The Covid pandemic has “destroyed morale” among school leaders in England, who feel they have been scapegoated for government failures during the crisis instead of being hailed as heroes for their role on the frontline, MPs will be told. School leaders will tell a parliamentary briefing on Wednesday that a pay freeze, soaring workload and a mental health and wellbeing crisis are acting as deterrents to the next generation of headteachers. Paul Whiteman, general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers (NAHT), who will lead the briefing, said the school leadership supply is already teetering on the brink of collapse and warned of an exodus from the senior ranks of the profession once the crisis is over. “It has been a stressful and difficult time for school leaders,” he said. “We are hearing that morale is very low and some are considering leaving the profession. Even before the pandemic there were significant existing challenges like heavy workload, the high-stakes nature of the job and a decade of salaries falling in real terms. “But this has been exacerbated hugely by the lack of trust and support for leaders shown by the government during the pandemic. Experienced teachers and leaders with decades of classroom and management experience do not view headship as an attractive, viable and sustainable career choice.” Diana Ohene-Darko, assistant headteacher and acting deputy headteacher at two London primary schools, is one of those who would be expected at this stage in her career to be considering a step up to a headship role. “Until recently, I would have confidently called myself an ‘aspiring head’, one who wanted to make a difference more widely for the benefit of pupils, staff and the wider community, to take on that role of responsibility and accountability in leadership. However, in this regard, I now have to reflect,” she said. “A decade-long, real-terms pay freeze, along with headteachers becoming scapegoats for government failures during the pandemic, has meant that school leaders are thinking twice about progressing all the way to headship – never mind staying in the profession at all – not least because when all is said and done, it is their head on the line.” Ohene-Darko continued: “Throughout the pandemic, vocational commitment has been tested to breaking point. Workload has soared to the point that our leaders are suffering with their own physical and mental wellbeing; many have had to seek wider support and there is no shame in that. “It is time that our profession was given back the credibility it deserves, in line with other countries who have education on a pedestal. It is time that we were paid in line with inflation, year on year, to reflect the continued and sustained hard work of our profession.” A recent NAHT survey found that more than half (53%) of school leaders who are not yet headteachers do not aspire to headship, up from 40% in 2016. Almost nine in 10 assistant and deputy heads (87%) said concerns about personal wellbeing were a deterrent to become a head and 93% accused the government of failing to support their wellbeing during the pandemic. A Department for Education spokesperson said: “We have taken a wide range of action to support leaders and ensure teacher development remains attractive and fulfilling. This includes a mental health support scheme for school leaders, investing £250m in training opportunities, and committing to help reduce workload in the Education Staff Wellbeing Charter.”The government has been warned by an influential group of MPs to urgently tackle a “fraud epidemic” across Britain, amid concerns about the increasing financial toll on consumers and taxpayers from economic crime. The Commons Treasury committee said ministers needed to bring in fresh laws and beef up resources for fighting fraud after a dramatic surge in scams during the coronavirus pandemic. It said there had been a 43% jump in fraud and computer misuse between June 2019 and June 2021. Publishing a report as pressure mounts on the government to tackle fraud after the shock resignation of Lord Agnew last week, the cross-party group of MPs called for law enforcement to be appropriately resourced to tackle the scale of the problem. A Treasury and Cabinet Office minister with responsibility for counter-fraud, Agnew announced his resignation during a speech at the House of Lords dispatch box, saying that the government’s performance in tackling fraud in Covid-19 support schemes had been “nothing less than woeful”. Acknowledging his resignation in a critical report for the government, the Treasury committee said urgent reforms were needed to identify and punish fraud, as well as to improve the level of protection for consumers when using online services. The committee called on the government to enact long-delayed reforms to Companies House, the registrar for firms, saying higher incorporation fees and tighter identity checks were needed to prevent fraudsters from hiding their identities behind UK businesses to launder money and conduct crime. The powerful committee of MPs said it was pushing for the government to set out legislation to tackle fraud in an economic crime bill. It comes after Agnew warned last week that ministers had “foolishly rejected” calls for the bill to be introduced in the current parliament. The committee said the government needed to consider whether the governance of economic crime should be centralised in a single department, with a single enforcement body for fighting fraud and scams rather than the “bewildering” number of agencies currently responsible. “The government must consider why economic crime seems not to be a priority for law enforcement, and how it can ensure it becomes one. It must ensure that law enforcement agencies are appropriately resourced to tackle the scale of the problem,” the Treasury committee warned. Calling on internet giants to take greater steps to protect consumers, the report said more responsibility could be placed on companies to reimburse consumers who are victims of fraud. “The government should seriously consider whether online companies should be required to contribute compensation when fraud is conducted using their platforms,” it said. Rishi Sunak told MPs on Tuesday that the government was “going after each and every person who we suspect of defrauding the taxpayer”, as Labour pressed the chancellor on Covid-related fraud in the Commons. The government has estimated that £4.9bn of lending on its Covid-19 bounce back loan scheme for small businesses was fraudulent, accounting for about 11% of the total programme. Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, told the Commons: “Schoolboy errors, a combination of arrogance, indolence and ignorance, nothing less than woeful. Not my words, but the words of former Treasury minister Lord Agnew.” More action was required to protect consumers from fraud, the committee said. In a series of recommendations, it said ministers needed to consider regulation to protect consumers from fraud and money laundering in the crypto-asset industry. There has been a sharp rise in scams using bitcoin, non-fungible tokens and other crypto-assets amid their growing popularity. Mel Stride, the chair of the Treasury committee, said the government needed to “push harder and act faster on the growing fraud epidemic” to give the UK a fighting chance of stopping scammers in their tracks. “For too long, pernicious scammers have acted with impunity, ripping off innocent consumers with fraudulent online adverts, impersonation scams and dodgy crypto investments,” he said. “Unfortunately, fraud has soared during the pandemic, and as MPs we’ve heard heart-breaking stories of individuals who have fallen victim to these criminals and lost large sums of money.” A spokesperson for the government said it was bringing forward investment of £400m over the next three years to tackle economic crime. “We are taking firm and coordinated action across government to crack down on economic crime, and are determined to go further. We will not tolerate criminals profiting on dirty money and will do whatever is necessary to bring these criminals to justice.”Shop price inflation almost doubled in January to the highest level for nearly a decade as the cost of furniture and flooring shot up. Annual inflation of goods bought from retailers rose to 1.5% last month from 0.8% in December, according to the latest data from the British Retail Consortium (BRC) trade body and the market research company NielsenIQ, the highest level since December 2012. The price of food rose by 2.7% in January, up from 2.4% in the previous month and the highest rate since October 2013. However, the biggest change in inflation was in non-food items, with prices rising by 0.9% compared with 0.2% a month before. Helen Dickinson, the chief executive of the BRC, said: “January saw shop price inflation nearly double, driven by a sharp rise in non-food inflation. In particular, furniture and flooring saw exceptionally high demand leading to increased prices as the rising oil costs made shipping more expensive. “Food prices continue to rise, especially domestic produce which have been impacted by poor harvests, labour shortages, and rising global food prices.” The retail price of UK furniture was up by a record 12.5% on a year before in December according to the Office for National Statistics, in the fourth consecutive month of double-digit price rises. A rise in the cost of materials, such as wood, and fuel has combined with a an increase in shipping and labour costs, which have affected many types of manufacturers and retailers. Raw materials and shipping costs have also pumped up the prices of flooring, including carpets. Dickinson warned of further price rises, on top of higher household bills, such as gas and electricity. “Many households will find it difficult to absorb the additional costs, as well as others on the horizon. Retailers are working hard to cut costs, but it would be impossible to protect consumers from any future rises. As commodity prices, energy prices and transportation costs continue to rise, it is inevitable that retail prices will continue to follow in the future,” she said. The latest evidence on inflation comes after data showing that households’ annual grocery bills are on track to rise by £180 this year. Grocery prices rose 3.8% over the four weeks to 23 January compared with the same period last year, according to the market research company Kantar. It said prices are rising fastest for fresh beef and poultry, savoury snacks, crisps, skincare and cat food but are falling for fresh bacon, vitamins and beer.Central to the levelling up white paper are what are termed 12 “national missions” to be achieved, all by 2030, many of them phrased in fairly general terms. This is what the missions set out: To increase pay, employment and productivity in every part of the UK, with each containing “a globally competitive city” and a smaller gap between top performing and other areas. Public transport connectivity across the UK to be “significantly closer to the standards of London” including integrated ticketing and simpler fares. A “significant” increase in primary school children reaching expected standards in reading, writing and maths. For England – education policy is devolved – this will mean at least 90% meeting expected standards, with at least a one-third increase for this metric in the worst performing areas. A “significant” rise in the numbers completing high-quality skills training across the UK. In England, the target is for 200,000 more doing this, including 80,000 in the lowest skilled areas. A narrowing in healthy life expectancy between the UK areas where it is highest and lowest, with the overall average healthy life expectancy rising by five years by 2035. An improvement in perceived wellbeing in all parts of the UK, with a narrowed gap between areas with the highest and lowest levels. A rise across the whole UK of “pride in place”, defined as “people’s satisfaction with their town centre and engagement in local culture and community”, with a narrowing of gaps between areas with the highest and lowest levels. An increase in the number of first-time home buyers in all UK areas. The “ambition” is for a 50% fall in the number of rented homes deemed non-decent, including the biggest improvements in worst-performing areas. An overall fall in homicide, serious violence, and neighbourhood crime, focused on worst-affected areas. A devolution deal for “every part of England that wants one”, with powers “at or approaching the highest level of devolution and a simplified, long-term funding settlement”.Targets to reduce inequalities across society by 2030 are to be enshrined in law as part of long-awaited levelling up proposals to be published today, amid new rows over funding for the government’s headline policy. Michael Gove will promise to “call time on the postcode lottery” of inequalities across Britain, setting 12 legally binding “missions” to improve health, living standards, transport, crime and wellbeing by the end of the decade. Announcing the government’s levelling up strategy, the communities secretary will say that every area of England will have the chance to create a “London-style” metro mayor as part of what he claims is the biggest shift of power from Whitehall to local areas in modern times. The levelling up white paper comes with Boris Johnson desperate to shift the public debate away from lockdown parties and on to what he says is the guiding aim of his premiership. However, critics warned that the government is not clear about how it will achieve its 12 “missions”, which include everything from cutting crime to boosting skill levels in “left-behind” regions, and that there is insufficient funding behind the plans. Labour denounced it as a series of slogans. The new levelling up targets include increasing taxpayer-funded research and development outside London and the south-east by 40%; boosting “perceived wellbeing” in every part of the country and improving “pride in place”, defined as “people’s satisfaction with their town centre and engagement in local culture and community”; and bringing local transport connectivity across the UK “significantly closer to the standards of London”. Gove said: “For decades, too many communities have been overlooked and undervalued. As some areas have flourished, others have been left in a cycle of decline. The UK has been like a jet firing on only one engine. Levelling up and this white paper [are] about ending this historic injustice and calling time on the postcode lottery.” Ministers will give government departments a legal duty to report on their progress against the missions – an approach used by Tony Blair’s government in tackling child poverty, and subsequently rejected by the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition. Gove hopes this approach will help to force Whitehall departments to work together towards a coherent set of objectives. It may also give his department bargaining power in future tussles with the Treasury. However, shadow levelling up secretary Lisa Nandy said there was little substance in the new plans. “Ministers have had two-and-a-half years to get this right and all we have been given is more slogans and strategies, with few new ideas. “High streets will only thrive when people have money in their pockets to spend. We need good jobs, decent wages, genuinely affordable housing and action to deal with the unfolding cost of living crisis so people can spend on their high streets and young people no longer have to get out to get on.” Gove was handed the levelling up portfolio by Johnson in last autumn’s reshuffle. Downing Street believes achieving tangible progress will be key to holding on to the former Labour “red wall” seats outside London and south-east England, which the Tories won in 2019. Gove’s department was beefed up significantly, with Johnson’s levelling up adviser Neil O’Brien, the MP for Harborough, made a junior minister. Gove has also been advised by the former Bank of England chief economist Andy Haldane. One person who had been briefed on the plans said: “The 12 missions are … targets about how you measure success and they’re all over the place. One is about raising life expectancy and it literally had ‘by X’ in the draft when I saw it.” They said Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, had “pretty much killed off all the big ideas in the white paper over the last few months” and that the announcements amounted to incremental progress rather than a radical policy shift. Another said Gove and his officials had been managing expectations by telling local leaders “this is a start that outlines the direction of travel” rather than promising significant new money and powers. They added: “It sounds like Michael Gove wants to move in the right direction but there is not an awful lot of money. Whether that is because the Treasury has refused or whether there’s internal politics at play, we don’t know.” Sunak has already announced a total of £11bn to be spent on a series of levelling up funds – some of which will be allocated by Gove’s Department for Levelling up, Housing and Communities (DLUHC). Fresh questions about the department’s ability to deliver on the government’s ambitious promises are raised in a new report from the National Audit Office (NAO), which criticises it for failing to monitor past expenditure effectively. “DLUHC has a limited understanding of what has worked well in previous local growth programmes due to a lack of consistent evaluation or monitoring,” the NAO said. “By failing to conduct evaluations, DLUHC has wasted opportunities to learn lessons to inform future interventions, and it does not know whether previous policies achieved their aims.” A third person briefed on the hefty white paper described it as “solid” but warned that it is focused on spatial inequalities – narrowing the gaps between the best and worst-performing regions – rather than, for example, narrowing the gap between rich and poor. “It’s levelling up places: it’s not levelling up society,” they said. Gove will announce a raft of other specific policies, encompassing everything from extending the decent homes standard to include private rental properties, to scrapping rules that mean the majority of public funding on housing ends up being spent in London and the south-east. The government will also fund improvements in 20 new towns and cities, including Wolverhampton and Sheffield, though Nandy has already criticised those plans as reheated. As part of what he is claiming will be a “devolution revolution”, Gove will say the government has already begun talks on new “county deals” with nine new areas including Durham, Hull and east Yorkshire, and Devon. Some Tory MPs have already privately questioned the makeup of the proposed new metro mayoral regions, however, with the one for the east Midlands – expected to centre on Nottingham – causing particular disquiet.How do you switch over from Spotify to another music service? What are the options? And which service pays artists the most? The ongoing controversy over Spotify’s flagship podcaster Joe Rogan, whose vaccine misinformation has led to musicians pulling their music from the platform, has also caused a lot of listeners to look for alternatives. Spotify reportedly accounts for 31% of the total music streaming market, more than double its nearest competitor – Apple Music – at 15%. Whether you’re motivated by joining Neil Young and Joni Mitchell in their boycott, or you’re just interested in seeing the alternatives, it can seem daunting to make the switch after years of being with the service. But it is really easy. Streaming services tend to not have lock-in contracts, so if you’re looking to switch to another service, the first step would be cancelling your existing subscription. Unfortunately, Spotify doesn’t make it possible to cancel through its phone apps, so you’ll need to log in via a web browser and cancel your premium subscription through the account settings function. Depending on when you subscribed, you’ll be able to keep the premium features until the next payment was due. So what are the options? 1. Apple Music When Apple Music launched, it felt clunky and limited. But it has come a long way in the past few years, with vast improvements to its functionality, music selection (75m songs), radio, playlists and other features like music videos which Spotify doesn’t have. The user experience now seems much closer to Spotify. Apple also has launched lossless and spatial audio for a better quality of listen. Lossless audio is something Spotify promised in 2021 but has not launched. If you’re already in the Apple ecosystem this is definitely the best option, but there is also an Android app. Apple offers three months for free to new users but after that subscriptions are A$11.99 (£9.99) a month or A$119 (£99) a year, with family plans at A$17.99 (£14.99) a month. There are also bundled subscription deals with Apple’s other services, such as iCloud storage and Apple TV+. 2. YouTube Music If you pay for a YouTube premium subscription – A$14.99 (£11.99) a month – you get YouTube Music for free. It has about 60m songs and you get access to YouTube videos along with it. The audio quality is reportedly not as good as other services but it does have playlists and radio stations and other features you would see elsewhere. As with Apple Music and its ecosystem, if you’re already an Android user, this is an easier option for you. 3. Amazon Music Australians paying for Amazon Prime can already access a limited version of Amazon music (2m songs in SD only), or it’s A$11.99 a month for the full service. In the UK, it’s £7.99 a month to add to Prime, or £9.99 a month for non-Prime customers. It has lossless and spatial audio tracks, 75m songs, podcasts, playlists, and integrates with Amazon’s other technologies. Young has been promoting an offer with Amazon for four months of free music for new sign-ups to the service this week. If you want to avoid giving three of the largest tech companies your money, though, there are a growing number of other options. 4. Tidal Tidal has always been pitched as the service that compensates artists the best and offers the best audio quality. It has a catalogue of 80m tracks and a free tier that operates similar to Spotify’s. Up from that are A$11.99 (£9.99) and $23.99 (£19.99) plans, the latter of which rewards the artist you listen to the most each month with 10% of your subscription fee. In addition to high-quality audio and all the expected features, Tidal has more than 350,000 videos and concert live streams. Other non-major companies offering streaming services includes Napster (yes, the former peer-to-peer file sharing service has gone legal), Qobuz and Pandora. Transferring playlists The biggest issue for people looking to switch is transferring your long-curated playlists. This is made easier through third-party services. If you want it to be fast you’ll have to pay but if you don’t have many to transfer or have the time, you can usually convert one playlist at a time for free. The most popular is the app SongShift (although it is only available on iOS) and Soundiiz (which runs in a web browser). You’ll need to give whichever app you choose access to the accounts you are switching over but you can remove access once you are done. The services will usually flag if a song on the playlist can’t be found. Sometimes it’s as simple as a mismatch with the exact name of the song and it can be found as a different mix or title. How well do the services pay artists? The companies tend to keep the information about how much they pay artists for each stream a closely guarded secret but a report from Tricordist in 2020 gives us a picture of the rough payments artists can expect. According to the report, Spotify pays US$0.00348 a stream, Apple Music pays US$0.00675 a stream, Amazon pays US$0.00426, Google pays US$0.00554, and Tidal pays US$0.00876. Surprisingly, the fitness company Peloton comes out on top of the list, paying US$0.03107 a stream. Napster also rates higher than others at US$0.00916. It’s all still shockingly low for artists but the best option would probably be Tidal. In addition to the streaming rate being slightly higher than average, Tidal is also directly paying artists 10% of its upper-tier plan for each user – depending on which artist the user streams most. But if you want to support artists more directly, you can buy vinyl, or digital copies of the music through iTunes or similar services, or pay directly through Bandcamp or Soundcloud.The White House said Joe Biden is open to more one-on-one conversations with Vladimir Putin, as the tensions between Russia and Ukraine continue to escalate. “The president remains certainly open to that if there’s a determination that that is the appropriate and most constructive step moving forward,” White House press secretary Jen Psaki said. Psaki also emphasized the importance of recognizing Russia as the “aggressor” in the Ukraine crisis. Dismissing Putin’s criticism that the west has ignored Russia’s security demands, Psaki said, “When the fox is screaming from the top of the henhouse that he’s scared of the chickens, which is essentially what they’re doing, that fear isn’t reported as a statement of fact. And as you watch President Putin screaming about the fear of Ukraine and the Ukrainians, that should not be reported as a statement of fact.” The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, spoke to Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, to discuss the escalating crisis in Ukraine. “He emphasized that further invasion of Ukraine would be met with swift and severe consequences and urged Russia to pursue a diplomatic path,” state department spokesperson Ned Price said of the call. Biden met with the chairman and ranking member of the Senate judiciary committee to discuss the upcoming supreme court vacancy. At the start of the meeting, Biden said he was committed to receiving bipartisan input as he searches for a nominee to succeed Stephen Breyer. “The Constitution says ‘advise and consent, advise and consent,’ and I’m serious when I say it: that I want the advice of the Senate as well as the consent, if we can arrive on who the nominee should be,” Biden told reporters. Some of the Trump White House documents connected to the Capitol insurrection had been torn up, the National Archives said last night. Donald Trump’s habit of ripping up papers has been well documented, and the Archives said some of the notes had not been taped back together. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has subpoenaed Trump White House documents related to the attack. – Joan E Greve The House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer has tested positive for Covid-19. In a statement, the 82-year-old senator of Maryland said Tuesday that his symptoms were mild, and he is working from home. “In order to protect the safety of other Members, staff, employees, and visitors to the Capitol, I will utilize proxy voting,” he said. “I look forward to returning to the Capitol once my isolation period is over to continue carrying out the important work of leading House democrats as we govern responsibly for the people.” A whistleblower has alleged that an executive at NSO Group offered a US-based mobile security company “bags of cash” in exchange for access to a global signalling network used to track individuals through their mobile phone, according to a complaint that was made to the US Department of Justice. The allegation, which dates back to 2017 and was made by a former mobile security executive named Gary Miller, was disclosed to federal authorities and to the US congressman Ted Lieu, who said he conducted his own due diligence on the claim and found it “highly disturbing”. Details of the allegation by Miller were then sent in a letter by Lieu to the Department of Justice. “The privacy implications to Americans and national security implications to America of NSO Group accessing mobile operator signalling networks are vast and alarming,” Lieu wrote in his letter. The letter was shared with the Guardian and other media partners on the Pegasus project, a media consortium led by the Paris-based Forbidden Stories that has investigated NSO and published a series of stories about how governments around the world have used the company’s spyware to target activists, journalists, and lawyers, among others. NSO said it had no business with the mobile security company. The Guardian and media partners have separately learned that NSO is the subject of an active criminal investigation by the Department of Justice, according to four people familiar with the investigation. The investigation, they claim, is focused on allegations of unauthorised intrusions into networks and mobile devices. One American citizen whose mobile phone was hacked by a client of the spyware maker – and who asked not to be identified – said they were interviewed at length about the 2021 hacking incident by US authorities. Security researchers had found the individual was hacked while living outside the US and using a non-US mobile number. The justice department also interviewed the Mexican journalist Carmen Aristegui, whose iPhone was hacked using NSO technology, according to security researchers who have analysed her mobile phone. According to another person familiar with the criminal investigation, the justice department has also been in contact with a company whose users are alleged to have been targeted by clients of NSO using Pegasus spyware. Read more: Spenser Mestel reports: In recent months, Michigan should have been a hotbed for attempts to rig elections, like it was in 2011. That year, the Republican-led legislature distorted the voting maps so that the GOP was able to win nine of Michigan’s 14 congressional seats despite never earning more than 50.5% of the vote statewide. A decade later, as the redistricting cycle has come around again, the dynamics are just as toxic. The battleground state broke for Joe Biden by fewer than 155,000 votes, and the Republican-controlled legislature has fought endlessly with the Democratic governor about election “audits”, voter IDs and absentee ballots. But this cycle, the state’s redistricting commission has pulled off something remarkable. Despite a flurry of legal action and very public disputes between members, it has produced some of the fairest maps in the US. How did it manage it – and will the maps survive? Neither party was involved in drawing new maps, a process that is open to abuse if politicians are allowed to allocate particular voters to particular districts in order to guarantee a win there. Instead, the responsibility fell to 13 Michiganders – four Democrats, four Republicans and five independents – who were randomly selected by the state. The Michigan Independent Citizens’ Redistricting Commission (MICRC) includes a foster care worker, a retired banker, an aspiring orthopedic surgeon, a mother of six, a college student and a real estate broker. MICRC, and the approach it epitomizes, came about thanks to Katie Fahey, a Michigan resident and political novice who posted a message on Facebook two days after the 2016 presidential election. She said she wanted to take on gerrymandering and eventually recruited more than 14,000 volunteers to campaign for an amendment to the state’s constitution. It passed with 61% of the vote and created the commission, one of the most successful ways to unrig the redistricting process so far and a potential model for other states. Read more: New Mexico senator Ben Ray Luján has suffered a stroke, his office said. The 49-year-old Democratic senator underwent surgery over the weekend and is expected to make a full recovery, according to his office. It is unclear when Luján will return to the Capitol. Because Democrats hold a narrow majority in the Senate, they will need all members to confirm Joe Biden’s nominee to replace supreme court Justice Stephen Breyer. Biden has signaled he will name his pick by the end of the month. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: The White House said Joe Biden is open to more one-on-one conversations with Vladimir Putin, as the tensions between Russia and Ukraine continue to escalate. “The president remains certainly open to that if there’s a determination that that is the appropriate and most constructive step moving forward,” White House press secretary Jen Psaki said. Psaki also emphasized the importance of recognizing Russia as the “aggressor” in the Ukraine crisis. Dismissing Putin’s criticism that the west has ignored Russia’s security demands, Psaki said, “When the fox is screaming from the top of the henhouse that he’s scared of the chickens, which is essentially what they’re doing, that fear isn’t reported as a statement of fact. And as you watch President Putin screaming about the fear of Ukraine and the Ukrainians, that should not be reported as a statement of fact.” The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, spoke to Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, to discuss the escalating crisis in Ukraine. “He emphasized that further invasion of Ukraine would be met with swift and severe consequences and urged Russia to pursue a diplomatic path,” state department spokesperson Ned Price said of the call. Biden met with the chairman and ranking member of the Senate judiciary committee to discuss the upcoming supreme court vacancy. At the start of the meeting, Biden said he was committed to receiving bipartisan input as he searches for a nominee to succeed Stephen Breyer. “The Constitution says ‘advice and consent, advice and consent,’ and I’m serious when I say it: that I want the advice of the Senate as well as the consent, if we can arrive on who the nominee should be,” Biden told reporters. Some of the Trump White House documents connected to the Capitol insurrection had been torn up, the National Archives said last night. Donald Trump’s habit of ripping up papers has been well documented, and the Archives said some of the notes had not been taped back together. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has subpoenaed Trump White House documents related to the attack. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Joe Biden spoke to Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell today about his search for a supreme court nominee, after Stephen Breyer announced his retirement last week. “The Leader believes the cornerstone of a nominee’s judicial philosophy should be a commitment to originalism and textualism,” a spokesperson for McConnell said. “He emphasized the importance of a nominee who believes in judicial independence and will resist all efforts by politicians to bully the Court or to change the structure of the judicial system.” Biden also met with the Senate judiciary committee chairman, Dick Durbin, and ranking member, Chuck Grassley, this afternoon to discuss the supreme court vacancy. “The Constitution says ‘advice and consent, advice and consent,’ and I’m serious when I say it: that I want the advice of the Senate as well as the consent, if we can arrive on who the nominee should be,” Biden told reporters at the start of the meeting. The Pentagon was asked to respond to reports that Russian troops are moving medical supplies, particularly blood supplies, closer to the Ukrainian border, which could potentially point to an imminent invasion. The Pentagon press secretary, John Kirby, did not go into the specifics of those reports, but he acknowledged that Vladimir Putin has “increased his logistics and sustainment capability” along Ukraine’s borders over the past several weeks. “Now is that alone all by itself some sort of tripwire or indicator causing alarms to go off that an invasion is imminent? Not necessarily,” Kirby said. Kirby added that the defense department relies on “a whole mosaic of information as we evaluate what we’re seeing on the ground” in Ukraine. “I would just go back to what we’ve said and have said now for more than a couple of weeks, we believe that he has enough capability to move now if he wants to,” Kirby said. “Depending on what his goal is here and what he wants to do, he could move imminently, at any time.” The Guardian’s Andrew Roth and Julian Borger report: During a press conference at the Kremlin today, Vladimir Putin told journalists he was unsatisfied with the US response to Russian demands that Nato remove troops and infrastructure from eastern Europe and pledge never to accept Ukraine into the alliance. “It’s already clear … that Russia’s principal concerns were ignored,” Putin said following talks with the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán. In emotional remarks, Putin also said the west was using Ukraine as a “tool to hinder Russia” and hypothesised that Ukraine’s entrance into Nato could lead to a conflict over Crimea, the peninsula annexed by Russia in 2014. Putin said he was ready to continue negotiations with the west, which has said it is ready for dialogue but views Moscow’s demands as a non-starter. But Russia has also continued deploying thousands of troops and offensive weapons to the Ukrainian border, appearing to threaten a strike if the Kremlin does not get its way. Putin’s remarks broke almost a month of silence on the issue from the Russian leader, who has been mostly absent from public life as concern has grown in western capitals that Moscow was preparing an invasion. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, also spoke today with Nato Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg, Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chairman-in-Office Zbigniew Rau and EU High Representative Josep Borrell. “The Secretary reaffirmed his support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and discussed diplomatic engagements with Russia against the backdrop of Russia’s unprovoked military buildup on Ukraine’s borders,” state department spokesperson Ned Price said. “The participants agreed to continue to coordinate closely and committed to seek a diplomatic solution to prevent further aggression against Ukraine.” In his call with Sergei Lavrov this morning, Blinken reiterated that Russia would suffer “swift and severe consequences” if Vladimir Putin approves an invasion of Ukraine. The White House said Joe Biden is open to having more one-on-one conversations with Russian President Vladimir Putin regarding the situation in Ukraine. “The president remains certainly open to that if there’s a determination that that is the appropriate and most constructive step moving forward,” press secretary Jen Psaki said. Psaki noted that the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, has been “very active and engaged” in communicating with his counterparts as Russia has built up its troop presence along Ukraine’s borders. This morning, Blinken spoke to Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, to reiterate the White House’s preference for a diplomatic path to de-escalation in Ukraine. “He emphasized that further invasion of Ukraine would be met with swift and severe consequences and urged Russia to pursue a diplomatic path,” state department spokesperson Ned Price said of the call. At her daily briefing, the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, was asked about Russian President Vladimir Putin’s latest comments on the crisis in Ukraine. Earlier today, Putin complained that the US and its allies are ignoring Russia’s security demands, as the Kremlin works on a response to the White House’s proposal on Ukraine. Psaki said that, while it is important to “keep the door to diplomacy open,” the US will continue to stand by Ukraine as Russia threatens its sovereignty by building up its troop presence along Ukrainian borders. “When the fox is screaming from the top of the henhouse that he’s scared of the chickens, which is essentially what they’re doing, that fear isn’t reported as a statement of fact,” Psaki said. “And as you watch President Putin screaming about the fear of Ukraine and the Ukrainians, that should not be reported as a statement of fact. We know who the fox is in this case. We have seen the buildup of troops at the border.” When asked about a potential path to “mutual de-escalation” in Ukraine, Psaki argued it was important to identify Russia as the “aggressor” in the situation. “When we talk about mutual de-escalation, Russia has 100,000 troops on the border. They are the aggressor,” Psaki said. “Nato is a defensive alliance. It is not the same thing. And I think we need to be careful about comparing them as the same thing.” Meeting with Senate judiciary committee leaders at the White House, Joe Biden described the duty to nominate supreme court justices as “one of the president’s most serious responsibilities”. “There’s always a renewed national debate every time a president nominates a justice because the Constitution is always evolving slightly in terms of additional rights or curtailing rights, etc. And that’s always an issue,” Biden said. The president reiterated his hope that he will select a nominee by the end of the month, and Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer has promised to move “quickly” to confirm the person. After Biden delivered his opening remarks before the meeting, reporters were escorted out of the Oval Office. The president did not take any questions. Joe Biden is now meeting with the Senate judiciary committee chairman, Dick Durbin, and ranking member, Chuck Grassley, to discuss the upcoming supreme court vacancy. The president addressed reporters at the start of the meeting in the Oval Office, which Kamala Harris also joined. Biden noted that he, Durbin and Grassley have previously worked on many judicial nominations, as they worked together in the Senate for years. “The Constitution says ‘advice and consent, advice and consent,’ and I’m serious when I say that I want the advice of the Senate as well as the consent to arrive on who the nominee should be,” Biden said. “I’m looking for a candidate with character, with the qualities of a judge in terms in terms of being courteous to folks before them and treating people with respect, as well as a judicial philosophy that is more one that suggests that there are unenumerated rights in the Constitution.” As Joe Biden prepares to meet with the leaders of the Senate judiciary committee to discuss the upcoming supreme court vacancy, one of the president’s potential nominees is attracting progressive criticism. The progressive group Our Revolution released a statement this morning urging Biden not to nominate Michelle Childs, a South Carolina judge who has the support of House majority whip Jim Clyburn. In the statement, Joseph Geevarghese, the group’s executive director, criticized Child’s work as a “a former labor and employment lawyer who repeatedly worked on behalf of employers against unionization drives”. “President Biden vowed to be the ‘most pro-union,’ ever, and it is imperative he keeps this campaign promise by nominating a pro-union Justice,” Geevarghese said. “It would be nonsensical to nominate a union-busting Justice to the nation’s highest court. President Biden must stand by his word and nominate a pro-union, Black woman.” The Senate judiciary committee chairman, Dick Durbin, and ranking member, Chuck Grassley, have now arrived at the White House for their meeting with Joe Biden, per CNN: The three men are expected to talk about the supreme court vacancy created by Stephen Breyer’s retirement, which was announced last week. Reporters will be let in to the Oval Office for the start of the meeting, and they may have the opportunity to ask Biden some questions about his search for a nominee. Stay tuned. Republican lawmakers busy funneling money to colleagues who crossed Donald Trump, contd. Further to the reporting moments ago on this, Reuters goes on to name more names. The [three Republican] incumbents targeted by Trump ended 2021 with more money in their campaign war chests than any of their challengers, including those backed by Trump. A week after the deadly January 6, 2021, attack on the Capitol by a mob of Trump’s supporters, the House voted to impeach him, with the Senate then falling short of the super-majority needed to convict him and bar him from future public office. [Steve] Scalise gave money in September to at least three House members who voted to impeach Trump: Peter Meijer of Michigan and Jaime Herrera Beutler of Washington state - who are both facing Trump-endorsed challengers - as well as David Valadao of California. Scalise also transferred money in December to the re-election campaign of Dan Newhouse of Washington, a House Republican who also voted for impeachment. The contributions ranged from $2,000 to $5,000 and came from Scalise’s re-election campaign committee or from his “Eye of the Tiger” fundraising group, a so-called leadership committee that lawmakers use to support other candidates. Representative Elise Stefanik, who replaced Representative Liz Cheney as the No. 3 House Republican after Cheney was ousted from her post following her vote to impeach Trump, made a $5,000 contribution to Herrera Beutler from her “E-PAC” leadership committee, which Stefanik uses to support Republican women candidates. Cheney, the scion of a storied Republican family and the most forceful Trump critic in Congress, received $5,000 from [Kentuckian] McConnell’s “Bluegrass Committee” fundraising group. The group also gave $10,000 to the campaign of [Alaska’s Lisa] Murkowski, who is the only one of the Republican senators who voted to convict Trump in his Senate impeachment trial last year who is seeking re-election this year. Cheney and Murkowski both are facing Republican primary challengers endorsed by Trump, as is Representative Fred Upton of Michigan, another Republican who voted to impeach Trump and took contributions from the leadership committee of Representative Cathy McMorris Rodgers of Washington. Representatives August Pfluger of Texas, Virginia Foxx of North Carolina, Byron Donalds of Florida and Carlos Gimenez of Florida - who each have been endorsed by Trump in their re-election bids for this year - also transferred money to impeachment voters from their campaigns or leadership committees. Their offices did not respond to requests for comment. A Trump spokesperson and representatives for Scalise, Stefanik, McConnell and McMorris Rodgers also did not respond to requests for comment. Joe Kent, a U.S. Army veteran endorsed by Trump to unseat Herrera Beutler, said the lawmakers backing the incumbent are hoping Trump’s movement “will just go away.” “2022 is a referendum on the establishment,” Kent said. Republican lawmakers are busy funneling money to colleagues who crossed Donald Trump At least 71 GOPers in the US House and Senate channeled more than $380,000 last year to the campaigns of eight colleagues whom Trump, the former US president, is trying to drive from office – prioritizing the goal of regaining control of Congress over 45’s apparent desire for vengeance, the Reuters news agency reports. Reuters has more, saying those lawmakers: Transferred money to the campaigns of seven House Republicans who voted to impeach Trump on a charge of incitement of insurrection arising from last year’s Capitol riot and Senator Lisa Murkowski, who voted to convict him. Steve Scalise, the No 2 House Republican, and a group aligned with Mitch McConnell, the Senate Republican leader, were among those making the donations. Joe Biden’s fellow Democrats control both the House and Senate with slim majorities. Republicans are trying to take over one or both chambers in the Nov. 8 congressional elections. If they do so, they could torpedo Biden’s legislative agenda. Election experts said these contributions to colleagues reflect a long-standing practice among lawmakers to share money freely to help their party secure a majority, with incumbents typically seen as having the best chances of winning. “It’s very much a strategic consideration,” said political scientist Zachary Albert of Brandeis University in Massachusetts. Three House lawmakers targeted by Trump already have dropped out of their races following public backlash from Republican leaders. Nonetheless, congressional Republicans are donating to colleagues who Trump has disparaged as “disloyal” and “losers,” according to financial disclosures filed with the Federal Election Commission ahead of a Monday deadline. More to follow on this in few moments. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden will meet this afternoon with the chairman and ranking member of the Senate judiciary committee to discuss the upcoming supreme court vacancy. The meeting comes one week after Stephen Breyer, one of the court’s three liberal justices, announced he would step down from the bench this summer. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, spoke to Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, to discuss the escalating crisis in Ukraine. “He emphasized that further invasion of Ukraine would be met with swift and severe consequences and urged Russia to pursue a diplomatic path,” state department spokesperson Ned Price said of the call. Some of the Trump White House documents connected to the Capitol insurrection had been torn up, the National Archives said last night. Donald Trump’s habit of ripping up papers has been well documented, and the Archives said some of the notes had not been taped back together. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has subpoenaed Trump White House documents related to the attack. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Vladimir Putin accused the US and its allies of ignoring Russia’s security demands, and he said his team is still working on a response to the White House’s proposal on Ukraine, which was delivered last week. Hosting Hungarian Prime Minister Victor Orban in the Kremlin, the Russian president directly addressed the escalating crisis in Ukraine for the first time in more than a month. The AP reports: [Putin] said it was clear that the West has ignored the Russian demands that NATO will not expand to Ukraine and other ex-Soviet nations, refrain from deploying offensive weapons near Russia and roll back NATO deployments to Eastern Europe. Putin said the refusal by the U.S. and its allies to heed the Russian demands violate the obligations on integrity of security they made at the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. He argued that while Western allies emphasize every country’s freedom to choose alliances, they neglect the principle of the ‘indivisibility of security’ enshrined in the OSCE documents. That involves the principle that the security of one nation should not be strengthened at the expense of others. The Guardian’s Julian Borger and Lorenzo Tondo report: Ukraine will be responsible for its own destruction if it undermines existing peace agreements, a senior Russian diplomat has warned at a combative UN security council debate on the crisis. The warning from Vasily Nebenzya, Russia’s permanent representative to the UN, came on a day of continued high-level diplomacy aimed at defusing the Ukraine crisis. The state department said it had received a response from Moscow to a document the US delivered in Moscow last week, formally outlining areas where the Biden administration believes the two countries could find common ground. US officials would not disclose the contents of the Russian letter, saying they would not “negotiate in public”. Russia’s state news agency RIA reported on Tuesday that Russia had sent follow-up questions rather than a response, and that Moscow was still working on an actual response. Today’s call between the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, lasted about 30 minutes, per the Washington Post. In the call, Lavrov said the Kremlin is working on a full written response to the US proposal regarding Russia demands on Ukraine, which the White House delivered last week. In its proposal, the White House made clear that it would not support denying Ukraine the opportunity to pursue Nato membership, as Russia has insisted upon. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, spoke to Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, today to discuss the escalating crisis in Ukraine. “The Secretary emphasized the U.S. willingness, bilaterally and together with Allies and partners, to continue a substantive exchange with Russia on mutual security concerns, which we intend to do in full coordination with our partners and Allies,” state department spokesperson Ned Price said. “He further reiterated the U.S. commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as the right of all countries to determine their own foreign policy and alliances.” Blinken again urged the Kremlin to withdraw its troops and equipment from Ukraine’s borders, where more than 100,000 Russian service members are now stationed. “He emphasized that further invasion of Ukraine would be met with swift and severe consequences and urged Russia to pursue a diplomatic path,” Price said. The call marks the first time that Blinken and Lavrov have spoken since the US delivered its written response to Russian demands on Ukraine last week. Donald Trump wants the House committee investigating the January 6 attack to investigate Mike Pence. In the first of two rambling, lie-filled statements this morning, the former president said: “The Unselect Committee should be investigating why [House speaker] Nancy Pelosi did such a poor job of overseeing security [at the Capitol on 6 January 2021, a common and baseless complaint from Republicans] and why Mike Pence did not send back the votes for recertification or approval, in that it has now been shown that he clearly had the right to do so!” That has not been shown, clearly or otherwise, however much Trump thinks moves to reform the Electoral Count Act of 1887 suggest that it has. Nothing is getting easier for Pence, as the former vice-president tries to stay relevant in the race for the Republican nomination in 2024, which of course seems Trump’s for the taking should he wish to take it. Pence, remember, concluded that he did not have the authority to reject electoral college results, resisted pressure from Trump to do so, and was rewarded with a mob of Trump supporters attacking the Capitol, some chanting that they wished to hang him. Here’s more on all that, from our columnist Sidney Blumenthal: Meanwhile, the New York attorney general, Letitia James, has reportedly subpoenaed documents from the General Services Administration as part of her civil investigation into potential fraud at the Trump Organization. According to the Washington Post, James and her team are investigating whether Trump inflated his assets to secure the lease for the historic post office building in Washington, where the Trump International Hotel is now located. The Post reports: The documents James sought included a scorecard GSA used to rank Trump’s bid against those of other developers who proposed leasing and redeveloping the federally owned Old Post Office Pavilion downtown. That information could fit into James’s broader effort to show a pattern of Trump giving false information to business partners, banks and insurers to secure loans and other deals. James’s request appears to differ from previous inquiries into Trump’s hotel, which largely focused on whether he should have been allowed to retain the deal while in office. After Trump was elected, he ignored calls from Democrats to sell his stake in the lease to avoid conflicts of interest. Trump is now working to sell that lease, in a deal that could net his company $100 million in profits, and the negotiations have coincided with renewed scrutiny from lawmakers and prosecutors. In October, the House Oversight Committee, chaired by Rep. Carolyn B. Maloney (D-N.Y.), issued a report raising concerns about whether Trump had misled the GSA in pursuing the deal. Maloney and Rep. Gerald E. Connolly (D-Va.) wrote to GSA Administrator Robin Carnahan alleging that Trump “’concealed hundreds of millions of dollars in debts from GSA when bidding on the Old Post Office Building lease’ and called for an investigation. Donald Trump directed Rudy Giuliani to ask the Department of Homeland Security if it could seize voting machines in three key states, the New York Times reported. Citing three anonymous sources, the paper said Giuliani made the call six weeks after Trump’s defeat by Joe Biden but before the January 6 Capitol riot, by supporters trying to stop the certification of electoral college results. A DHS official told Giuliani it did not have the authority to seize the machines, the Times said. The paper also said Trump turned to his personal lawyer after considering a plan to have the Department of Defense seize the machines, and after being told by his attorney general, William Barr, that the Department of Justice would not do so. Some of the White House records turned over to the House committee investigating the January 6 attack were ripped up by Donald Trump. The documents include diaries, schedules, handwritten notes, speeches and remarks. The supreme court rejected Trump’s attempt to stop the National Archives turning them over to Congress. In a statement, the Archives said: “Some of the Trump presidential records received by the National Archives and Records Administration included paper records that had been torn up by former president Trump. “These were turned over to the National Archives at the end of the Trump administration, along with a number of torn-up records that had not been reconstructed by the White House. The Presidential Records Act requires that all records created by presidents be turned over to the National Archives at the end of their administrations.” The Archives did not say how it knew Trump had torn the records but his habit of tearing up documents has been widely reported. In 2018, Politico spoke to Solomon Lartey, a records management analyst who spent time “armed with rolls of clear Scotch tape … sft[ing] through large piles of paper and put[ting] them back together … ‘like a jigsaw puzzle’.” Lartey and another staffer who taped records were fired by the White House that year, they said summarily. Lartey said: “They told [Trump] to stop doing it. He didn’t want to stop.” Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer has said the chamber will move “quickly” to confirm Joe Biden’s supreme court nominee once the president chooses someone to succeed Stephen Breyer. “I am confident that the President will select an outstanding individual to fill Justice Breyer’s seat, and we intend to move quickly on our constitutional duty to act on his nominee when announced,” Schumer said in a floor speech yesterday. “I can assure all senators that the Senate will have a fair process that moves quickly, so we can confirm President Biden’s nominee to fill Justice Breyer’s seat as soon as possible.” Schumer also applauded Breyer’s decades of service on the court, noting that the liberal justice once served as an aide on the Senate judiciary committee in the 1970’s and worked closely with the late Senator Ted Kennedy. “At every step of the way he remained his essential self: decent, brilliant, and dedicated to our democracy,” Schumer said. “Today, the members of this chamber say thank you to Justice Breyer for his lifetime of public service.” J Michelle Childs, a South Carolina judge among contenders to be nominated to the supreme court by Joe Biden, has received strong support from an unlikely source: Lindsey Graham, a Republican senator and leading ally of Donald Trump. “I can’t think of a better person for President Biden to consider for the supreme court than Michelle Childs,” Graham, a member of the Senate judiciary committee that will consider Biden’s pick, told CBS’s Face the Nation on Sunday. “She has wide support in our state. She’s considered to be a fair-minded, highly gifted jurist. She’s one of the most decent people I’ve ever met.” James Clyburn, the South Carolina congressman whose endorsement both secured Biden’s promise to install a Black woman and boosted him to the Democratic nomination, is a known Childs supporter. The House Democratic whip told CBS on Sunday he spoke to Biden about Childs “several months ago”. The nomination of any Black woman, Clyburn said, would send a message “to every little child growing up under moderate circumstances, needing the entire community to help raise [her], getting scholarships to go up to school because she couldn’t afford to go otherwise, going to public schools because you didn’t get an offer from one of the big private schools”. That message, he said, would be: “You’ve got just as much of a chance to benefit from the greatness of this country as everybody else … That’s the kind of conversation I had with [Joe] Biden way back when he was running for president.” At her briefing yesterday, White House press secretary Jen Psaki was also asked about Joe Biden’s promise to select a Black woman to fill Stephen Breyer’s seat on the supreme court, which would mark a historic first for the US. A reporter pointed to an ABC News/Ipsos poll that showed 76% of Americans want Biden to consider “all possible nominees” for the vacancy, while the White House has indicated he will follow through on his pledge to choose a Black woman. “What we can assure the American public of, wherever they fell on that poll, is that he will choose and nominate someone who has impeccable credentials and is eminently qualified to serve as a supreme court justice and someone who is eminently qualified to serve in a lifetime appointment,” Psaki said. She noted that other presidents have previously made similar promises when it comes to supreme court vacancies, such as when Ronald Reagan promised to nominate the first woman justice. (He did, and Sandra Day O’Connor was confirmed in 1981.) “The president’s commitment is to deliver on the promise he made to the country,” Psaki said. “There’s no question in his mind that there is a wealth of qualified, talented Black women to choose from.” Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Joe Biden will meet today with the Senate judiciary committee’s chairman, Dick Durbin, and ranking member, Chuck Grassley, to discuss the upcoming vacancy on the supreme court. The meeting comes a week after Stephen Breyer announced he would step down from the bench this summer, giving the president his first supreme court seat to fill. Announcing the meeting yesterday, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said the discussion was a reflection of Biden’s commitment to seeking bipartisan input as he searches for his nominee. “He is steeped in this process and looks forward to advice from members of both parties on the Hill, as well as top legal experts and scholars across the country, working with the vice-president and his team at the White House,” Psaki said at her daily briefing. “So this will be part of that process, and I expect we’ll have more details to confirm as the week proceeds.” Biden is scheduled to sit down with Durbin and Grassley this afternoon, and reporters may get a chance to ask him some questions at the start of the meeting, so stay tuned.The New South Wales government’s proposal to raise the wall of the Warragamba Dam could result in complete inundation of some cultural sites and is at odds with Australia’s obligations under the world heritage convention, scientific advisers have warned. In a letter to the federal government, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) – which provides advice to Unesco’s World Heritage Centre – said the project “appears to be inappropriate in relation to the requirements of the world heritage convention”. In a scathing review of the environmental impact statement (EIS) prepared for the proposal to raise the dam wall by up to 17 metres, the scientists wrote the findings contradicted the document’s conclusion that raising the dam wall “would not result in a material loss or degradation of the outstanding universal value” of the world heritage area. They noted the project was expected to result in complete inundation of some cultural sites and this loss was “clearly at odds” with the suggestion there would be no material loss or degradation of world heritage values. Bob Debus, the chair of the Colong Foundation for Wilderness and a former NSW environment minister, said the NSW government was “putting Australia on a collision course with the world heritage committee” that created the risk of an in-danger listing for the Blue Mountains. “The Unesco advice is saying quite clearly that raising of the Warragamba Dam wall is totally inconsistent with Australia’s obligations under the world heritage convention,” he said. Stuart Ayres, the minister for western Sydney, said “we don’t support the view presented by the international union”. The IUCN assessment raises several concerns with the project, including that the government had insufficiently assessed the effects on threatened plants and animals, cultural values, and the recovery of species after the 2019-20 bushfire disaster. The IUCN said it was unacceptable the government had proposed compensating for damage to world heritage values by providing offsets in other areas. The scientists further wrote that local communities and traditional owners had not been properly consulted in the development of the EIS “and it also is apparent they have not provided their free, prior and informed consent”. Ayres said the proposal to raise the wall was to mitigate downstream floods while minimising environmental impacts behind the wall. “It’s important to recognise that unlike a water storage dam that holds water permanently, the higher wall at Warragamba will only hold water above the current storage level on a temporary basis, a few hours up to 14 days,” he said. “We are confident that given the temporary and limited areas covered by inundation that environmental impacts can be managed.” A spokesperson for the federal environment minister, Sussan Ley, said the NSW government was assessing the project on the government’s behalf, under bilateral assessment arrangements. “The bilateral agreement provides for a robust assessment of matters of national environmental significance including world heritage values,” he said. “Before making any decision on the proposal, the minister will consider the NSW government’s environmental assessment and all other matters required under national environmental law.”Until a couple of years ago, negotiating the hill leading to one of Kyoto’s most popular temples would have tested the patience of a Buddhist saint. The arrival of yet another coachload of sightseers would send pedestrians fleeing to narrow paths already clogged with meandering visitors on their way to Kiyomizu-dera. That was before Covid-19. Today, the cacophony of English and Chinese, and a smattering of other European and Asian languages, has been replaced by the chatter of Japanese children on school excursions. Shops selling souvenirs and wagashi sweets are almost empty, their unoccupied staff perhaps reminiscing about more lucrative times. Two years into the pandemic, some of the ancient capital’s residents admit that they have learned to embrace life without foreign visitors, who were once welcomed for the money they ploughed into the local economy and resented for their cultural faux pas and, in some cases, staggering bad manners. The global boom in Japanese pop culture and cuisine, a weaker yen and fading memories of the March 2011 nuclear disaster in Fukushima turned the country into a tourism success story. In 2019, a record 31 million people visited from overseas – an estimated 8 million of them including Kyoto in their itinerary. Buoyed up by its successful bid to host the 2020 summer Olympics, the government set an ambitious target – to which it continues to cling – of 60 million overseas visitors by the end of this decade. But after two years of the toughest borders restrictions in the world, Japan’s tourist boom feels as if it belongs to a different age. By last year, the gains of the previous decade had been wiped out, first by the arrival of the coronavirus, then by new waves that forced the government to abandon plans for a gradual opening up to tourists and other people from overseas. Just 245,900 foreign visitors arrived in Japan in 2021, according to the tourism agency, a drop of 99.2% from pre-pandemic levels. “It feels very different now,” said the owner of an ice-cream shop near Kiyomizu temple. “There used to be lots of foreign tourists, but now it’s almost empty.” Despite the loss of revenue, Kyoto residents are divided over the eventual return of significant numbers of overseas visitors. It wasn’t long ago that the city was at the centre of a backlash against “tourism pollution”. Signs were erected in the Gion district warning visitors against trespassing and – a common complaint – pestering passing geiko and maiko entertainers for selfies as they walked to their evening teahouse appointments. Traffic clogged popular sightseeing spots, while locals struggled to find space on buses crammed with tourists and their luggage. Restaurateurs railed against tourists who made group reservations but failed to turn up. For now, Kyoto’s tourist economy is dependent on domestic visitors, whose presence ebbs and flows in lockstep with measures to contain the latest wave of coronavirus infections. Mari Samejima is among the local businesspeople who are eager for the return of the bakugai – explosive buying – unleashed by free-spending parties of Chinese tourists who descended on Kyoto before the pandemic. “They spent a lot of money here,” said Samejima, who runs a gift shop. “I understand why some people are hesitant about a return to those days – and I have my own doubts – but I’d prefer to see foreign tourists again.” The number of customers at Yoshinobu Yoshida’s shop, which sells Kyô sensu folding fans, has slumped by as much as 60% over the past two years. “I don’t know what we’ll do if it carries on like this,” said Yoshida, whose shop has stood on the same spot near Kiyomizu for a century. “If I’m honest, I can’t see it returning to normal for another few years.” With the Omicron surge yet to reach its peak, and Japan’s government showing little enthusiasm for lifting its travel ban, few expect foreign tourists to return to Kyoto soon. And when they do, the numbers are expected to be a fraction of those before the pandemic. That may not be a bad thing, according to Tomoko Nagatsuka, who remembers hearing more Chinese than Japanese being spoken in her cafe, where weary tourists recharge with green tea and traditional sweets. “Kyoto isn’t a particularly big city, so too many foreign tourists put pressure on things like public transport,” she said. “They were great for business, but it was difficult to live a normal life with so many of them milling around. Part of me really wants them back, but another part of me loves the peace and quiet.”Tonga will go into lockdown after recording two Covid-19 cases among port workers helping distribute international aid in the wake of the volcanic eruption and tsunami that devastated the Pacific country last month. The cases seem to confirm fears among Tongan officials that the arrival of aid could bring an outbreak of the virus, which could represent a bigger danger to Tonga than the tsunami. The prime minister, Siaosi Sovaleni, said the lockdown, which begins at 6pm on Wednesday, will be open-ended, but will last for at least 48 hours, at which point it will be reviewed. The nationwide lockdown will require people to stay at home, with only essential services allowed to operate. Since the lockdown was announced, people have been scrambling to get supplies, with photographs emerging of queues down the street outside banks and shops, as people seek to get cash and food. Tonga is still reeling from the eruption of the undersea Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano on 15 January, which sent gas 20km into the air, prompted a tsunami, with waves reaching 15 metres (49ft), and blanketed the country in ash. Three people died in Tonga as a result of the tsunami and the Tongan government estimates that 84% of people in the country have been affected by it. In some islands and villages, every single house was destroyed by the tsunami. International aid has been arriving in Tonga since the disaster, with ships and planes arriving from Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Britain and China. The delivery of humanitarian relief supplies, including bulk water, hygiene kits and shelters, had aimed to be contactless. Tonga has remained Covid-free for much of the pandemic, reporting just a single case in a returning traveller in October. Travel to Tonga usually requires incoming travellers to spend three weeks in quarantine. The case in October, which also led to a lockdown, prompted a huge jump in vaccination rates in Tonga, with the government confirming that the number of those who were fully vaccinated went from around 35% before the first case was confirmed to 62% four days later. More than 20 cases of Covid-19 were reported among sailors aboard the HMAS Adelaide, which departed Australia for Tonga with supplies in the week following the eruption. There have also been Covid infections among crew members on aid flights from Japan and Australia. Tonga turned back an aid flight from Australia due to a positive Covid case on board. Small Pacific nations, including Kiribati and Palau, were among the last places to have remained Covid-free, due to their remoteness and strict bans on international travel. However, in the last month, outbreaks of Covid-19 have swept through many Pacific nations, including Samoa, Solomon Islands, Kiribati, and Palau. Just a handful of the very smallest Pacific countries – Tuvalu, Nauru, and Cook Islands – are still Covid-free. The lockdown in Tonga comes as many homes and businesses remain without internet access after the tsunami severed the sole fiber-optic cable that connects Tonga to the rest of the world. Officials are hoping repairs will be completed within a week or two. About 61% of Tonga’s 105,000 people are fully vaccinated, according to Our World in Data.If you’re a conscious consumer, there’s no doubt you think about the food you eat and the effect it has on your health and the environment. And if you choose to eat meat, fish, eggs or dairy, it’s important to seek assurance that the brands you buy from have considered the welfare of the animals. While the RSPCA acknowledges that not consuming animal-derived products is one way for consumers to demonstrate they care about farm-animal welfare, the organisation also aims to set a higher standard on farms today. Richard Mussell, RSPCA Australia CEO says, “We want to set participating farms on a path of continuous improvement in animal welfare while maintaining commercial viability, because ultimately this improves the lives of hundreds of millions of animals each and every year.” Mussell says the RSPCA Approved Farming Scheme is like no other in Australia. “We have comprehensive standards that are focused on improving animal welfare, as well as a stringent certification process.” Producers who qualify for RSPCA Approved certification have to meet a robust set of requirements, with a rigorous assessment process. With formal reviews every five years, the Standards are also progressively evolving so that they continue to factor in relevant animal welfare science, innovations around the world and community expectations. “The RSPCA Standards go well above and beyond what’s legally required in Australia, and aim to work with large-scale producers to raise the bar for animal welfare in a way that’s tangible and sustainable long-term.” RSPCA Australia considers that the welfare of an animal includes both their physical and mental states. This means that making sure animals have good welfare goes beyond simply preventing pain, suffering or distress. The RSPCA Approved Farming Scheme’s 2020 Impact Report makes it clear that RSPCA Approved eggs, meat and fish are the best choice for animal-welfare conscious consumers. Put simply, if you consume meat, fish or eggs, you can support a future for higher-welfare farming by choosing RSPCA Approved products. Raising the bar for animal welfare The publicly available RSPCA Standards are focused on animal welfare and the organisation’s rigorous certification program means farms go through regular and thorough assessments to make sure they consistently meet those standards. The RSPCA Approved Farming Scheme has been improving farm animal welfare for 25 years and, in 2020, according to their Impact Report, more than 585 million animals were farmed to RSPCA Standards as part of the scheme. Since 1996, more than three billion animals have benefitted from higher welfare farming conditions, such as lower stocking densities and enriching environments. For chickens, turkeys and egg-laying hens this means more space to move, and perches and litter covering the floor, allowing birds to scratch and dust bathe. Pigs have space to wander and explore, as well as quality bedding to rest and nest. For farmed Atlantic salmon there’s more space to swim, move freely and school with other fish. RSPCA Australia considers that the welfare of an animal includes both their physical and mental states. This means that making sure animals have good welfare goes beyond simply preventing pain, suffering or distress. It means allowing animals to express their natural behaviours – such as scratching and dust bathing for chickens – in an enriched environment, where they feel safe and have positive experiences – such as low-stress handling by farmers and stock people. “We want to set participating farms on a path of continuous improvement in animal welfare while maintaining commercial viability, because ultimately this improves the lives of hundreds of millions of animals each and every year.”, says Richard Mussell, RSPCA Australia CEO What to look out for Many Australians care deeply about how farm animals are treated and are looking for labels and certifications to guide their purchasing decisions. It can be confusing though, which is why the RSPCA is committed to helping customers make a good choice. In addition to sourcing food that bears the RSPCA Approved certification at supermarkets and independent grocers, when dining out consumers can support farmers who are doing the right thing, with a number of restaurant chains such as McDonald’s, Oporto and Grill’d sourcing RSPCA Approved chicken. Australian consumers are increasingly becoming aware that there are finer details that need to be considered when reading information about products described as ‘free range’, ‘outdoor bred’, ‘organic’ and ‘sow-stall free’, as these descriptors relate to the way in which the animals are farmed and housed. On their own, they do not constitute welfare standards. To know that a product, or an ingredient in a product, has been farmed to higher animal welfare standards and has been independently verified, the easiest thing to do is look for the RSPCA Approved certification. Driving change into the future Your purchasing power can drive change. The Australian meat chicken industry is a great example of how increasing consumer interest in the way our food is farmed has meant a push for more transparency and higher expectations over the past few years. This has led to an industry-wide shift towards better animal welfare. When Coles and Woolworths supermarkets launched RSPCA Approved chicken products in 2014, it caused a ripple effect across the whole industry which has seen improved welfare outcomes for millions of Australian meat chickens. Now, according to AgriFutures Australia’s 2020 report on market insights for Australia’s chicken meat industry, half of all consumers pay more attention to labels on chicken meat packaging than they did five years ago, with more than three in four Australian consumers saying that having a third-party audited animal welfare program with established standards is important to them when purchasing chicken. “Australians should know that when they choose the RSPCA Approved certification, it is leading to an increased uptake of higher welfare farming practices along the supply chain.” Mussell says. “ That’s a good thing, because making sure all animals – including those farmed for food – have a better quality of life, is paramount.” Learn more about how the RSPCA Approved Farming Scheme has been improving the lives of Australia’s farmed animals for 25 years.The family of Kathie McCormack Durst, the first wife of the late disgraced real estate heir Robert Durst, have filed a wrongful death lawsuit against his second wife. New York officials charged Durst with the murder of his first wife last year, nearly 40 years after she disappeared under mysterious circumstances. But his death in a California prison, where he was serving a life sentence for the murder of his friend, brought the case to a halt. In a lawsuit filed on Monday, the McCormack family alleges that Debrah Lee Charatan, Durst’s second wife who stands to collect millions from his estate, helped him avoid justice for years in connection with McCormack’s death and two other killings. Charatan is believed to be the sole or primary beneficiary of a trust worth tens of millions of dollars and is now the nominated executor of Durst’s estate, said Robert Abrams, a lawyer for the McCormack family. The lawyer alleges the money was promised to Charatan in exchange for her help and recently notified Durst’s trust that the McCormack family would be seeking more than $100m from Charatan and Durst’s estate. Filed in federal court on the 40th anniversary of McCormack’s disappearance, the lawsuit seeks damages in excess of $75,000. Robert Durst died on 10 January in a California hospital while serving a life sentence for shooting his best friend, Susan Berman, in the back of the head at her Los Angeles home in 2000 as she was preparing to tell police what she knew about McCormack’s death. Just weeks after he was sentenced for Berman’s killing, a New York grand jury indicted him on a second-degree murder charge in McCormack’s case. But the 78-year-old’s death upended both cases, bringing the McCormack charges to a halt and, thanks to a quirk in the California law, seeing the Berman murder conviction rendered void because the case was under appeal when Durst died. Durst was suspected in his first wife’s disappearance for years, and the Westchester county district attorney’s office has long faced criticism for waiting decades to file charges against him in the matter. A civil lawsuit against his estate was one of the only remaining legal avenues for McCormack’s family, according to Neama Rahmani, a former federal prosecutor who was not involved in the case. “No one was willing to prosecute and try the case. Unfortunately, because of this long delay, Kathie Durst and her family will never receive the criminal justice that she deserves,” Rahmani said last month. The McCormack family previously filed a wrongful death lawsuit against Durst in 2019, but the case was thrown out because it was filed too late. The judge in that case said, however, the case could be revived if Durst were to face criminal charges in connection with his first wife’s death. McCormack disappeared in 1982 and her body was never found. At the time of disappearance, she was a medical student, who was preparing to become a pediatrician. Her family has said Durst was abusive, and that she had previously required treatment in a hospital for injuries he caused. Durst married Charatan in December 2000. Abrams alleged in a previous lawsuit, now under appeal, that Charatan wed Durst to help him evade authorities after the investigation into McCormack’s disappearance was reopened. Charatan has never been charged with a crime in the case, and her lawyers said in court papers in 2019 that she bears no responsibility related to McCormack’s disappearance, which occurred six years before she met Robert Durst. Attorney Scott Epstein said allegations against her were based on rumor “more suitable for a work of fiction”. “The plaintiffs’ claims are at best an example of the most extreme form of speculation and at worst nothing more than a thinly veiled attempt to publicly embarrass and extort money from Ms Charatan, an innocent party, who is perceived by the plaintiffs as a deep pocket,” Epstein wrote. Durst’s suspected involvement in three killings in three states was documented in the 2015 HBO documentary series The Jinx: The Life and Deaths of Robert Durst. The series chronicled McCormack’s disappearance, Berman’s murder and the 2001 death of Durst’s neighbor, Morris Black, in Galveston, Texas, where Durst was hiding out while disguised as a deaf-mute woman. The Associated Press contributed reportingLocals say they are living off perished goods in the central Australia town of Ampilatwatja as flooding, road closures and Covid cases combine to cause a “perfect storm” of crises. A week of heavy rain in the town, which is around 350km north-east of Alice Springs, has caused road closures and a food and supplies shortage. A Covid outbreak is also believed to be growing. Residents told Guardian Australia they had not been able to manage the outbreak due to a lack of rapid antigen tests, and because staff at the local health clinics had been stretched. Steven and Narelle Walker, managers at the Aherrenge community shop, said locals were frustrated at the lack of support from authorities. “We can’t get fresh fruit or veggies due to the roads being flooded, and our suppliers can’t supply us because the trucks can’t get through. We’re living off perished goods now,” Steven said. “There are small pockets of frustration now, and some fear. There are a lot of people scared of catching the virus.” Narelle said: “We can’t even test ourselves. Because there are no RATs. We can’t protect ourselves nor our staff. Nobody has had enough, they bring these rules in and no one is prepared.” The town has reported 11 cases, with locals suspecting there are more going unreported. Steven said the community in Ampilatwatja felt “abandoned” by authorities, adding that they had missed out on two weekly trucks carrying vital supplies in the time the roads had been closed. “A lot of people are confused by the rules as well, are in lockdown or lock in? Some people don’t know and are confused by changing definitions and rules. “We’ve been promised more supplies and more RAT tests, but nothing has happened, and nothing seems to eventuate. We’re just working through the stocks that we’ve built up, but we feel like we’re abandoned.” Steven said communication had also been difficult, with phone and internet coverage dropping out. Telstra’s NT regional general manager, Nic Danks, told the Guardian the “hardware issue” has been causing the disruptions, and that the flood waters had prevented them from making any repairs. “We have tried multiple routes and ways to get to the affected site but flood waters and bad weather are preventing us from accessing the area. “We tried to chopper technicians to the site today but bad weather in the area forced us to turn back. We are working closely with local and state authorities as well as the community to get the area back online as quickly as possible.” A spokesperson for Northern Territory Health said: “Our transport team work with our providers to ensure the deployment of aircraft suitable for the conditions in each community.” “Our transport operators are prepared for wet roads and airstrips. They have a firm understanding of the conditions on the ground in these locations and the capacity of their community stores, where they have ensured increased stock is on-hand to see the community through an extended period of isolation.” But John Paterson, from the Aboriginal Medical Services Alliance Northern Territory (AMSANT), called the situation a “perfect storm” of challenges, and said there were “huge delays” in getting supplies into Ampilatwatja. “All this has just come at once to remote communities where we have some of the sickest and most chronically ill populations in the country,” he said. “We’ve been calling for assistance for multiple days now, and I totally understand the logistical problems, but there seems to be a reluctance from authorities to provide any help.” Paterson said he thought military support would be able to navigate the logistical difficulties, but has said there was “waning” interest in response to requests for help. “There just seems to be a lack of wanting of willingness when it comes to our requests for support and assistance from all levels of government,” he said. “It just seems like nobody cares for our people any more.” He said locals were feeling “very anxious,” and that many of the frustrations came down to a lack of coordination by authorities. “It’s not up to the Aboriginal community control sector to take on that responsibility. This is government’s responsibility, and they ought to be stepping up and providing the appropriate leadership support and assistance to our remote communities when in need of help. “Elders, in particular, are absolutely fearful of the spread of Covid and the lack of access to essential services such as hospitals if they, as well as food security and the lack of food.” Paterson pointed to a lack of resources for local medical clinics, saying staff there were stretched under pre-pandemic demands, and had been completely overwhelmed by the pandemic. “The local Aboriginal health service is already under enormous strain in terms of workforce capacity, people have been at the forefront of this pandemic for the last two and a bit years. “Our current workforce that provides day to day primary health care to our mob are now expected to drop all of that responsibility and that service and then the take up Covid testing and vaccinations.” “They’re fatigued, they’re tired and they’re right on the edge of burnout.”Health workers on the frontline of India’s Covid vaccination programme say people are being officially registered as double vaccinated without receiving both doses because of pressure to meet government targets. Workers described how easy it was to falsely register second vaccine doses for people who did not attend appointments, by using personal records from their first dose and opting to bypass a code sent to their mobile phone. “There is no technical glitch,” said Aditya, a health worker from Uttar Pradesh who requested that only his first name was used owing to fear of reprisal. “The issue is the unprecedented pressure on us to increase the number of vaccinated people.” The vaccine status of all citizens is recorded on a government-built platform called CoWIN. CoWIN vaccination certificates are globally recognised and make people eligible for inter-state and international travel, including to countries that are accepting only fully vaccinated passengers. The government had set a deadline of the end of 2021 to get everyone in India vaccinated, which was missed. According to official statistics, 75% of the adult population have now had two doses. Last week, the prime minister, Narendra Modi, tweeted that he was “proud of all those who are making our vaccination drive a success”. However, health workers who spoke to the Guardian alleged the figures were being manipulated, and estimated that in urban areas 20% to 35% of people had been fraudulently registered as double vaccinated. In rural areas they estimated that the figure could be as high as 40% to 60%. ‘Shocking’ Manish Kumar, a 21-year-old student from Patna, Bihar, described how he had been on the way to a vaccination centre in June last year when his sister, Puja Kumari, 28, received a text message on her phone saying she had successfully received her first vaccine. When the siblings reached the centre about an hour later they raised the problem with officials and threatened legal action. “After that, they vaccinated all of us, including my sister, saying there was a technical glitch and apologised,” said Kumar. But the same then happened to Kumar’s father, Mukesh Prasad, a farmer, who was en route to the vaccination centre when he got a text saying his second vaccine had been administered. Another problem emerged when it came to Kumar’s second dose. In October, after he had moved 170 miles away to attend Banaras Hindu University in the neighbouring state of Uttar Pradesh, he received a message saying he had just received his second dose at a health facility in Patna. “I want some sort of protection from Covid-19, but how will my father and I get the second vaccine done?” asked Kumar. Kaprela Hari, a 32-year-old IT professional from Rajampet in the southern state of Andhra Pradesh, faced a similar problem for his father, a farmer, who had been too busy in the fields to make time for his second appointment. Out of the blue, he received a text message confirming his father’s receipt of a second vaccine dose and a link to the CoWIN certificate of double vaccination status. “The nearby facility for vaccination would open at 11am and close at 1pm, and it had not been possible for me to get my father vaccinated in this two-hour gap,” said Hari. “So I was surprised when I got the vaccination message.” After taking up the issue with a health worker posted in his locality, Hari said he was told that the local facility was not responsible and that his father “should have turned up for vaccination on time”. Hari concluded that data was being “manipulated”. Deceased people also appear to be receiving vaccine certificates in an apparent attempt to boost numbers. In January, Uday Bir Singh was having lunch with relatives in a restaurant when he received a text: “Dear Manju Rani, you have successfully been vaccinated with your second dose.” A click on the link attached to the message revealed the vaccine certificate of his wife, Rani, who had died of Covid eight months earlier. “It felt like a cruel joke,” said Akanksha, Singh’s daughter. “How can my mother be vaccinated in January 2022 when she died in May 2021? We felt devastated and didn’t understand how it happened.” In a statement, the government denied any vaccine fraud was taking place, stating that every vaccine team had a “verifier” whose sole job it was to confirm the identities of those being vaccinated. “[The] CoWIN system is an inclusive platform and has been designed keeping the limitations and challenges of mobile and internet availability across the country,” the government said. “Necessary features and flexibility, to ensure that every eligible individual has the access to vaccination, regardless of any of physical, digital or socioeconomic barriers to access, have been incorporated in CoWIN. “At the same time, SOPs [standard operating procedures] and features have been incorporated to prevent fraudulent and/or wrong data entry at time of vaccination.” India’s healthcare system is woefully underfunded and underresourced, and the vaccination programme has put more pressure on frontline healthcare workers, who work long hours on little pay. Several workers said the practice of falsely registering people as fully vaccinated was a result of threats from senior officials to suspend workers or withhold salaries if vaccination targets were not met. “I was slapped in a meeting by a district level official who was not happy with the number of vaccinations we have been doing,” said a 45-year-old health worker in Bihar. “Later, the official called me and apologised, saying that there is tremendous pressure from the minister of the state.” Wahida, a healthcare worker from Jammu and Kashmir, said: “The easy way to get away with the situation is to register people, no matter what. It is less hectic and officials are also happy.”Two heads have been stolen from separate graves in a Melbourne cemetery, with police saying the grisly crime has distressed the families of those whose bodies were disturbed. It is not believed anything else was taken from the coffins, which were located in mausoleums in Footscray cemetery. Victoria Police acting inspector Ben Jarman said the first theft occurred overnight between 27 January and 28 January, and the second between Monday night and Tuesday morning. The thefts occurred at mausoleums towards the rear of the cemetery, and were reported to police after passersby noticed graves had been damaged. “It is very distressing for the families, obviously they weren’t expecting this news to come from Victoria Police,” Jarman said. “They expect their loved ones to be put to rest, at peace.” There were no known links between the two people whose graves were targeted, Jarman said. A third grave site was also disturbed, but it was a pre-purchased plot that did not contain human remains. Jarman said police were unclear about the motive for the crime, which constituted theft and removal of body part offences, but he was not ruling out that it was linked to satanism. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Because it’s such an uncommon crime to be committed, until we catch up with the offender and find out a motive, it’s very difficult to say what the motive is,” he said. Jarman was not aware of similar cases occurring in Victoria, but said that would form part of the investigation. It is unclear how many people are involved in the offences, which occurred when the cemetery could only be accessed by foot, but it is expected tools were used to access the remains. There had been items left at the scene by the offenders, Jarman said. “It is difficult to say whether they are acting alone, there is a … lot of work to get into these mausoleums, there was a substantial amount of damage, but too early to say at this stage.” Jarman said police would increase patrols in the area, and the local council was working with the cemeteries trust to improve security, including by installing CCTV.Children in Afghanistan are rummaging through bins looking for plastic to sell while women sit in the middle of busy roads begging for food, spurring fresh calls for the Australian government to ramp up assistance to the poverty-hit country. Fiona McSheehy, an aid worker currently based in Afghanistan, told Australian senators on Wednesday she had witnessed “desperately heartbreaking” scenes over the past three months, as humanitarian groups warn of rising poverty and famine. The acting country director for Afghanistan at Save the Children, addressing a Senate hearing in Canberra by videoconference, said half of Afghanistan’s population was aged under 18 and “they have no real future at the moment”. “I’ve been involved in humanitarian work for more than two decades now and this is by far and away the most complicated and also deeply saddening situation I’ve ever been in,” McSheehy said. “I’ve been here for about three months. Since I arrived, I have seen the number of children on the street increase dramatically. You see them rooting through things like rubbish bins to try to find things that they can then sell – plastic and things like that. “We see them lined up in streets begging as people try to get to the airport, and they’re selling face masks one by one – that’s how desperate they are for an income.” McSheehy, who has also travelled to some of the provinces, said during her time in Afghanistan she had seen “more poverty and more desperation”. “Every now again you’ll see a woman and her children just sitting in the middle of the road begging for food and money, while cars and lorries drive either side of them. It is desperately heartbreaking,” she said. McSheehy also told the hearing that each morning the streets of Kabul were lined with men sitting in wheelbarrows waiting for a day of work. She said if she went back three hours later, most of those men were still there waiting – because there was no work. That meant it was hard for parents to feed their children, she told the Senate’s foreign affairs, defence and trade references committee, which is continuing its inquiry into Australia’s engagement in Afghanistan. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Senate committee last month published an interim report that said former Afghan interpreters and other colleagues left behind by the Australian government after the Taliban takeover in August now faced a high risk of brutal reprisals. Mat Tinkler, the acting chief executive of Save the Children Australia, described the situation in Afghanistan as a “living hell”. He said on Wednesday there were now 13.1 million children in need of humanitarian aid – an increase of 3.1 million children in just three months. “Senators, we are watching the world’s largest humanitarian crisis unfold right now and every day the risk to an increasing number of children’s lives becomes both more severe and more urgent,” he said. Tinkler said 22.8 million people – almost the entire population of Australia – were “on the brink of famine”. By the middle of the year, more than 95% of the population could be living in poverty. He asked what it would take for the Australian government to do more to try to avoid this catastrophe. Tinkler said his organisation welcomed Australia’s funding commitment of $100m to Afghanistan, but $52m of that was already funded in 2021-22 and $35m would be spent across the four-year budget period. That left about $13m in new funding dedicated to the crisis this year. “I think the world and Australia needs to ask itself, are we comfortable watching this tragedy unfold, are we comfortable watching a projected 1 million children die this year of malnutrition?” Tim Watkin, the head of government relations at the Australian Council for International Development, described it as an “escalating humanitarian crisis”. Nadine Haddad, a senior policy adviser to World Vision Australia, said the severity of the situation in Afghanistan was “far too much for anyone to comprehend”. She emphasised the importance of aid to directly help people in need, with safeguards to ensure money did not go to the Taliban leadership, but added: “The priority of humanity must take over.” The Australian government does not recognise the Taliban regime, but Australian officials say they are involved in “cautious” discussions. Those talks are done in group settings alongside other like-minded countries “where we judge it’s worthwhile” – including to press the Taliban to allow “safe passage” to people who wish to leave Afghanistan. Daniel Sloper, Australia’s special representative for Afghanistan, joining the hearing by videoconference from Doha, said the Taliban had largely honoured a commitment to allow the delivery of humanitarian assistance, with some “very concerning” exceptions. Sloper said there had been “localised incursions or seizures of goods or interference, particularly with women associated with the delivery of assistance”. “Since the end of last year, we’ve seen a rise in reports of interference, including most recently a suggestion that in one province women who were unaccompanied – that is, working alone – were threatened with shooting,” he said. Sloper said Australia’s assistance was being channelled through international partners with experience on the ground, a method that “has restricted some of what we have provided to date”. He hinted that the government was considering expanding that approach. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said it was aware of 35 Australian citizens and 26 Australian permanent residents who remained in Afghanistan, plus 148 foreign citizens who are immediate family members of Australian citizens or permanent residents.Fires, flooding and humidity may have made life hard for many Australians in the last week but it looks like there may be a reprieve as the monsoon system causing havoc across the continent is expected to break apart before the weekend. A monsoonal weather system swept across the continent dragging with it tropical moisture from the equator that caused massive rainfalls from the far north-west of the country, right into central Australia. An extra 100mm of rain was dumped across some parts of remote South Australia, hampering efforts to restore road and rail lines that had been cut after floods caused by ex-tropical cyclone Tiffany. The situation meant desert communities across Western Australia, SA and the Northern Territory have remained cut off for the last week. The Royal Australian Air Force began airlifting supplies into Coober Pedy on Monday, while store shelves in other regional centres such as Alice Springs remained bare after the town found itself unreachable by land with a growing Covid outbreak. Though usually a rare event, the rain has caused the Todd River in Alice Springs to flow for the second time in three months. The last time it flowed was 10 November when 100mm of rain fell in 24 hours. Out west, the Kimberley has gone from record making 50.7C temperatures in mid-January to widespread flooding across the region. Areas around Perth and Geraldton may be sweating through temperatures nearing 40C and bracing for bushfires, but Broome recorded more rainfall in the 48 hours from Sunday morning than it did for all 2021, with 564mm of rain. The most extreme conditions were at Country Downs, a cattle station just north of Broome, which recorded 652mm of rain in just 24 hours – more than Melbourne’s annual rainfall – the second highest daily rainfall on record in WA. Jonathan How from the Bureau of Meteorology said the situation across central Australia should improve from Thursday, though the flood waters were likely to persist before draining into inland salt lakes. “Thankfully the rain is easing off on Thursday,” How said. “We are seeing some cooler air coming through. It’s basically cooler air coming up from the Southern Ocean, moving up towards the monsoon, causing it to break apart and move away.” There is also some good news on the way for Queensland, which has sweltered through a one-two-punch of hot weather and high humidity with some areas battered by severe storms overnight. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Warm water in the Coral Sea saw hot, steamy air blow across the Queensland coast these past few days, causing temperatures to feel 5C to 10C hotter than they were. Though the maximum temperature across Brisbane on Tuesday was 34C, the humidity meant it felt closer to 38C. At 9am on Wednesday the temperature was already sitting at 32C, but would have felt more like 37C. This humidity also fuelled thunderstorms across the state, with south-east Queensland lashed by a storm that brought down powerlines in Logan, stripped roofs from buildings and recorded more than 100,000 lightning strikes. A suspected tornado was reported over Browns Plains, causing damage to homes but the Bureau had yet to make the sighting official. “For us to call it a tornado it needs to touch the ground. At this stage we’re calling it a suspected tornado, so we need to confirm that,” How said. The storm also left at least 23,000 people without power, a situation which Nationals MP Matt Canavan quickly blamed on renewable energy saying “green energy can’t keep the lights on”. However, power company Energex said the outages were caused by a vehicle hitting a power pole during the storm and underground cable faults, and had nothing to do with renewables. The energy market regulator AEMO was forced to intervene with its reverse trading mechanism, saying in a statement it would “closely monitor reserve levels to maintain adequate supply as the evening peak-demand period approaches”. Though the Bureau of Meteorology has issued warnings for flash flooding ahead of heavy rain overnight, it is expected this will help clear out the humidity and lower temperatures across Queensland going into the weekend. While these heavy rains may reach areas of northern New South Wales, conditions are not expected to be as severe over Sydney. While down in Melbourne, cooler air means the humidity will have broken as the city heats up over the weekend with an expectation of hitting the low 30s early next week.My husband and I struggled with when exactly to become parents. Years went by and it never felt like quite right. We were young, living away from our families in London, and renting a small basement flat. We wanted to be settled – in our careers, in a city, living in a place we owned – before we committed to having a child. After all, those seemed like the sort of things parents, actual proper adults, should have. In hindsight, we needn’t have worried as much as we did. Our daughter, and then our sons, were born to two parents who deeply care about them and their wellbeing. Like many parents, we put aside much of our own needs and wants to give our children the best life we could. More than a decade after becoming those shellshocked new parents, we now take more assured steps on our parenting journey. Our children are happy and healthy and thriving. But of course, like all parents, we worry about whether what we give them is enough. Would it be better if we could afford to send them to private school (even though the notion of private schooling is against both our beliefs)? Should our children be doing more after-school activities? Have we saved enough to give them a financial head-start when they become adults? Worrying about the future, it seems, goes hand in hand with parenting. We worry not just about the sort of people our children will grow up to be, but also whether we have equipped them enough to live happy fulfilling lives. We worry about what sort of world we will be leaving our children and many of these worries feature in our children’s lives too. But ultimately, where does worrying get us? It’s not going to change the future. I started meditating around the time I was to become a mother for the first time and one of the lessons I’ve learned is that I can’t control what’s going to happen down the track, but I can control how I feel about my present. I can control – to some degree at least – what happens in the now. And just as I can’t change the future for my children by worrying about it, I can at least change their present by giving them the best childhood I can. In her book The Philosophical Baby, Alison Gopnik writes about how as parents and caregivers we determine a hugely important aspect of our children’s lives and that’s the childhood we give them. She talks about a project in Michigan where children from deprived backgrounds were given access to dedicated caregivers. The benefits of this were seen 20 to 30 years later when those children had grown up to become “more prosperous, better educated, healthier and less likely to go to jail”. Similarly, Michael Delman in his book Your Kid’s Gonna be Okay writes: “For our children, our patience, kindness and encouragement will pay better dividends than constantly wringing our hands and telling them how anxious we are about them.” All this means that perhaps one of the most important things we can do for our children is to worry less about their future and focus more on their present. As much as we can, we have the power to give our children a childhood that will carry them in good stead for the rest of their lives. In western countries we spend so much of our lives worrying about our children’s future, perhaps to their detriment, as Gopnik has argued in her book The Gardener and the Carpenter. Rather than worrying about their future, perhaps we should be more concerned about what will one day be their past – after all, unlike their future, our children’s past is one thing over which we have some semblance of control. This is not to say that as parents we won’t mess up or that life won’t throw events our way that we can’t control. It also doesn’t mean that we should ignore the foundational needs of our children and not do what we can to set them up for success. But perhaps the worrying and fretting over whether we are doing enough is not as important? The good news is that if you are thinking such things, you’re most likely already an excellent caregiver and have your children’s needs as a priority. Perhaps what’s most important is that we are there for our children, and that no matter how much time in a day we have for them, we try to make sure it is quality time without distractions. • Saman Shad is a writer based in SydneyUS talkshow host and actor Whoopi Goldberg has been suspended from The View for two weeks for saying the Holocaust “isn’t about race” on Monday’s episode. Her suspension from the The View was announced in a statement released by US network ABC News on Tuesday night, after Goldberg issued a public apology. “Effective immediately, I am suspending Whoopi Goldberg for two weeks for her wrong and hurtful comments,” Kim Godwin, president of ABC News, wrote in the statement. “While Whoopi has apologised, I’ve asked her to take time to reflect and learn about the impact of her comments. The entire ABC News organisation stands in solidarity with our Jewish colleagues, friends, family and communities.” Goldberg has yet to comment on her suspension. Variety reported that the decision to suspend Goldberg was made in consultation with the highest tiers of management at Disney, which owns ABC News. Goldberg made the comments during a discussion about a Tennessee school board’s decision to ban the Pulitzer prize-winning Holocaust graphic novel Maus. “Let’s be truthful, the Holocaust isn’t about race, it’s not. It’s about man’s inhumanity to man, that’s what it’s about. These are two groups of white people,” she said on The View on Monday. She continued: “You’re missing the point … let’s talk about it for what it really is. It’s about how people treat each other. It’s a problem. It doesn’t matter if you’re black or white, Jews … everybody eats each other.” The Auschwitz Memorial and StopAntisemitism.org are among organisations that have condemned her comments, with Jonathan Greenblatt from the Anti-Defamation League calling her comments “dangerous”. The Nazis regarded Jewish people as an inferior race, and a threat to Aryan Germans. Racist ideology was used to justify the annihilation of anyone with Jewish heritage, regardless of their religious belief and practice. Hitler himself described Jewish people as a race, not a religion, in Mein Kampf. In a statement posted on Twitter the same day, Goldberg offered her “sincerest apologies”. She wrote: “On today’s show I said the Holocaust ‘is not about race, but about man’s inhumanity to man’. I should have said it is about both … I stand corrected. “The Jewish people around the world have always had my support and that will never (waver). I am sorry for the hurt I have caused.” After her apology, Greenblatt publicly thanked Goldberg for “acknowledging the Holocaust for what it was”. He then appeared with Goldberg during the start of Tuesday’s episode of The View, during which she again apologised.If one was looking for a motive for the extraordinary leak of text messages describing the prime minister, Scott Morrison, as “a horrible, horrible person”, “a fraud” and a “psycho”, then the wild factional brawl within the New South Wales division of the Liberals is a good place to start. “This is a major hit job by NSW on Morrison and his offsider, [Alex] Hawke,” one senior NSW Liberal said of the blue-on-blue attack. Morrison also upped the ante. During a chat with 2GB’s Ray Hadley he publicly threatened federal intervention in the NSW division. “If they can’t endorse [federal environment minister Sussan Ley] they should get out of the way and let the federal executive ensure we can get things done,” the prime minister said. On Monday, the state executive rebuffed a motion designed in the prime minister’s office to automatically re-endorse three sitting members, including Ley. The NSW Liberal party, arguably the most dysfunctional branch in the country, is in the final stages of trying to carve up the spoils for the next federal election: eight safe or winnable seats that could guarantee careers in federal parliament for years. The choices could determine whether Morrison holds or picks up seats in NSW. Understandably he wants a say. The problem is the rules don’t give him one. The composition of the parliamentary party will also determine the balance of internal power within the three factions in the NSW Liberal party – the moderates, the right and the centre right. This will determine the policy direction of the Liberals in the future. But more immediately, it’s also about the influence of those who rule within the party behind the scenes. Despite the federal election being due by May, party mechanisms have been seized up by obstruction. It has now reached a crisis point, with factional organisers unable to deliver on a complex peace deal on who will be candidates. This threatens to expose their own weakness and could implode the NSW division. The prime minister, a former state director of the NSW Liberals, and Hawke – his immigration minister who is also the convener of the centre-right faction, the PM’s power base – are at the very heart of this internal toxic dispute. Hawke, who represents the prime minister on a crucial vetting committee, is being blamed by all for the delays in choosing candidates by failing to make himself available to scrutinise candidates. Some think the pair are engineering a crisis so the PM can pick candidates. The other factor is the relatively new rules which were designed to insert democracy into preselections. Plebiscites of all branch members are required under new rules, but the results are unpredictable or in some cases undesirable to some. These have been delayed by Hawke’s actions to the point they may no longer be possible. In the branches, members are furious. The right and the moderates are desperately trying to stitch together a grand bargain that satisfies everyone, to no avail. Candidates are now withdrawing, fearing the seats are unwinnable, and there are threats of legal action from members over the breach of the new rules. So when texts allegedly sent between the former premier, Gladys Berejiklian and “a cabinet minister” were lobbed into the public domain on Tuesday via a question at the press club in Canberra, the fingers immediately pointed to one of the most prominent factional players in NSW: Matt Kean – the NSW treasurer, Berejiklian confidante and moderate convener. On Wednesday morning on 2GB’s Ben Fordham show, Kean denied he was the leaker. “I played no part in the ambush of the prime minister. It was not me,” he said. It was “completely insulting” to suggest he was behind the text messages, Kean said. The journalist who asked the question at the press club, Peter Van Onselen, has since clarified his source was a federal minister. Berejiklian has said she couldn’t recall the text exchanges. The federal Nationals leader, Barnaby Joyce, claimed on Wednesday he knew who Berejiklian was allegedly texting. But whoever is responsible, this is not accidental and its delivery at a televised event ensured maximum media follow-up. Those of us who have peeked inside the feudal court of the NSW Liberals can vouch that the prime minister and Hawke are extremely unpopular with many right and moderate factional figures. On the right, many feel Hawke’s actions – which have effectively delayed preselections – are about engineering a crisis and denying branch members democracy. Among the moderates, the dominant faction, there is equal frustration as they blame the prime minister for upsetting the more recent peace deal. Others see in the leak an attempt to distance the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, from the prime minister and his record on Covid-19 planning, the related economic slowdown and women’s issues. Perrottet’s electoral test will come sooner, with four state byelections scheduled for 12 February. But for Perrottet, there are risks he too could be tarnished in the eyes of the electorate by the organisational division’s infighting. There’s an old adage in politics: if you can’t govern yourself, you can’t govern the country. Voters might not follow the ins and outs of factional wars, but they know it causes paralysis in governments, pollutes who gets preselected to represent them and leads to cronyism within a political party. In short, they hate internal bickering. So if someone in the NSW or federal Liberals thought this was a smart strategy, they probably need to get out more.Peter van Onselen, the political editor of Network Ten, has denied undermining and humiliating the network’s federal political reporter Tegan George and says a federal court case will show he is a strong advocate for wiping out sexual harassment in the workplace. “No, no, absolutely not,” he said when asked by the ABC’s Virginia Trioli on Melbourne radio whether he bullied George, who reported to him in the Canberra bureau. “And when process plays out, I’ll be able to respond to it all through Channel 10. But I just can’t talk about it publicly. Now that it’s a court proceeding.” Van Onselen denied he had a “woman problem” and said the case would show his behaviour in the workplace was the “exact opposite”. While saying he couldn’t talk about the details in the statement of claim revealed by Guardian Australia on Tuesday, Van Onselen claimed a key matter raised by George would show that he does not tolerate sexual harassment in the workplace. “Well, actually on this one, the statement, which has been leaked publicly, one of the complaints is that I didn’t tolerate, if you like, non-cooperation with an incident that involved alleged sexual harassment within the office … which I wanted to be dealt with,” he said. “I’m looking forward to Channel 10 defending [the claim], which they are doing but I just can’t speak publicly about it, unfortunately.” Van Onselen was referencing a claim by George that she was threatened with disciplinary action by Network Ten management when she resisted making a formal statement about an alleged sexist remark that she had overheard. The statement of claim said she was pressured into making a formal statement after she “overheard a conversation in Network Ten’s parliament house bureau between a Network Ten employee and a freelance camera operator in which a sexist remark was made about another employee”. George’s legal counsel, Maurice Blackburn principal Josh Bornstein, said his client “overheard snippets of a conversation between two colleagues which contained sexist remarks and reported it to a manager”. “Any suggestion that Ms George refused or failed to report an incident of sexual harassment is false,” Bornstein said on Wednesday after the ABC interview. George claims Van Onselen backgrounded journalists against her and tweeted about “employees who witness” sexual harassment but did not report it, a tweet she believed was directed at her. “I’m talking about witnesses not victims,” Van Onselen said in another tweet, quoted in the claim. “Especially when an employer makes clear they want to stamp it out, but a witness covers up for a colleague they are close to, for example”. A columnist for the Australian and an academic, Van Onselen has been one of George’s bosses in the Canberra bureau since 2019 and she alleges she suffered “hurt, humiliation and distress” in the workplace and has been on sick leave since June last year. She names a number of senior executives at the network in her claim, including Van Onselen. Trioli also quizzed him regarding his headline making question to Scott Morrison at the National Press Club about text messages between Gladys Berejiklian and an unnamed senior Liberal. The prime minister was blindsided by a claim that leaked texts between a party colleague and the former New South Wales premier included her calling the prime minister a “horrible person” who was untrustworthy. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In his question to Morrison on Tuesday, Van Onselen said: “In one, she described you as a horrible, horrible person, going on to say she did not trust you, and you are more concerned with politics than people.” Trioli: “According to those text messages, he’s a psycho, but according to a statement of claim that’s been filed in court you’re batshit crazy. So do you and the prime minister have this in common?” “I can’t talk about that. As much as I would love to,” Van Onselen said. “Because it is not public.” In her lawsuit, George claims Van Onselen variously used Twitter, Ten group emails and WhatsApp messages to undermine her. The federal court released the originating application to the media on Wednesday but held back the statement of claim. The originating application says George is claiming that Ten contravened the Fair Work Act and should “pay a pecuniary penalty for each contravention”. Ten, which is the only respondent, is yet to file its defence in the federal court.Footsore, we reached the ruins of Metcalf’s House that, until the beginning of the 19th century, was an inn on an old road between Teesdale and Weardale. On this frosty morning, it’s the perfect spot for a sit-down, hands warmed by mugs of flasky tea. It wasn’t difficult to imagine what a welcome sight this place must have been for weary drovers of packhorses that once carried almost everything across these Pennine hills before the advent of railways, decent roads and the internal combustion engine. Now, there is no blaze in the hearth, open to the skies, and the apse-shaped oven built into the wall is full of rubble and ferns. In the inn’s heyday, when it had walls, doors and a roof, the air in these rooms must have been a fug of wood smoke, beer, hot beverages and warm bread. The forest below us, along Ayhope Beck, was partially wreathed in mist. There is probably no one alive who remembers this view before conifer plantations clothed the hillsides, but the birch, hazel, gorse and alder around Metcalf’s House hint at a pre-forested landscape of heathland. Our route onwards, thankfully all downhill, took us through air scented with the sharp, resinous tang of conifers. In a Scots pine plantation, some wind-thrown trees from past storms had been allowed to slowly subside into the earth: left to their own devices, forests can bury their own casualties under carpets of moss, until fungal decay completes its work and timber rots and crumbles. Winged seeds from cones above sometimes spin down and settle on these mossy seedbeds, elevated above the tangle of brambles, nurturing a new generation of saplings, rooted in decaying remains of fallen giants. We reached the valley bottom and the sweet, humic aroma of a deciduous woodland of lofty, straight-trunked oaks. They must have been among the first trees planted here, by unemployed shipyard workers and miners who were drafted in and housed in barrack huts, to afforest these windswept hillsides during the Depression years of the 1930s. Their names go unrecorded but they deserve to be remembered for this magnificent legacy. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryA rapid antigen test manufacturing facility will be established in Melbourne to supply Victoria with millions of kits each year. The state’s premier, Daniel Andrews, on Wednesday announced his government’s partnership with Lumos Diagnostics, which is already manufacturing the kits in the US for Canadian and European markets. If their kits are approved by Australia’s Therapeutic Goods Administration, the company plans to produce 1 million tests a month from April and 3 million a month after July. The facility will reach full capacity to manufacture 50 million tests a year by October. “That’s a fantastic outcome,” Andrews said. “We know we’re going to be using these things for quite some time and of course, once you get to that level, there’s always opportunities to grow this even further.” The announcement came as case numbers continued to drop nationwide. Victoria recorded 25 deaths and 14,553 new cases of coronavirus, with the number of active infections in the state almost halving – from nearly 140,000 cases one week ago down to 73,886 on Wednesday. Andrews said the majority of deaths were from previous days and had only recently been reported to authorities. There were 786 Victorians in hospital with the virus, down from 851 on Tuesday. NSW Health recorded 27 more Covid deaths and 11,807 new cases on Tuesday, the lowest number this year apart from Australia Day, when 10,345 cases were recorded. It’s a drop of 1,011 cases on the previous day and a stark contrast to the record high of 91,715 cases on 13 January. Queensland recorded 16 deaths, including a child under the age of 10, and 9,360 new cases. The state’s chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, said the child who died had a “very serious underlying, rare, inherited medical condition”. Queensland’s premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said the news was “absolutely devastating”. “It’s our very sad duty today to have to report our first young child that has passed away due to Covid,” she said on Wednesday. “Can I … please urge families to get their children vaccinated. School goes back next week, we are expecting to see increased numbers of cases.” South Australia recorded 1,723 infections and one death, while Tasmania recorded 666 cases and the Australian Capital Territory 549. Western Australia recorded 17 new local cases and 12 returning from interstate or overseas. Two of the local infections are unlinked to existing clusters and are under investigation. The Northern Territory is yet to release their daily figures. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Despite the drop in cases and new manufacturing deal, Andrews said Victoria would not be cancelling any previously made orders for rapid antigen tests, instead offering to share the kits with other jurisdictions if they were not needed. “We can be more confident and much more positive about the future now that we’ve got that supply chain independence,” he said. He flagged it would not be long until a resumption of non-urgent elective surgery, which has already been announced in NSW. “We think it is possible to resume some services in a staggered way, in a balanced, cautious way, and we’ll make further announcements about that soon,” Andrews said.Doctors and surgeons are urging state and federal governments to address a backlog in elective surgeries, but nurses in Victoria say the surgery pause should continue to give an “exhausted workforce” some reprieve. The Australian Medical Association (AMA) and the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons (RACS) both supported state governments that postponed elective surgeries to dedicate resources to Covid-19 and prevent virus patients from overwhelming public hospitals. But in a joint statement, the AMA and RACS said: “This approach is increasingly unsustainable. “An urgent plan is needed to restore reasonable and acceptable access to elective surgery, as well as a long-term funding arrangement to ensure this backlog is cleared,” the statement said. The AMA president, Dr Omar Khorshid, said blanket suspensions of elective surgery should be used only as a last resort. “The fact that these are still happening points to the failure of governments to properly invest in public hospital capacity, as well as a failure to undertake the necessary planning needed to avoid this outcome,” he said. The surgeries cancelled by governments have largely been “category three” surgeries – operations that need to occur within one year or for conditions that may cause pain but aren’t expected to rapidly deteriorate – and some “category two” surgeries, which are conditions causing pain or disability and need to occur within 90 days. The RACS president, Dr Sally Langley, said these surgeries were not “optional”. “For many patients waiting in line in pain to have a critical operation, the delays in surgery can be devastating,” she said. “Further, the lack of screening procedures has resulted in patients presenting with more advanced cancers, and in some cases, it has dramatically altered their prognosis.” The AMA and RACS want elective surgery to resume as a priority in both private and public hospitals so that surgeons can start catching up on missed operations. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On 7 January the New South Wales government announced non-urgent elective surgery would be suspended. On Tuesday, the premier, Dominic Perrottet, announced that from 7 February, non-urgent elective surgery requiring an overnight stay would return to 75% capacity in private hospitals, and up to 75% of pre-pandemic activity levels at public hospitals in regional and rural NSW where they were able to do so. In Victoria, non-urgent elective surgeries have been suspended until mid-February. The Victorian branch of the Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation urged the premier, Daniel Andrews, to maintain the pause as planned, despite growing pressure from doctors and surgeons. The federation’s acting secretary, Paul Gilbert, said the pause had provided a surge workforce that could be redeployed at a time when nurses were exhausted and there were critical shortages in aged care homes especially. “In a crisis, it is smart not to use up all your reserves and private hospital nurses and doctors are a surge workforce under the code brown declaration that may well be needed over the next few weeks.” Asked about Gilbert’s comments on Wednesday, Andrews said the government would take a cautious approach before announcing anything. But he added: “We think it is possible to resume some services in a staggered way, in a balanced, cautious way, and we’ll make further announcements about that soon. “We’ll make the announcements when we’ve listened, when we’ve got all that feedback and when we have determined how it is we will recommence those services, and nothing will be done that isn’t safe. “It’s not an easy decision, it’s not lightly made to limit the number of services that are offered across the system. We’ll get those services back up and running as fast as we possibly can and, of course, we’ll listen to our workforce when it comes to making those important decisions.” The Australian Healthcare and Hospitals Association acting chief executive, Kylie Woolcock, said governments also needed to invest funding into the health system, including for digital transformation, to address the range of care deferred and delayed through the pandemic. While surgeries had been affected, data reported by the Productivity Commission on Tuesday revealed decreasing participation in cancer screenings nationwide throughout the pandemic. “These drops in screening will result in people being diagnosed when cancer is at a more advanced stage, when it is more difficult to treat and result in worse prognoses,” Woolcock said.Richard Colbeck has defended his decision to attend the Ashes cricket in Hobart instead of a parliamentary Covid inquiry, insisting the aged sector was not in crisis and he continued to work on the Omicron outbreak. The aged care and sport minister told the Senate’s Covid-19 inquiry on Wednesday the aged care sector was performing “extremely well” despite coming under “genuine stress” due to coronavirus. The hearing also heard the Morrison government did not consider the possibility that PCR testing would be overwhelmed over summer, with officials from the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet blaming the states for imposing testing requirements to travel across borders. Guardian Australia last week revealed Colbeck attended the Hobart Test from 14 to 16 January after declining to attend the Covid committee on Friday 14 January – citing the workload of officials battling the Omicron wave. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has said he can “understand the criticism” of Colbeck but backed him for continuing to work on aged care issues. On Wednesday, Colbeck said he stood by the decision to attend the day-night Test because it “would be hypocritical of me not to”. “I made a judgment call. I have no option but to stand by that and take the criticism that comes from it.” Colbeck denied putting his sport portfolio above aged care, insisting he “continued to work on both”. “I wasn’t just at the cricket – I continued to work with officials to manage the issues in aged care,” he said. Colbeck said on 14 January he spent “the predominant part of the day on the aged care outbreak”, including meetings with the head of the vaccine rollout, Lt Gen John Frewen, in the morning to discuss aged care boosters, and with the deputy chief medical officer and head of the aged care advisory group, Prof Michael Kidd, at 3.30pm. “The Test match in Hobart was a significant event for Tasmania, as minister for sport I had to be conscious of that as an issue,” the minister said. “All through that weekend, I continued to work on matters in both portfolios, particularly aged care, even though it was a weekend and I attended the Test match.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Colbeck noted that, despite criticism from Labor, the shadow agriculture minister, Julie Collins, had also attended the Test after leaving Anthony Albanese’s tour of regional Queensland. The Labor senator Katy Gallagher noted on Wednesday that the aged care sector was struggling with outbreaks in half of all facilities with 10,000 cases overall, residents locked down, and the sector suffering workforce shortages. There had been 657 deaths in the sector since July 2021. Colbeck said the sector was performing “extremely well” despite the Omicron outbreak. He cited the fact that in 2020 there were 28,000 Covid cases in Australia, of which 2,051 were in aged care (7.2%), but now of the 1.8m Covid cases, just 10,500 were in aged care (0.58%). Some 89% of aged care residents have had both doses of a vaccine, but just 66% have received their booster despite 99% of centres being visited by teams offering them – meaning 64,600 of the system’s 190,000 residents have not had a booster. Frewen said boosters in aged care lagged due to issues including a lack of consent from residents or carers; residents only receiving their second dose recently and a lack of urgency in some communities due to no outbreaks. Colbeck and health officials could not say how many of the 471 people who have died in aged care since January were boosted, citing a “time lag” in getting data from the states. Despite rollout delays throughout 2021, Australia now had the eighth-highest vaccination rate in the OECD, Frewen said, with 95.6% of the population aged 16 and over having had one dose and 93.5% fully vaccinated. More than 8m boosters have been administered. Frewen said the Indigenous vaccination gap had closed by 12%: some 88% of Indigenous Australians have had a first dose and 75% were fully vaccinated. Earlier, officials from the department of the prime minister revealed that despite the health department commissioning new modelling from the Doherty Institute in December, the government did not anticipate PCR testing delays and inadequate capacity over summer. Asked if a collapse in testing was a scenario considered by models, Alison Frame, the deputy secretary of social policy, replied: “Not that I’m aware of.” Frame explained that earlier Doherty modelling that accompanied the national reopening plan in mid-2021 had considered the possibility of a more transmissible variant but the government believed that because PCR testing had held up well during “significant” waves in New South Wales and Victoria it could cope with high demand. Chief health officers had been “zealous” in controlling how rapid antigen tests were used in their states, she said, and health advice still recommended PCR testing as the best option. “The preference was for PCR as a higher standard of testing,” Frame said. “Rapid antigen testing may complement that, but it was not the mainstay.” Frame blamed the states for a surge in demand for PCR testing, noting that “test to travel” requirements had added about 20% to demand. She claimed that had not been anticipated. The head of the Therapeutic Goods Administration, Prof John Skerritt, rejected suggestions the regulator had been “asleep” or “lazy” in the process of approving rapid tests. Skerritt said the TGA gave advice in favour of rapid tests in September and 13 varieties were approved by October. But the decision to wait before recommending their use more widely was “deliberate”, he said, because it “would have been dangerous” to rely on tests with false-positive rates of up to 50% or 60% while Australia was still in the Delta wave. The chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, agreed that rapid tests were “not the best in the Australian context at that time” because of low community transmission. Skerritt said they were a “significant part of the armoury”. In the first week of the government’s limited free RAT program for concession-card holders, some 2.8m free tests were delivered through community pharmacies.Lala likes to think of herself as pretty unshockable. On her popular Instagram account @lalalaletmeexplain, she dishes out anonymous sex and dating advice on everything from orgasms to the etiquette of sending nude pictures. Nor is the 40-year-old sex educator and former social worker (Lala is a pseudonym) shy of sharing her own dating experiences as a single woman. But even she was perturbed by a recent question, from a woman with a seven-year-old daughter who had caught her new partner watching “stepdaughter” porn involving teenage girls. Was that a red flag? Given her professional training, the story set Lala’s alarm bells ringing. “To me, you can’t take these risks – things like that I’m willing to die on a hill for,” she says. So she was taken aback by some of the comments on her Instagram account, where she asks her 175,000 followers to respond to other people’s dilemmas. “There were people on that post saying: “What people watch in porn is not what they do in real life; how can you be so judgmental?’” The idea that nobody should be judged for their sexual desires lies at the heart of so-called “sex-positive feminism”, the credo that stripping away the stigma historically surrounding female sexuality will liberate women to enjoy themselves without guilt or shame and help to eliminate the slut-shaming and victim-blaming that often stops violence against women being taken seriously. The movement is credited with shattering taboos around issues such as masturbation, periods, LGBT rights and female genital mutilation, thanks to its insistence on women’s right to sexual pleasure. From the gleeful exhibitionism of Love Island contestants to Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion’s exuberant sex-positive anthem Wet Ass Pussy, the idea that enjoying sex is nothing to be ashamed of – in theory at least, if not always in practice – has filtered into young women’s everyday lives. But if sex-positive feminism champions women pursuing their own desires without feeling judged, it also demands that they refrain from judging the way other people have sex – at least between consenting adults. Now, some are questioning who this free-for-all really serves and how consent is defined, in a society where women are still heavily conditioned to please men. In her book Block, Delete, Move On, published this month, Lala writes of her gratitude to those who fought for women’s right to enjoy sex – however and whenever they want – and her refusal to be judged on the number of people she has slept with. But, while the endless supply of potential hook-ups provided by dating apps has been great for women who just want casual sex, she argues, it has downsides for those seeking long-term relationships. “Since sex has become easier to get,” she writes, “love has become harder to find.” Through her Instagram account and the dating column she writes for OK! magazine, she hears regularly from women tolerating activities they don’t enjoy in bed for fear of being rejected for someone more willing – an age-old story, except that those sexual norms are now set by pornography. “Sexual liberation is great, but in some ways we ran with that, and then ended up in a model of sex that has been created by men,” says Lala. “We have got the part where it’s: ‘You can do this without judgment, you don’t have to be married or worry about unintended pregnancies!’ but we’re not balancing that with the education or that sense of what sex really is – how should it feel, when should you do it, how should you do it?” When Lala polled her Instagram followers recently, almost three quarters said they had experienced rough or painful sex but had chosen not to complain about it. “It’s like: ‘I don’t want to disappoint him, I don’t want to be bad in bed.’ If you really like someone but every time you have sex it hurts and you don’t want that, how do you negotiate that when you’re only 18?” For all her professional expertise, she says, she remembers some “pretty horrible sex” when she was younger. In December, the singer Billie Eilish, then 19, declared that watching porn from the age of 11 had “destroyed” her brain. At first it made her feel like “one of the guys”, she told the Howard Stern radio show in the US, but now she thinks it twisted her expectations: “The first few times I, you know, had sex, I was not saying no to things that were not good. It was because I thought that’s what I was supposed to be attracted to.” On Twitter, self-proclaimed sex-positive feminists accused her of being “anti-choice”, or stigmatising women who work in porn, while the #BillieEilish hashtag attracted images of topless models with her head crudely photoshopped on to them, and lurid boasts from men of what they’d like to do to her. But Eilish is not alone in questioning the way porn tropes have coloured everyday relationships. Generation Z is the most sexually fluid generation yet – only 54% of its members define themselves as exclusively attracted to members of the opposite sex, compared with 81% of baby boomers – and is arguably the most adventurous. More than one in 10 teenagers claim to have had anal sex by the age of 18, according to the UK’s authoritative National Survey of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles, which also found under-24s almost as likely as middle-aged people to have had more than 10 partners, despite being sexually active for many fewer years. But the generation most likely to have its first sexual experience via a phone screen seems increasingly willing to question what that means for individuals’ lives. A third of British women under 40 have experienced unwanted slapping, spitting, choking or gagging in bed, according to research carried out for the pressure group We Can’t Consent to This, which campaigns to limit the so-called “rough sex” defence for murder (used by men who killed their partners to argue that the women died accidentally, in consensual sex games). It is one of a string of recent grassroots campaigns led by young women against tech-enabled forms of sexual aggression, from the unsolicited sending of “dick pics” to sharing intimate photos online. While women who enjoy rough sex have an absolute right to pursue it without shame, Lala argues, the normalisation of pain in porn may provide cover for some abusive men, and make women feel prudish for refusing potentially dangerous acts like choking. “A lot of young men have co-opted BDSM [bondage, discipline or domination, sadism and masochism]. They’re not into power plays and consent. They just like hurting women.” Anna-Louise Adams was in her early 20s, and at university in London, when she experienced a handful of casual sexual encounters that turned rough without warning. “It was quite forceful hair pulling, and spanking – stuff that, I suppose, you would see in porn and seems quite generic, but you would expect a conversation to be had before it happened,” she says on the phone from Birmingham, where she is completing a master’s in sociology. Luckily, she says, she was confident enough to object. “But I did find it quite shocking, and it did deter me from having sex for probably about a year. I’d had two or three experiences of varying degrees of extremity and I just thought: ‘what’s the point of this?’” she says. “I’d come to my own conclusions about sex that wasn’t in a relationship, at least. I feel quite sad for my younger self, really.” Now 25, and having compared notes with friends who had similar experiences, she no longer thinks it relevant that the encounters that turned sour were casual ones. “I’ve heard about plenty of relationships where it’s happened, and happened unexpectedly.” Speaking publicly for the We Can’t Consent to This campaign has, she says, also helped to channel her feelings into something constructive. Some might say sex positivity has benefited women such as Adams, giving them the confidence to set boundaries in bed and discuss their experiences openly. But she is unconvinced. “It doesn’t benefit women. Even if there are individuals who feel personally empowered, collectively it continues to oppress us,” she says. “It’s all well and good saying that we can have sex now without being shamed and victim blamed. But it’s not like that’s being translated into real life.” The sense that the revolution hasn’t lived up to its idealistic promises may be fuelling resistance. Louise Perry, press officer for We Can’t Consent to This and author of The Case Against the Sexual Revolution, due to be published this summer, argues that a movement originally meant to liberate women is being hijacked to serve men’s interests. Perry, 29, held the same liberal views in her early 20s as “most other millennial urban graduates in the west”, about issues such as porn, hook-up culture, or BDSM, but began questioning them after a stint working in a rape crisis centre. “I’m not anti the sexual revolution per se – I don’t want to go back to having 10 children, or whatever would have been in store without the pill,” she says. “But I think the beneficiaries [of sex-positive feminism] overwhelmingly have been a certain subset of men.” The problem isn’t just porn, she argues, but dating apps inadvertently making men less accountable for abusive behaviour. “I’ve spoken to women who have dated men from apps and have been sexually assaulted, then find he’s deleted his profile and they don’t even know his username – that’s the sort of thing that really, really serves the interests of men.” While there’s little evidence of singletons deleting apps en masse, the suspension of dating during the pandemic may have pushed some to rethink what they’re looking for. The dating app OKCupid reported a rise in the number of British users seeking a long-term relationship after the 2020 lockdown while in the US, Match.com’s annual Singles in America report last year found that only 11% of users claim to be seeking casual flings, with qualities such as trust and emotional maturity now prized over physical attractiveness. If only temporarily, the loneliness and insecurity of lockdown may have made cosy coupledom look more appealing. Yet the idea that sex-positive feminism is “falling out of fashion”, as the New York Times writer Michelle Goldberg argued, may seem regressive to some people. After all, it was never meant to be about just saying “yes” to everything. Indeed, some sex-positive activists are defined by actively not wanting sex, such as the lingerie model Yasmin Benoit, who identifies as asexual or ace – meaning that she never or rarely experiences attraction to others – but maintains she is not anti-sex just because she isn’t interested, personally. And, historically, sex positivity is rooted in efforts to tackle sexual violence, via protests such as the “Slut Walks” movement of the past decade, where women marched, stripped to their bras, to project the message that nobody is “asking for it” by the way they dress. Contentiously, for Generation Z in particular, while sex positivity is frequently associated with liberal-left views or support for trans rights, the backlash against it has become associated – not always fairly – with both rightwing media and gender-critical views. (The foreword to Perry’s book is by Prof Kathleen Stock, the academic who resigned from the University of Sussex last year, after protests against her views on trans rights.) “I think we’re on the edge of a real anti-sex backlash,” says the activist and writer Laurie Penny, author of Sexual Revolution: Modern Fascism and the Feminist Fightback, who points out that destigmatising sex has freed women to talk about what were once taboo subjects. “A culture where sex is stigmatised is also one where we can’t talk about any of those things and I don’t believe there’s anything progressive about a society that wants to control or limit women’s sexuality.” Penny, who uses they/them pronouns, also thinks some attacks on sex-positive feminism – such as that it means porn is beyond criticism – are fights with straw men. “There’s a brilliant quote from [the porn star] Stoya, which says that trying to learn about sex from watching porn is like trying to learn to drive from watching monster truck videos. The thing is I don’t often see that argument made, that you’re not allowed to criticise pornography,” they say. But Penny agrees the “sex-positive” label is becoming outdated in a culture where old constraints on sexual behaviour are gone but the threat of male violence endures. “In this apparently sexually liberated culture, women still don’t feel able to have boundaries and say what they want, and everything is dictated by what men feel they’re supposed to want. I don’t think the problem is too much sexual liberation, I think it’s not enough. You have to actually deal with sexual violence in order to create substantive sexual liberation.” If there is a backlash under way, it may not mean a return to sexual conservatism. Last year, the hashtag “Cancel P*rn” began spreading on TikTok, with users sharing horror stories of X-rated platforms caught hosting footage of rape and child abuse, or talking about the impact of the sex industry on their own lives. While arguments like this are sometimes dubbed “sex-negative” feminism, negative seems the wrong word for accounts such as @profitfromtrauma, a 23-year-old former escort and “sugar baby” to rich older men who paid her for sex. Now working as a trauma coach, she answers followers’ questions about why – in contrast to some more upbeat sex worker accounts on the platform – she really couldn’t recommend her old career. Yet she comes across as anything but prudish. One of her most popular posts is labelled “How I enjoy my body knowing I’m not a £150 sock to men any more”. The missing element of this half-finished revolution, Lala argues, is a cultural shift in men’s attitudes. “Sex-positive feminism has laid the foundations, it’s given us a platform and a voice and a space to use our voices. But without getting men on board and proper sex education, we’re all going to be on the same old hamster wheel.” That won’t happen overnight, she acknowledges. But she does see glimmers of hope. Recently, she counselled a man who had been choking his girlfriend during sex for years. It was only when the girlfriend mustered the courage to say she didn’t like it that he admitted he didn’t like it, either. They were both, it turned out, going along with what they thought the other one wanted, and each secretly wishing the other would make it stop.The Russian threat to Ukraine may be the first major foreign policy crisis since Brexit in which the UK can play to its strengths, and show that Britain with its military muscle is not turning into the global irrelevance that many had predicted. That at least is the hope in parts of Whitehall. The two other big post-Brexit foreign policy moments – the withdrawal from Afghanistan, and the announcement of the Aukus security partnership in the Indo-Pacific – did not exactly see Britain in the cockpit in the same way. The UK departed from Afghanistan under US duress and then executed that withdrawal so chaotically that it cost Dominic Raab his foreign secretaryship. Aukus was largely a US-Australian deal, even if puts the UK in a potentially leading role in the Indo-Pacific in future. But the Ukraine crisis is a different test, and one that the UK’s extensive diplomatic network dare not fail if it is to prove that outside the EU bloc, the UK has acquired a new foreign policy agility. At a personal level, Boris Johnson also hopes Ukraine will be his deus ex machina, a moment to prove to his sceptical backbenchers that he can show statesmanship and, more cynically, to shame the media into ending its “trivial obsessions” with “partygate”. As a result many of the recent Downing Street briefings prepared for the Sunday papers have had a somewhat desperate quality to them, portraying Johnson as being at the centre of grave, fast-moving world events. This contrasts with the harsher reality of scheduled calls to Vladimir Putin being cancelled because Johnson was detained by MPs asking him if they were fools to have complied with the Covid rules that he had set. The Russian president was never likely to see Johnson as an important interlocutor in the same league as the French president, Emmanuel Macron. Putin can also detect weakness in his opponents, and as soon as he sees a man is down, his first instinct is to kick as hard as he can. The call has now been rescheduled, but it is an embarrassing episode. It was also a bad stroke of luck that Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, was struck by Covid just before she headed on a diplomatic tour of eastern Europe. But that is not the whole picture or a fair description of how active the UK has been throughout the crisis. Britain has a clear-eyed sense of the issues at stake – the defence of the security architecture stuck in the wake of the collapse of the Soviet Union, all set out in the widely praised article by the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, debunking Putin’s claims about Ukraine’s historic origins. The UK also has a deep, long-standing military connection with Ukraine – confirmed last year in a new strategic partnership upon which it is now building through the provision of next generation anti-tank weapons. Through Chatham House there has been a steady flow of exchanges with Ukraine’s leading figures, covering energy, civil society and banking, going back a decade. The UK now hopes that military alliance with Ukraine can be extended by drawing in another close British ally, Poland – an idea enthusiastically endorsed by the Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki. It may even prove to be a way of drawing Ukraine closer to an informal security alliance with Nato partners without actually joining Nato itself – something which is off the table for the foreseeable future anyway. It would represent a balance to the Weimar Triangle, the much older alliance between Germany, France and Poland. All that helps to make Johnson a priority in Kyiv as European premiers jostle to fly into Ukraine. But there is a bigger prize for the UK. If it plays its cards right, It can re-establish itself as the undisputed No 1 ally of the US. UK intelligence services are working in lockstep with Washington, for instance over claims of a Russian inspired coup. Some reports suggest the US handed the UK the intelligence evidence to allow Truss to unmask the alleged plotters. Equally, British and US assessment of the high likelihood of an invasion is largely pitched at the same level. Britain’s leading cyber-experts have been flying to Washington to discuss what counter-measures can be prepared. Johnson has not been averse to reminding Washington of the UK’s reliability by chastising his former EU rivals France and Germany. Doubtless echoing what his diplomats were hearing in Washington, Johnson has warned Macron not to seek to exploit the crisis to promote his project of European strategic autonomy. Germany, he and Truss now repeatedly say, is too dependent on Russian gas, an analysis shared on a bipartisan basis by many in the US Congress. For a variety of historic and geographical reasons Germany was always going to end up the outlier in this crisis, but none of this is helped by a new coalition government still bedding in. It has even led the UK Foreign Office to lobby Washington to ask for an expansion of the Normandy format, from which the UK and the US are currently excluded. As the key forum in which the status of eastern Ukraine is discussed with Russia, Britain deeply regrets its self-exclusion. Above all, UK diplomats, along with the Ministry of Defence are trying to make themselves useful by using its influence in its network of former allies inside the EU, including in the Baltic states and eastern Europe. The Baltic states need no persuading about the Russian threat, and are privately, and sometimes in public, frustrated with Germany’s refusal to let them give Ukraine weaponry of German origin. More UK troops will go to Estonia if Nato requests. But Wallace is also putting in the air miles touring the EU countries where the UK message on the Russian threat faces a tougher reception: Slovakia, Hungary and Croatia. On Monday, Wallace – currently top of a cabinet league table monthly members’ poll on the ConservativeHome website – made little progress in Budapest with the Hungarian defence secretary who, at a joint press conference, said he opposed sanctions on Russia or more Nato troops in his country. On Tuesday, Wallace popped up in Croatia. Johnson has also been on the phone to Recep Tayyip Erdoğan of Turkey, a Nato member and potential wild card. There is of course one problem with all this frenetic activity and with the policy towards Moscow: Britain’s lax approach to Russian oligarchs based in the UK. It is now out there as a drag anchor on everything the UK seeks to do internationally about Russia. The shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, was correct on Monday when he said that report and after report has been published highlighting this problem, and yet the government has refused to act. None of the measures announced this week by the Foreign Office will be implemented unless an invasion occurs, so the basic problem remains untouched. With Joe Biden making the fight against corruption one of his big themes, it was inevitable that Washington was going to lose patience with the UK’s sloth.Invasion. Disease. Death. The 16th-century Europeans arriving in Peru brought with them all manner of havoc and destruction. But they did not only pillage the living. They also looted graves. Now researchers say local people came up with a somewhat macabre response to restore disturbed remains – by threading spines on to sticks. “The idea is that when [the Europeans were looting], they have to go through textile bundles that have these bodies, and so they’re ripping textile bundles, and taking out the gold and silver, and bodies are coming apart,” said Dr Jacob Bongers from the University of East Anglia, lead author of the study. “Then local peoples, Chincha peoples, are coming back, seeing this, and trying to put their dead back together.” The Chincha were a very wealthy society of at least 30,000 people that included fishers and farmers, with Spanish reports suggesting they were known for their sea-faring merchants. Writing in the journal Antiquity, Bongers and colleagues report how they encountered human vertebrae carefully threaded on to reed posts while exploring mortuary sites in the Chincha valley of Peru in 2013, an area in which the Chincha kingdom flourished until the 15th century when it was incorporated into the Inca empire. At first, Bongers said, he thought the sticks were created by the looters. But as more and more vertebrae-threaded posts were found – with almost 200 reported so far – he realised that was unlikely to be the case, adding their association with disturbed textile bundles also suggested there could be a different story. The study reveals that the threaded vertebrae were found inside or outside large elaborate tombs known as chullpas, often on the surface, while the practice was applied to the remains of adults and juveniles. Radiocarbon dating of three reeds and their associated vertebrae, combined with modelling and analysis, suggests the individuals probably died between 1520 and 1550, a period consistent with epidemics and famines in Peru, Bongers added. The reeds were harvested to make the posts a little later, between 1550 and 1590. “The reed dates [are] approximately when the Europeans would have been in Chincha, and when they would have been looting these tombs,” said Bongers. The team say their hypothesis is supported by the finding that the vertebrae were often threaded on to the reeds out of their anatomical order, and were already separated from each other when the threaded posts were created. “That’s why the vertebrae are not in order: because they were scattered,” said Bongers. Bongers said the study showed that even though the body parts are no longer biologically living, they continue to have social lives. “Death was not the end here,” he said. “What we are seeing here is long-term engagement with the dead. European colonialism is not stopping local people from interacting with the dead.” Prof Bill Sillar, an expert in Andean archaeology from University College London, who was not involved in the work, said the dating in the study was convincing, noting that finding that the remains had deteriorated before the threaded vertebrae were constructed showed this took place some time after death. But he added that while it is plausible the action was a response to colonial looting, there could be other explanations, as many Andean societies revisited the remains of their dead – including Inca society, which periodically brought out their mummies and gave them drinks before returning them to their tombs. “While I think it is quite reasonable to think the vertebrae were restrung and mummies reconstructed as a response to colonial interventions,” Sillar said, “I could also see it as equally plausible that this practice emerged as an aspect of Andean mortuary ritual before the Spanish intervened.”Who am I when I’m behind a screen? It’s a question we face more and more as the pandemic minimizes face-to-face contact, forcing even more workplace communication to take place over email and messaging apps. On the bright side, this offers a golden opportunity for us to create new personalities. Would you like to be the snarky colleague with the biting wit? The warm workplace buddy oozing with mutual support? Or perhaps the no-nonsense pragmatist whose two-sentence emails inspire a mixture of fear and admiration? Of course, you might not have the time to hone this new persona. The good news is there’s an array of apps and extensions ready to create an identity for you with a few clicks of a mouse. We dug up a few of the most intriguing. Emotional Labor Rectifying the global exclamation-point shortage Perhaps you fear you sound like an automaton with your insistence on straightforward, declarative statements. Maybe it’s time to lighten the mood – and how better than with gushing affection and out-of-control punctuation? This browser extension will transform your “hello” to “hey lovey!” and add triple-exclamation points to the end of your sentences. It was probably intended as a joke, but it’s worth taking seriously: it could really warm the atmosphere of the average office. As a case in point, here’s how it would have gussied up the US supreme court justice Stephen Breyer’s resignation letter on Thursday: Original Dear Mr President, I am writing to tell you that I have decided to retire from regular active judicial service as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States, and to serve under the provisions of 28 USC § 371(b). Yours sincerely, Stephen Breyer Improved Hey lovey! I’ve been thinking of you :) Dear Mr President. :) I am writing to tell you that I have decided to retire from regular active judicial service as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States, and to serve under the provisions of 28 USC § 371(b)!!! Yours love, Stephen Breyer Just Not Sorry Because work is no place for your humanity On the opposite end of the spectrum, Just Not Sorry is a browser extension that reviews your emails for words and phrases that might show weakness, such as “sorry” and “I think”. It flags these words and, if you hover over them, offers tips – for instance: “Using sorry frequently undermines your gravitas and makes you appear unfit for leadership,” and “‘I think’ undermines your idea and displays an overall lack of self-confidence.” The laudable goal is to help you communicate without fearing your own assertions, especially given misogynistic perceptions of language in the office. But writers including Jessica Grose and Harriet Minter have pointed out that the service frames female speech patterns – or what we assume those patterns to be – as an inherent problem. “Politeness is more strategic than demeaning,” wrote the linguist Debbie Cameron in response to the extension. The sarcasm converter Skewer them with your withering wit Sarcasm, being entirely dependent on tone, is among the most difficult attitudes to convey in text. Workarounds have been developed – there’s the addition of “/s” to the end of a comment, but that ham-fisted gesture destroys all subtlety. Others use the Mocking SpongeBob approach, based on a meme of the square-trousered marine creature in what might be described as an ironic pose, accompanied by text written in a blend of upper- and lowercase letters. It gets your message across – and it’s NoT a PaIn To TyPe OuT aT AlL! That, as Vice points out, is where the converter comes in. The Twitter user @BenSummerf has developed a small box that automatically transforms your text from this kind of thing to ThIs KiNd of ThInG without the painstaking operation of the shift key. Unfortunately, unless you’re in touch with Ben, it might be difficult to get your hands on the physical device. The good news is there’s a web-based version – though it’ll require a bit of copy-and-pasting to transfer your biting commentary to your email account. Ilys Erasing writing anxiety by erasing writing This web-based service seeks to put you in a flow state by preventing you from seeing what you’ve already written. Craft your emails and Slack posts in here and you’ll stop worrying about whether you’ve offended anyone because you’ll immediately forget about it. Ilys only shows you the latest letter you’ve typed, or, if you’re in “ninja mode”, no letters at all. Once you’ve written a certain number of words (set by you), the site finally allows you to edit your work. The idea is that you shouldn’t be burdened by editing as you go; that’s a separate process. I believe in that distinction and did find Ilys freeing to use, but I’m not sure I’d want to spend $11 a month for a service I could also achieve by closing my eyes. Emoji Translate Because it’s where we’re headed anyway Then again, does writing even matter any more? The kids these days prefer to communicate via tiny pictures, and there’s no reason you can’t do the same. Just visit EmojiTranslate.com, which turns your words into easy-to-digest images, creating a fun rebus for your line manager to decipher. For instance: 👋, 🙇 I ❌️ ➡️ to the 🤝. I’m 🧑‍💼 at that ⏱️. … which, of course, says “Hi, sorry, I can’t go to the meeting. I’m busy at that time.” Your boss will understand.Absurd as it seems, and resist it though we may, the universe continues to insist that the 90s were 30 years ago instead of 10 minutes. Thus, we are increasingly confronted by dramas that take the headlines of our youths and examine them as the pivotal moments of history they in fact were. At least they are not (quite yet) ancient enough to be treated with reverence or mystification. We 70s babies are still not Stonehenge, or the ruins of Herculaneum. But the bouncily interrogative spirit of the king of the genre, Ryan Murphy (who has dramatised the OJ Simpson case, the killing of Gianni Versace and the Clinton-Lewinsky affair) still seems to be setting the tone for those who follow in his train. Pam &amp; Tommy (Disney+), adapted from the article by Amanda Chicago Lewis, disinters the sex tape scandal that engulfed the celebrity couple of the mid-90s. The Baywatch star and international sex symbol (to give what was then her full official title), Pamela Anderson, and Mötley Crüe drummer, Tommy Lee, had become even greater than the sum of their parts (and Lee’s part in particular was already legendary – and about to become more so) by getting married four days after meeting each other. Robert Siegel’s eight-part miniseries looks at what happened to the couple after a private tape of them having sex on their honeymoon went (for the first time thanks to the power of the then-infant internet) very, very public. The series is really three narratives plaited together. The first – to which the opening episode is dedicated, though we return to it throughout – is a heist caper, true even in its most incredible details. Rand Gauthier (Seth Rogen) is a contractor fired, unpaid, by the capricious Lee for supposedly shoddy work, who takes revenge by stealing the safe from the rock star’s garage. He evades the security guards and cameras by using a furry rug to disguise himself as a large dog. Inside the safe he finds various weapons, cash, and an unmarked Hi8 video cassette, which he takes to his friend, a porn director played by Nick Offerman. “Looking for work?” he asks Rand. “Carpentry? Anal?” When they see what’s on it, the stage is set. It’s a fun opener – as it were – but doesn’t showcase what will become a warm, funny, intelligent and rather moving drama, with astonishing performances from Lily James as Anderson and Sebastian Stan as Lee. They each achieve the feat of uncannily resembling – aesthetically, vocally, and in every mannerism – the real-life people, without descending into mimicry. The series moves back and forth in time as the second and third narratives come into play. There’s the love story – as unconventional as all get out, sure, but showing what the pair found in each other (beyond, yes, the obvious), and how, even if a split was probably inevitable, their relationship was put under unprecedented pressure when the tape went public. The third strand is the one that virtually defines the genre: a critique of the media machinations, public appetite and systemic legal biases at that particular time, which enabled the events to unfold as they did. And, as ever, we can see the misogyny that infused everything, and here made sure Anderson bore the brunt of the humiliation and damage to herself and her career. There is a particularly brutal scene in which she is deposed by a lawyer who seems out to degrade her as thoroughly as possible. But there is a whole web of lesser moments (on the Baywatch set, during personal appearances, in her Playboy shoots), when she is at the whim of the men in charge. The sight of the 90s image of Anderson, and the scandal being reconsidered in line with modern and more enlightened mores (imperfect though they still are) is a welcome one. But, this is undermined by the fact that the whole enterprise has been undertaken without her approval. Ironically, it is the very alertness and compassion of the thing that – assuming she saw the script or was given an idea of the tone – makes you think how very much she must have wanted, whatever the take on it was to be, the entire subject to be left alone.Some of the wealthiest parts of England, including areas represented by government ministers, have so far been allocated 10 times more money per capita than the poorest under Boris Johnson’s “levelling up” agenda, Guardian analysis has found. Michael Gove, the communities secretary, will announce on Wednesday new measures designed to end what the prime minister has called the “outrage” of regional inequalities. But analysis of the £4.7bn allocated under the levelling up agenda to date shows how some of England’s most deprived areas are receiving far less support than some of the richest boroughs. A further £1.8bn is still to be announced. Sajid Javid’s constituency, Bromsgrove in Worcestershire, will receive nearly £15m – £148 a head – despite being one of the wealthiest areas in England. Central Bedfordshire, an area partly represented by the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, has received £26.7m – £91 a head – from the Levelling Up Fund despite being among the top fifth of local authority areas in affluence. In contrast, eight local authorities that are among the poorest in England have received less than £10 a head from the four funds announced to date. These include Swale in Kent; Tendring in Essex; Barking and Dagenham; Southampton; and Knowsley in Merseyside. The analysis brings together the four main levelling up funds for the first time. The Future High Streets Fund, the Community Renewal Fund and the Towns Fund have been fully allocated, while the levelling up fund has allocated £1.4bn with a further £1.8bn still to be announced. A total of £4.7bn has been allocated in England across the four schemes so far. Jonathan Webb, a senior research fellow at the thinktank IPPR North, said: “This new analysis from the Guardian demonstrates the gap between the rhetoric and the reality of levelling up. “Forcing local areas to bid for centrally controlled pots of money is resulting in an opaque and unfair allocation of already limited resources, as this analysis shows. The fact some of the most deprived local authorities have received no money from any of the government’s four main levelling up funds is unacceptable and will only widen the UK’s existing regional divides.” The Commons public accounts committee, which scrutinises government spending, has ordered Gove’s department to provide more information about how its funding decisions were taken amid concerns about a lack of clarity and transparency from ministers and officials. Other relatively affluent areas that have received much larger awards than poorer areas include Lewes in East Sussex (£443 a head), South Derbyshire (£229) and South Ribble in Lancashire (£226). Many areas of high deprivation have also received large payouts. Copeland and Barrow-in-Furness, which are both among the most deprived 40% of councils nationally, will receive more than £600 a head – the largest per capita awards. But Southampton and Knowsley, both among the most deprived fifth of councils, have so far received nothing from the four funds. The Merseyside borough of Knowsley, the third poorest local authority in England, has been rejected by three of the funds despite being identified by the government as a top priority for investment. It was named on Tuesday as one of the government’s “educational investment areas” to be outlined in the white paper, however. Graham Morgan, the Labour leader of Knowsley council, said levelling up had been “nothing more than a slogan so far” and suggested the area was being punished because it was a Labour stronghold: “The people who actually work for the government on these schemes can’t find any box which we haven’t ticked. So there is some other reason – a political reason – why Knowsley isn’t getting the support which local people need.” Lisa Nandy MP, the shadow levelling up secretary, said: “For all the talk of levelling up, we have been completely short-changed. Ministers are hiding behind process, refusing to come clean on how these decisions around funding are being made. People are struggling to keep their heads above the water with rising costs, rising bills and rising taxes.” The government said it had assessed data on deprivation, need for regeneration, impact of Brexit, transport infrastructure and other indicators to decide which areas should get funding. It said local authorities that were wealthier on average would often contain pockets of deprivation and that urban areas with metro mayors may have benefited from separate government funding streams. But Henri Murison, director of the Northern Powerhouse Partnership, a regional economic thinktank, said: “This analysis shows the government has allocated money without enough regard to the high levels of economic disadvantage in many parts of the country – this seriously undermines their professed commitment to levelling up.” Murison said Johnson’s government was planning to spend less on English regional development than Theresa May or David Cameron’s governments and that true levelling up would need long-term financial backing form the chancellor, Rishi Sunak. A spokesperson for the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said the analysis was misleading because it “ignores the billions of pounds of levelling up funding that will be allocated in the coming months, and the huge amount of work taking place across government to level up the UK”. They added: “Levelling up is more than one grant – it’s a massively ambitious, generation-defining project that includes the largest shift of power from Whitehall to local leaders in modern times alongside innovative new policies to end the postcode lottery and shift focus and resources to Britain’s forgotten communities.” • This article was amended on 2 February 2022. A reference to Central Bedfordshire (a local authority) earlier appeared as Mid Bedfordshire (a parliamentary constituency), owing to an editing change.Plants are flowering a month earlier in the UK as the climate heats up, a study has found. The researchers examined 420,000 recorded dates of first flowering for more than 400 species, dating to 1793. The average date for the first blooms was about 12 May up to 1986, but since then the date has been pushed forward to 16 April. Herbaceous plants saw the biggest advance, producing flowers an average of 32 days earlier. Trees blossomed 14 days sooner and shrubs advanced by 10 days. The researchers think faster-reproducing herbaceous plants can more easily adapt to the warming climate. During the most recent recorded year, 2019, spring arrived 42 days earlier than the pre-1986 average. The difference between flowering times in the north of the UK, above Stoke-on-Trent, and the south has shrunk from nine days before 1986 to four days afterwards. In the period after the mid-80s there has been accelerated global heating caused by fossil-fuel-burning and other human activities. “The results are truly alarming, because of the ecological risks associated with earlier flowering times,” said Prof Ulf Büntgen, at the University of Cambridge, who led the research. “When plants flower too early, a late frost can kill them – a phenomenon that most gardeners will have experienced at some point.” But the even bigger risk is “ecological mismatch”, he said, when plants and hibernating or migrating insects, birds and other wildlife are no longer synchronised. “That can lead species to collapse if they can’t adapt quickly enough.” Such mismatches are already being seen, for example, between orchids and bees and great tit chicks and their crucial caterpillar food. The researchers concluded that if plants in the UK continued to flower earlier, and climatic extremes increased further, then “biological, ecological and agricultural systems will be at an unprecedented risk”. Farmers could suffer, for example, if fruit trees were flowering early and then a late frost killed the entire crop. While it could be difficult for people to see the significance of average global warming of 1C, Büntgen said, plants flowering a month early showed a clear change. “It is not abstract anymore. We all have a feeling for a month, particularly if you have to wait for your next salary payment,” he said. The study, published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society B journal, examined first flowering dates from the Channel Islands to Shetland, and from Northern Ireland to Suffolk. The study did not highlight specific species, because the data available for individual plants were very variable over time and in geographic coverage. “You have to be very cautious,” said Büntgen. But the study did note that there were now hundreds of records of snowdrops and hellebores flowering before New Year’s Day and dozens of such records for primroses, winter aconites and lesser celandines. The scientists found that the earlier flowering dates correlated strongly with the average daily maximum temperature from January to April, which rose from 7.8C from 1952-1986 to 8.9C from 1987-2019. The researchers did not find a link with the length of the day, but they said this cue used by plants might become important if average flowering dates are brought forward into February in the future. The researchers found that their data showed flowering had advanced by 15 days more than the UK Spring Index used by the government, which includes only two species, hawthorn and horse chestnut. John David, at the Royal Horticultural Society, said: “The main focus of this study is on native plants and so we don’t yet have a clear picture of the full impact of these changes on garden plants, but we would expect a similar pattern and have seen indications of this in our own gardens, such as the apple flowering times in our orchard at Wisley.” “The UK’s 30 million gardeners have an important role to play therefore in supporting our native biodiversity and counteracting the effects of any mismatch between flowering times and dependent wildlife. Our Plants for Bugs research, for example, shows what plants you can grow that will support biodiversity all year round.” The flowering date records used in the study come from Nature’s Calendar, a collection of 3.5m observations of seasonal change and maintained by the Woodland Trust and the Centre for Ecology and Hydrology. Many of the records are provided by citizen scientists and anyone in the UK can submit data. “It is the world’s largest dataset and it’s superb, but it’s not enough,” said Büntgen, who called for more people to participate. “Updating the dataset every year is extremely valuable, because this is the only tool we have to really understand how climate is affecting our ecosystems. This is not something we can model.”The family of an England rugby player locked down in a care home have voiced “pure despair” at new visiting rules which mean thousands of care residents will continue to be denied contact with loved ones. Kate Skillen, whose father, David Robinson, was a flanker in a county team that beat the New Zealand All Blacks in 1972 and toured Japan with England in 1971, said her family feel helpless that despite a pledge from the government to return to “unlimited visiting” from this week, rolling Covid outbreaks mean they cannot see him. Their last visit was on Christmas Day. Robinson, 77, who later became a dairy farmer, has dementia and lives in a care home in Cockermouth, Cumbria. He is one of tens of thousands of care home residents in England who remain locked down because of the spread of Omicron. Under new guidance published on Monday which lifts restrictions on the number of people who can visit in care homes, settings where two or more staff or residents test positive for Covid must still stop all indoor visiting for 14 days, except at the end of life or if a visitor has been granted “essential care giver status”. It means he is denied face to face visits with his three daughters, Beth, Anna and Kate, and seven grandchildren, including Hetty, three. The new government guidance states: “We expect and encourage providers to facilitate visits wherever possible, and to do so in a risk-managed way.” But the Rights for Residents campaign group said the continued restrictions on care visits into homes with outbreaks meant the restrictions were not a meaningful easing. “It is a continuation of draconian lockdown measures, isolating our loved ones at a time in life when they need families and friends – it’s a disgrace,” the organisation said. Up to 70% of the 165 homes operated by Four Seasons Health Care, one of the UK’s largest private operators, are currently closed to most visitors because of positive tests. 534 care homes in England reported Covid outbreaks to the UK Health Security Agency in the third week of January. Jeremy Richardson, chief executive of Four Seasons, said he wants the government to change the definition of an outbreak “because the consequences of infection are dramatically different now”. Covid deaths in England’s care homes are running at about 200 a week, nine times lower than the peak of the wave in January 2021. “We have been told that visiting remains restricted and there appears to be a rolling outbreak,” said Skillen. “My dad still knows us, he is overcome with emotion when he sees us and repeatedly tells us he loves us and kisses us when we see him, gripping our hands. It is very upsetting and I can only hope and pray he doesn’t just think we’ve abandoned him.” A quarantine period of 10 days is also still required after emergency hospital stays, which is discriminatory and deeply damaging to older people’s wellbeing according to Helen Wildbore, director of the Residents and Relatives Association. “Six months after so-called ‘freedom day’, guidance on visiting in care homes still contains the most damaging restrictions on people’s movement and contact,” she said. “The government has ignored calls from the sector – even from care providers – to amend the definition of an outbreak which is leading to harmful isolation periods often rolling on for several weeks if more cases are detected.” The Department of Health and Social Care has been approached for comment.Badly built roads can generate more hazard than a significant earthquake, research shows. Hakan Tanyaş, from the University of Twente in the Netherlands, and colleagues monitored the size and number of landslips in the Arhavi area of north-eastern Turkey between 2010 and 2020. During this period several roads were constructed through the region to access a new hydroelectric scheme. The scientists show that development had a shocking impact on the stability of the hillsides, with road construction responsible for more than 90% of the observed landslips in the region. Their calculations, reported in the Natural Hazards journal, suggest the volume of debris created by these excess landslips is equivalent to the area being shaken by a magnitude 6 earthquake. Because much of this sediment ends up in rivers, the scientists say it will change the way rivers flow and increase the probability and severity of flooding. Writing in The Landslide Blog, Dave Petley from the University of Sheffield, says road-induced landslides are a global issue. “The sad element of this is that these landslides almost entirely avoidable – such road-related landslide impacts are down to poor engineering practice. “Roads do not need to be built in this way, and there are plenty of examples of good practice from around the world.”The warm home discount scheme, which at the moment offers a £140 discount to those on certain benefits during the winter months, has come under the spotlight as ministers explore ways to tackle the impact of the energy crisis on household bills. The government has said the discount will be increased next winter, and the Labour party pledged it would add to the funding and expand its coverage. What is the warm home discount? The scheme offers vulnerable energy customers a discount on their energy bills each winter. Since 2014/15 the discount has been worth £140 a year. Discounts are given automatically to people on pension credit, but other low-income households must apply and only get help if their providers offer the scheme and there is still money available. The money comes off bills, rather than being paid to customers. Who pays for it? The energy companies fund the discount, with the money coming from customers’ bills. The sums put in are mandated by the government. This year suppliers have put in a total of £350m, which has added about £14 to bills. Next year they will put in more – a consultation last year suggested £475m in total – which will cost customers £19. The Treasury does not currently add to the scheme. Can I get the discount? Around 2m households currently qualify to apply – but not all will be able to get hold of the discount. If you are on pension credit you should have automatically been accepted. If not, you need to apply. Applications are currently only available to those on low incomes who receive certain benefits, including income support and universal credit, and meet other qualifying criteria. More than 900,000 eligible pensioners who have not applied for pension credit are thought to miss out each year. Only energy suppliers with at least 150,000 customers have to offer the discount currently, so those with smaller companies miss out. When providers have allocated all of their required funds, schemes are closed. Which schemes have already closed? EDF and Scottish Power have both already stopped taking applications. EDF said it had provided about 260,000 rebates worth a total of £36m. It said it had other support for customers, including a Customer Support Fund (CSF) for help with an outstanding debt or replacing essential white goods. A Scottish Power spokesperson said the scheme had been open between August and December, as in previous years, and it had worked hard to raise awareness among customers, which had led to it being fully subscribed. “Supporting customers in vulnerable circumstances is one of our priorities,” the spokesperson said. “As well as the warm home discount, we offer a wide range of customer support – like our prepayment voucher scheme – and we also support a number of external industry initiatives. We would encourage any customers having difficulty paying their bills to contact us.” What is changing? Next winter the discount will go up to £150 and the government will change the criteria to focus on those in fuel poverty. This will only affect energy customers in England and Wales. The changes follow a consultation before the energy crisis took hold, which also proposed offering automatic payments to everyone who qualifies, rather than asking people to apply. The government has not confirmed that it will make that change. It has also proposed to reduce the number of households who miss out because their energy provider is too small by lowering the number of customers a supplier must have to 50,000 in April 2022 and then to 1,000 from April 2023. At that point, the government said an estimated 99.99% of domestic customers would be with suppliers that had to offer the discount. A business department spokesperson said: “As set out in the energy white paper, from 2022/23, we plan to extend the warm home discount until 2026, increase it by £10 to £150, and help an extra 780,000 pensioners and low-income families with their energy bills.” Does that go far enough? Charities have welcomed the changes – Citizens Advice, for example, suggests the biggest problems with the scheme will be addressed. Gillian Cooper, head of energy policy at Citizens Advice, said currently rebates were unfairly distributed. Because the number of rebates for each company is based on their customer numbers rather than need “every year we see clients who miss out on rebates because their supplier is oversubscribed. Conversely, some suppliers are unable to give out all the rebates they’re required to, because their customers are more affluent, and put the unspent money towards alternative support instead.” However, others have called for the government to inject some money into the scheme so that discounts can be more meaningful. The fuel poverty charity, National Energy Action says the government needs to pay in £500m to make sure those who qualify can all get the money and to increase the discount. “As a very bare minimum, the scheme should at least be sufficient to make sure that everybody eligible for it should get it automatically,” says Peter Smith, director of policy at the charity. “A £500m injection from the Treasury would mean that everyone currently eligible could automatically receive a discount of just over £200.” Adding government funding to the scheme would be cheaper than scrapping VAT on energy, a proposal that the government is understood to be considering. The end of VAT on bills would cost the Treasury an estimated £2bn and not be targeted at the households in greatest need.Top story: Police investigating three events linked to Johnson Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are today’s top stories. A day after promising to reboot his faltering government, Boris Johnson faces fresh allegations about lockdown-busting parties in Downing Street after the Guardian learned that he attended a prosecco-fuelled leaving do for a No 10 aide during the strict post-Christmas shutdown last year. The alleged party is now under police investigation. Sue Gray’s investigation into lockdown parties revealed several events that had not previously been publicised, including a gathering on 14 January 2021 “on the departure of two No 10 private secretaries”. But the redacted report revealed no further details. Sources said the event was held in Downing Street in part as a leaving do for a senior policy adviser who is now a top civil servant working in the culture department. Three gatherings allegedly attended by Johnson are now being investigated by police. Anger continues to simmer on the Tory backbenches after Johnson’s allies briefed that he had won over his party despite the damage of the Gray report. As splits appear in the One Nation group of Tory centrists, veteran MP Peter Aldous said he had submitted a letter of no confidence and MP Tom Hunt criticised Johnson’s “cack-handed” backers. However, there was some cheer for the Tories as many welcomed the return of Lynton Crosby, the Australian campaign guru, to the prime minister’s side as part of No 10’s planned fightback. * * * Levelling up – Michael Gove will lead another key strand of the government’s attempted reset today when he launches the flagship levelling-up white paper, with targets to reduce inequalities across society by 2030 to be enshrined in law. The communities secretary will promise to “call time on the postcode lottery” of inequalities across Britain, setting 12 legally binding “missions” to improve health, living standards, transport, crime and wellbeing by the end of the decade. Labour has dismissed the policy as “new slogans without new ideas”, while research exposes the inequality of the funding formula. * * * Putin speaks out – Vladimir Putin has accused the US of trying to lure his country into war by giving military backing to Ukraine as the tense standoff over Moscow’s military buildup in eastern Ukraine continued. In his first public comments on the growing crisis since December, Russia’s president said the west was ignoring Russia’s security proposals and was using Ukraine to spark a conflict. Boris Johnson warned on a flying visit to Kyiv that a Russian invasion of Ukraine would end in a humanitarian, political and military disaster for Russia and the world. And our diplomatic editor argues that the Ukraine crisis is the first post-Brexit test for Britain to show that it is not a global irrelevance as many predicted it would become. It is also a test that Johnson cannot afford to fail. * * * Further Greenwood arrest – Manchester United footballer Mason Greenwood has been further arrested on suspicion of sexual assault and making threats to kill. The 20-year-old was arrested on suspicion of rape and assault on Sunday after police saw a woman reporting claims of physical violence and sexual threats on social media. Greater Manchester police, who have not identified the player by name, said yesterday that a suspect had been further arrested on suspicion of sexual assault and making threats to kill after they were granted further time to question him. Police have until later today to decide whether to charge or release him. * * * Goldberg suspended – Whoopi Goldberg has been suspended from a US talk show after saying in a TV appearance that the Holocaust was “not about race”. The 66-year-old actor apologised for her remarks on The Late Show and again on the next broadcast of The View on Tuesday morning. But now she has been suspended from the latter programme “effective immediately”, the ABC network said last night. * * * ‘Fraud epidemic’ – An influential group of MPs has urged the government to tackle a “fraud epidemic” across Britain, amid concerns about the increasing financial toll on consumers and taxpayers from economic crime. The Commons Treasury committee said ministers needed to bring in fresh laws after a 43% jump in fraud and computer misuse between June 2019 and June 2021. It comes amid mounting anger over official figures that showed ministers spent almost £9bn on personal protective equipment that was either substandard, defective, past its use-by date or overpriced. * * * Blooming early – If you think plants are flowering much earlier than they used to, you’re right: a new study says blooms are coming out a month earlier in the UK as the climate heats up. Researchers led by a Cambridge professor examined 420,000 recorded dates of first flowering for more than 400 species, dating to 1793. The average date for the first blooms was about 12 May up to 1986, but since then the date has been pushed forward to 16 April. * * * Today in Focus podcast An attack on a prison in northern Syria by Islamic State fighters led to a six-day siege that marked the terror group’s most dramatic stand since the collapse of its “caliphate” nearly three years ago. Martin Chulov explains why its threat is far from over. Lunchtime read: has the sex-positivity revolution failed? The sex-positive feminism movement championed the right to enjoy sex and was supposed to free women from guilt or being shamed. One Gen Z-er says her experience stopped her having sex for a year, and now many are questioning whether it has left them more vulnerable. Sport England’s plans for the Calcutta Cup Six Nations opener in Edinburgh on Saturday have been dealt a double blow with captain Courtney Lawes and lock Jonny Hill both ruled out with injury. Here’s a team-by-team guide to the opening weekend. The spectre of 1936 and 1980 haunts Beijing as the Winter Olympics prepare to open in the Chinese capital amid a deafening silence about human rights abuses. Saudi Arabia’s plans to lure some of golf’s leading players to play in a kind of super league will cause huge disruption for the game’s main tours in the US and Europe, with reports that English Ryder Cup star Ian Poulter is among them. We look at the top 10 transfers in the now-concluded January window, such as Bruno Guimarães’s £33m switch from Lyon to Newcastle and Dusan Vlahovic’s £63m move from Fiorentina to Juventus. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s move from Arsenal to Barcelona was put together on pizzas, promises and a director of football working miracles, while high spending indicates football could be back on the road to a super league. Business Shop price inflation almost doubled to 1.5% in January to the highest level for nearly a decade as the cost of furniture and flooring shot up. The price of food rose by 2.7%, up from 2.4% in the previous month and the highest rate since October 2013. But the biggest change was in non-food items such as furniture and flooring, with prices up by 0.9% compared with 0.2% a month before. The FTSE100 is on course to climb 0.77% at the opening, while the pound is on $1.345 and €1.199. The papers Money is the prevailing theme on many front pages this morning with the Mail leading an attack on government misspending on PPE: “What a £13bn waste” it says. The Express is also enraged about it with a splash saying “Scandalous! £8.7bn of YOUR money wasted”. The Times says “Energy bill rebates to help against rising costs”, but the Mirror takes another view of the cost of living story with “Prices crisis to leave us £2,000 a year worse off”. The FT reports on higher rates in Europe: “Markets signal expectation of at least two ECB rate rises this year”. The Guardian leads with “Levelling-up drive is ‘new slogans without new ideas’ says Labour”, while the Telegraph has “HRT to be sold over the counter”. The i reports that “Tories put PM on notice”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendMisha and the Wolves: Storyville 10pm, BBC Four The vivid real-life story of a Jewish girl who fled Nazi-occupied Belgium and walked across eastern Europe to live among wolves was riveting and extraordinary – and a wildly successful achievement for Misha Defonseca, whose memoir it was. But then her publisher began to question the truth of what she had written, which led to years of court battles in the US, where she had settled. You will be glued to Sam Hobkinson’s documentary, which investigates and unpicks this multilayered saga of truth, deception and exploitation. Hollie Richardson Kirsty and Phil’s Love It or List It 8pm, Channel 4 Moving out of a home that has seen loss and grief isn’t easy, as property gurus Phil and Kirsty learn tonight. Abi is struggling to leave her Surrey house after her husband’s death, but her daughter Maddy says it’s time for a fresh start. Cue high emotions. HR The Bay 9pm, ITV DS Townsend’s (Marsha Thomason) investigation into who killed the boxer rumbles on. A new stabbing victim is investigated, relatives mourn to a weepy strings soundtrack, there are mid-funeral arrests and the plot continues to advance – but only fast enough to keep things interesting for six episodes. Alexi Duggins Supercar, Superfam 9.45pm, BBC Three Another niche offering as part of BBC Three’s return, here’s Kash and Shabs, a pair of gregarious petrolheads from Essex who specialise in revamping some of the most powerful sports cars in the world. Expect shameless bling galore. Phil Harrison The Mind of Herbert Clunkerdunk 10pm, BBC Two Another double-bill of ribald whimsy from Spencer Jones, who channels Boosh surreality and Conchords musicality via the DIY aesthetic of Neil Buchanan’s Art Attack. Amid the bite-size flights of fancy tonight, a celestial cameo from Vic Reeves and an attempt to find some humour in completing a self-assessment tax return. Graeme Virtue China: The Search for the Missing 11.05pm, Channel 4 Ahead of the Beijing Winter Olympics, which start on Friday, Dispatches investigates reported allegations in China, including stories about mass surveillance, detention and forced labour in the country’s north-west region. HR Live sport Premier League Football Burnley v Watford, Wed, 5.30pm, BT Sport 1 Relegation six-pointer at Turf Moor.When Cecilie Fjellhøy first met the man she knew as Simon Leviev for a 10am coffee date at the Four Seasons Hotel in London in January 2018, he seemed to align with his Tinder profile. His pictures were flashy – designer clothes and expensive sunglasses in luxury cars and private jets – and his in-person demeanor was equally debonair. “He has this magnetism,” Fjellhøy recalls of her first impression in the Netflix documentary The Tinder Swindler, out this week. “There’s something about this guy that is special.” Fjellhøy, then a 29-year-old Norwegian graduate student living in London, was charmed by the man who claimed to be the “prince of diamonds”, a billionaire heir to the diamond fortune of the Israeli magnate Lev Leviev. And she was surprised: Simon had to leave that afternoon for a business trip in Sofia, Bulgaria. Would she like to go with him via private jet? She agreed – “I felt I would be stupid if I said no,” she says – and the film, directed by Felicity Morris, stitches together the trip through the documentation on Fjellhøy’s phone. There’s a “Yolo” WhatsApp message to her friends; photos of Leviev’s security team aboard the private jet; video of the woman and toddler Leviev said were his ex and child, and one in which Fjellhøy kisses him on the cheek. They spent the night together in the hotel, and she flew back to London the next day, smitten with the man with whom she began exchanging messages daily. This being called The Tinder Swindler, it’s not a happily ever after; it would take Fjellhøy months, $250,000 in unpaid loans, and an investigative team from Norway’s largest paper to figure it out, but nothing Leviev said or did was truthful. The bodyguard? A hired poser. The jet? Paid for by another swindled woman’s money. The woman Leviev said was his ex, who assured Fjellhøy he was a stand-up guy? One of three women he had swindled in Finland before he was convicted and imprisoned there in 2015, who still associated with him for reasons that remain unclear (she declined to participate in the film). Even the name Simon Leviev was a dodge; the “Simon &lt;3” in her phone was actually a serial catfisher and conman born Shimon Yehuda Hayut to a middle-class Jewish orthodox family in suburban Israel – no billionaire father. (In 2017, upon release from the Finnish prison, he legally changed his name to Simon Leviev.) “This isn’t just catfishing – this is catfishing on a whole other level,” Morris told the Guardian. “There’s not the red flags you think there are in these stories.” “We’re all a little bit guilty of gold-plating our lives, whether it be on Instagram or what have you,” she added. “But Simon, when you meet him, everything stacks up.” For Fjellhøy and the two other women who tell their stories in the film – Pernilla Sjoholm, from Sweden, and Ayleen Charlotte from Amsterdam – as well as others who have not come forward, “it’s almost like they enter a Truman Show, being played out for them, where he’s got a bodyguard, he does actually fly around in a private jet,” said Morris. For most of its first half, the nearly two-hour film weaves Fjellhøy’s first-person account with Sjoholm’s, who met Leivev on Tinder in March 2018. Their connection was initially romantic but turned into a deep friendship; Leviev brought along Sjoholm on trips to Mykonos, Rome and elsewhere with other Tinder dates, and the two messaged consistently for eight months. As Leviev partied lavishly with Sjoholm, Fjellhøy was looking, at his request, for London flats to rent together. Three months into dating, she received disturbing photos of Leviev and his bodyguard covered in blood, and a request for $25,000 – according to Leviev, his enemies were tracing his credit card payments. Fjellhøy had no reason to doubt her boyfriend would be good for the money, and who else was closer to him? She took out credit cards, loans and more loans for more requests, as Leviev repeatedly assured her that payment would come through the next day, then the next. It didn’t. Fjellhøy had been tricked, fallout from which rains throughout the second half of the film, as she links up with journalists at the Norwegian paper VG, and eventually Sjoholm and Charlotte, to unravel Leviev’s long history of cons dating back to his teenage years in Israel. (VG’s investigative piece, featuring messages, voice notes and video that is worked into the film, was published in 2019.) Losing the money and credit was bad enough, but losing the man she thought cared about her – the boyfriend who sent her roses and doting voice notes, the one who made a surprise last-minute trip to Oslo to see her – was a worse gut punch. The con was as much emotional as financial. Leviev “wasn’t being a kind of James Bond character with these girls”, said Morris. “Yes he’d send them flowers, and he’d remember their birthday, and he’d be really sweet, but it wasn’t like they were getting anything. He wasn’t giving them designer handbags or amazing holidays. He was just a very consistent, loving boyfriend.” The normal red flags or hiccups – not texting back, ghosting, lack of interest – didn’t apply to Simon, and the bar for dating was so low that this in and of itself was remarkable. “Simon was the perfect man for these women,” said Morris, “and that wasn’t in a material way. That was in an emotional way.” “We’ve all grown up on this diet of romcom movies and the idea of finding the love of your life, your Prince Charming, to sweep you off your feet,” said Morris, who works in clips from classic Hollywood romances into the film. “I definitely think that Simon plays on that.” The final section of the film, which simply must be seen to be fully appreciated and moves beyond the scope of the VG story, works in testimony and comeuppance from Charlotte, who dated Leviev for 18 months and also loaned him significant amounts of money that was never repaid. Morris stitches together VG’s investigations, Charlotte’s recollections, and menacing voice and text messages from Leviev to reveal a vindictive pathological liar finally snagged by his past. It’s thanks to all three women that he was arrested in 2019 in Greece and extradited to Israel; he was sentenced to 15 months in prison for theft and fraud charges he skipped out on in 2011, and released after five months due to good behavior. Simon Leviev, as he is still legally named (his now-private Instagram account, @simon_leviev_official, currently has 97,500 followers, bot percentage unknown), declined to formally participate in the film, though he did respond to WhatsApp messages from the Morris’s team. There was a “back-and-forth between us and various lawyers that he had employed for us to speak to”, said Morris, but “an interview never materialized.” Leviev, however, did send voice notes that are included in the film in which he denies all the women’s claims of fraud and threatens legal action. Despite the name, The Tinder Swindler is not actually that much about Tinder, or a warning against the perils of online dating. “We’re not saying that people shouldn’t use dating apps,” said Morris. “We’re not saying that people should be more cautious than they are, because most people are cautious.” Instead, the message is more one of perseverance through gaslighting, financial ruin and the fear of judgment. Fjellhøy, Sjoholm and Charlotte knew the reaction and skepticism that would come from speaking out, yet “they’ve been brave enough to say well, actually, the only real way that we’re going to get justice is to expose him,” said Morris. That justice, if not in jail time or financial restitution, can come through a public record. The first thing you do with a Tinder match is Google them, says Fejllhøy, who is still on the app, at the end of the film. And the results for Simon Leviev? Pages on pages of articles unraveling his lies. The Tinder Swindler is now available on NetflixArnima Hayat has been remembered as a “noble child from a noble family” after the aspiring doctor was allegedly murdered by her partner, Meraj Zafar, in Sydney’s west. Arnima’s body was found by police in a bathtub of chemicals at her home on Pennant Hills Road in North Parramatta about 4.30pm on Sunday, sparking a manhunt for her 20-year-old partner. Zafar turned himself in at Bankstown police station on Monday before being arrested and charged with her murder. Arnima, 19, was in her second year of medicine at university with dreams of becoming a surgeon, her parents told Channel Seven. Abu and Mahafuza Hayat, originally from Bangladesh, said their daughter “wanted to help people”. “Everyone hoped she’d become a big doctor,” father Abu said. “I want my daughter, I love my daughter.” Mahafuza sobbed as she spoke. “My daughter’s not coming,” she said. Canterbury Bankstown councillor Sazeda Akter described Arnima as an “angel” and a “noble child”. “We have lost a young soul within our community, someone who I have seen grow up in front of my eyes,” Akter wrote on Facebook. “A noble child from a noble family. It breaks my heart to see how things have transpired.” Arnima and her partner moved into the apartment late last year, according to neighbours who spoke to Channel Nine. Prieta Mamun, a Bangladeshi Australian influencer and online makeup retailer, remembers connecting online with “hype girl” Arnima in 2020. “She was very kind and supportive of outfits that I would wear and my style and the fact that I was Bengali like her,” Prieta told the Guardian. “She was a self care kind of girl. She would love getting her nails done, she loved false eyelashes.” Prieta was devastated when she heard Arnima had allegedly been killed by her partner. “It’s just excruciating,” she said. “I was just very shocked and really just defeated and exhausted.” Speaking on Monday, Parramatta police Supt Julie Boon said it was hard for the officers who found Arnima, after her family called authorities with concerns for her welfare. “I can confirm there were chemicals found inside the bathroom of the unit,” she said. “The scene was very challenging for arriving police. When they did arrive and found chemicals at the unit, they retreated and called other units.” A truck, believed to belong to accused killer Zafar, was seized in Greenacre for forensic examination. Zafar did not appear in person or via video link in Bankstown local court on Tuesday when his matter was mentioned before magistrate Shane McAnulty. Police allege he murdered Arnima between Saturday and Sunday, according to court documents. Zafar’s lawyer Mohamad Sakr told reporters outside court he did not know if his client would fight the charges. “He’s distraught about being in custody,” he said. “It’s just a matter of whether he wishes to fight these charges or not, but I will take those instructions and advise accordingly.” Zafar did not apply for bail and is due to appear again on 5 April.Shweeeee … Boooom. The noise of the exploding artillery shell startled me awake in the middle of a July night. Dazed, I stumbled out of bed and tried to check on the other journalists with whom I share a dormitory. As we ran outside, another shell flew overhead. It was five months after the military takeover in Myanmar and three months since we had been forced to relocate from the Kachin state capital, Myitkyina, to territory held by a group known in Myanmar as an ethnic armed organisation (EAO), fighting for self-determination for an ethnic minority state near Myanmar’s border with China. Now this territory was being bombed. We were all terrified; some of my staff were crying as they looked to me for guidance and comfort. This was neither our first nor last brush with danger. Since the military seized power on 1 February 2021, small local media outlets such as mine have faced immense risks and hardships just to survive. Just two weeks after the coup, I was one of the first journalists that the military arrested as it attempted to cover up its violent suppression of the pro-democracy movement. We were taking live-stream footage of the military’s violent suppression of a demonstration in Myitkyina, when soldiers fired rubber bullets to disperse protesters. Police and soldiers arrested me and four other local reporters. Just moments before they confiscated our camera gear and mobile phones, we filmed a soldier giving the order: “Arrest everyone filming.” We were lucky. After being held for the night we were released without charge. Yet since then the military has arrested at least 110 more journalists, of whom 44 remained in detention as of 10 January. Recently, three journalists were killed. One of them, Soe Naing, died during interrogation by the military after he was arrested on 10 December while filming a protest in Yangon. After our arrest, we immediately resumed reporting, but our space to work as journalists was rapidly narrowing. I was constantly followed by investigative police, and after they tracked down our office address, my whole team was put under surveillance. On 28 February, another of our journalists was arrested. He says he was strip-searched before being released eight hours later. On 7 March, we locked up our offices and went into hiding. Our challenges were compounded when the military blocked mobile data across the country on 15 March, leaving us dependent on finding places with wifi to carry out our work. On 29 March a female journalist from my team was arrested while covering a protest. She says that during her six-month detention she spent a week in an interrogation centre where she was subjected to psychological torture. Arrest warrants were also issued for several other members of my staff in April. That same month, as the military continued to crack down on the press, we realised that we were likely to become more of a target and we finally decided to relocate to the Chinese border. A month after we left, the military revoked our media licence. Since then we have been staying in the territory of one of more than a dozen EAOs that line Myanmar’s borders. Some of them have been fighting for self-determination for decades; since the coup, some have at times joined forces with new armed pro-democracy groups against the military. In our new location, we no longer fear being tailed incessantly by the military or the constant threat of arrest, but we face a new set of worries. Since our arrival, conflict has been escalating between the military and armed revolutionary groups across the country, and at times attacks near our location seem imminent. We have heard artillery fire several times, and have bags ready in case we need to flee in an emergency. But there are few places we could seek shelter. We cannot safely go back to the city, but a three-metre-high fence, topped with barbed wire and CCTV cameras, stops us from being able to cross the border into China. Although we are grateful to the EAO for allowing us to stay in its territory, we also have limited media freedom. Journalists and editors have received verbal warnings that action will be taken against us if we report on issues in a way they do not like. Nonetheless, we continue to report on the serious human rights violations and lawless behaviour of the Myanmar military in Kachin state and neighbouring areas. A year after the coup, the military continues to egregiously restrict media freedoms across the country and attempts to terrorise journalists into silence. Nearly all the journalists who were working in Myitkyina before the coup have fled. Many are unable to continue reporting at all. My team has made it this far, and we remain committed to keeping our newsroom alive whatever risks lie ahead. John Padang is the founder and editor-in-chief of the 74 Media, a regional news agency based in Kachin State. He is writing under a pseudonym for security reasons Translated by Zau Myet Awng; additional editing by Emily FishbeinIn 2021, journalist Caitlyn Rintoul began researching a story that is likely to change Western Australia’s resource sector forever. Rintoul was following up a different lead when a fly-in-fly-out worker told her sexism was a big issue on the state’s mine sites. With some digging, Rintoul uncovered instances of sexual harassment and assault in the mines, and after six months of work, she published the first in a series of stories about the rape of women on mine sites. It was reporting so urgent that it sparked a parliamentary inquiry, which went on to reveal 257 sexual harassment and assault cases across WA’s mine sites. “It’s essentially the #MeToo of the mining industry in Australia,” Rintoul says. “All of these issues had been kept secret for years. It was a lot of work to bring them to light because you’re dealing with huge companies who have massive public relations teams and money behind them. “So to highlight the sexual harassment, assaults and gendered violence going on in these environments was a big effort, and it’s really changed how women are treated in the industry.” Kathryn Shine, Senior Lecturer in Journalism at Curtin University, believes stories like Rintoul’s are what journalism is all about: a chance to shine a light in dark corners. For her work, Rintoul earned the award for best print news coverage at the 2021 WA Media Awards – an impressive achievement for a journalist who is still in the early days of her career. Rintoul studied journalism at Curtin University, graduating in 2015 and going on to work at various regional publications before taking a job at the West Australian in 2019. She believes her degree was a “really great grounding” in the world of journalism. “You learn so much from the law and ethics, which is obviously core to everything that we do, to research, investigation, interviewing, breaking stories and pitching,” Rintoul says. “It’s a really holistic grounding for a career in the media.” Kathryn Shine, Senior Lecturer in Journalism at Curtin University, believes stories like Rintoul’s are what journalism is all about: a chance to shine a light in dark corners. “I very firmly believe that journalism is a fantastic career,” Shine says. “The job is very important. It exposes truths about things like corruption and helps us find where things are going wrong, and how they should be. You make a really significant contribution.” Learning how to investigate important stories is key to being a good journalist. But in today’s landscape, reporting them can take many different forms. That’s why Curtin’s Master of Multimedia Journalism degree teaches students not only to work with the written word but also to master audio, video, photo and presentation skills. The breadth of technical ability she gained at Curtin is something Rintoul has relied on. Like many journos, she began her career working in regional publications, where it was essential that she knew how to handle every element of getting a story live. “I think any journalist who goes out to regional areas will find that you’re it: you’re the journalist, photographer, videographer, editor, subeditor,” Rintoul says. It’s an opportunity to learn skills across the board. Shine says changes to the way newsrooms are resourced means today’s media graduates need to be able cover a lot of bases themselves. But more than that, she believes having a range of skills “opens up an entirely new world of possibilities” for those in the media. “I think that’s really exciting for journalists – to be able to do everything, and not just be pigeonholed as a writer or a radio journalist, because it makes the job more stimulating, interesting and diverse.” Pictured: Journalist Caitlyn Rintoul The skills imparted in a multimedia journalism degree are sought after by employers, both in and outside of journalism. “We’re finding that we actually can’t meet demand for graduates from employers,” Shine says. “The media industry is really healthy at the moment.” Rintoul is thankful for her degree – and the career in media that it has allowed her to pursue. “If we didn’t have journalism, I don’t know how governments and companies would be held accountable,” she says. “It really is a fourth estate and I don’t think there’s any other industry like it.” For Rintoul, reporting on sexual assaults in WA’s mining industry wasn’t easy but it was definitely worthwhile. “The resource sector is often seen as a small-town environment where if you lose a job here, word gets around and you might not be able to pick up a job at the next company,” she says. “So it’s a very difficult subject for a lot of people [to speak about] but one that’s obviously really important. “I’m really proud that we were able to get this done, get the parliamentary inquiry and get some action happening within companies but also within government. It’s just a huge issue that’s really been covered up for so many years.” Learn about the power of journalism with a degree at Curtin University.When eight-year-old Dillon Helbig finished writing his book, The Adventures of Dillon Helbig’s Crismis, in mid-December, he wanted everyone to read it. The only problem was that he did not have an agent. So he decided to self-publish. During a visit with his grandmother to the Lake Hazel branch of the Ada Community Library in Boise, Idaho, Dillon quietly deposited his book, signed “by Dillon His Self”, on to a nearby shelf. “I always be sneaky, like how I get chocolate,” Dillon told the KTVB television station about the undercover operation. “There was a lot of librarians that I had to sneak past so do you know what I did? I covered up this part and covered the back with my body and just snuck it in and then started to walk, and then I came in this aisle – no, wait, this aisle – and then I put my book right here. Wait, right here.” The 81-page book details adventures that ensue after the star on a Christmas tree Dillon is decorating explodes. Dillon is transported into a portal and time-travels to the very first Thanksgiving and to the north pole. “Everything about it was a bit crazy,” the second-grader admitted. Days later, when Dillon came to check on the book, he noticed it was gone. His mom called the library. “His parents were worried we would find his book and we would get rid of it,” the Lake Hazel library branch manager, Alex Hartman, said. “Which was an unfounded fear because if there’s ever a place a book would be safe, it would be here.” It turned out that Hartman and his colleagues discovered Dillon’s book in the “stories” section and read it, including to Hartman’s six-year-old son. “Dillon’s book definitely fit all the criteria that we would look for to include a book in our collection,” Hartman said. And so, with Dillon’s permission, the library stickered and catalogued the book and placed it with its holdings of graphic novels for adults, teens and kids. As of Saturday, The Adventures of Dillon Helbig’s Crismis was subject to a 55-person wait list. Hartman has been in discussion with Dillon’s mother about creating a digital copy. “We’re just hoping that … children find inspiration to write their own stories and share those with other people,” Hartman told the Washington Post. “I just think it’s a good demonstration to share with other kids.” Dillon has been awarded the library’s Whoodini Award for best young novelist, a category created for him and named after the library’s owl mascot. The young author has announced that a sequel is in the works, this time about a visit from the Grinch and also featuring Dillon’s dog, Rusty. He is also writing a book about a jacket-eating closet, based, Dillon said, on a true story from his kindergarten days.Remember normcore? Back in 2014, a far more innocent time, a bunch of friends coined the term as tongue-in-cheek social commentary. It was supposed to describe a “post-authenticity coolness that opts in to sameness”. A journalist got wind of the word and published a piece describing the trend in rather more user-friendly terms – ie all the cool kids are wearing sensible shoes and dressing like Jerry Seinfeld. Suddenly, normcore was everywhere. New York magazine declared Pope Francis “our normcore Pope”. Vogue crowned the Duchess of Cambridge “the Duchess of Normcore”. Nobody seemed to really care what normcore actually meant; they just liked saying it. For good reason: it’s a strangely satisfying word. Normcore eventually faded from the headlines but it didn’t entirely disappear. “-core” became the new “-gate”: irresistible linguistic Lego that you could attach to almost anything. Cottagecore had a moment. So did Regencycore, warcore, gorpcore, pearlcore, Covidcore, goblincore and mushroomcore. Blimey. Long story short: there have been a bunch of rotten cores over the years. Almost too many to choose from, really. However, I have been staying au courant with the issue and I reckon I’ve found the worst iteration yet: “Kidcore”. According to a recent piece in the Wall Street Journal, that noted chronicler of the cutting edge, it’s very hot right now. Per the Journal: “Kidcore – a fad that sees adult men conjure their tweenage years with expressive, if juvenile, outfits – has thrived during the pandemic” and may be the big men’s fashion trend of 2022. Well, I’m certainly glad something thrived during the pandemic. Still. Please can we cut the -cores already? Eight years is a very long time for a gag to go on. Even I retire my jokes sooner than that. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistThe early release from prison of a white Chicago police officer who was sentenced to about seven years for the murder of a Black teenager in 2014 has sparked anger among relatives, community organizers and politicians who are questioning the decision to shave three years off his sentence for ‘good behavior’. Jason Van Dyke, who was convicted of murder in 2018, was sentenced to six years and nine months for the murder of 17-year-old Laquan McDonald, after video showed Van Dyke shooting the teenager 16 times. Van Dyke is now set to be released on 3 February, almost three years ahead of schedule. He will remain on parole for at least two years. Members of McDonald’s family, local activists and political leaders have voiced their fury over Van Dyke’s early release, noting that he served just a fraction of the 18 years prosecutors originally sought, let alone the maximum 96 years Van Dyke could have received for his charges. In a press conference last Thursday held by McDonald’s relatives at a local church, his grandmother, Tracie Hunter, called Van Dyke’s punishment a “slap on the wrist”, according to the Chicago Tribune. “I just want justice, the right justice,” Hunter said. “I’m not going to rest or be satisfied until this man does his rightful time.” “It’s crazy how I go to a cemetery and talk to a tombstone while this man can talk to his wife and two kids,” said Tanesha Hunter, McDonald’s aunt, in a separate press conference on Monday. Local activists have led several protests over the past week, including a rally outside Illinois governor JB Pritzker’s home last Friday. A number of actions are planned for Thursday, when Van Dyke will be released. “He represents all the officers who we could not hold accountable, or that the justice system has not held accountable yet,” community organizer William Calloway told the Chicago Tribune, listing other people killed by Chicago police officers including 29-year-old Flint Farmer in 2011, 15-year-old Dakota Bright in 2012, 15-year-old Michael Westley in 2013, and 19-year-old Roshad McIntosh and 25-year old Ronald Johnson III in 2014. The Reverend Jesse Jackson said he is also organizing a march for Thursday and has joined other organizers in calling for the justice department to pursue federal civil rights crimes against Van Dyke. A federal investigation was opened in 2015 but charges were never filed. “We all know that 81 months is not enough to fully hold Van Dyke accountable and we know that there is a movement in this city. That is the reason why Van Dyke is behind bars, so we are reactivating that movement,” Jazmine Salas of the Chicago Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression, one of the organizations that signed a letter to the Department of Justice asking for federal charges, told WTTW. Pritzker himself has been critical of Van Dyke’s shortened sentence, saying last Friday that he was “disappointed” in the outcome. “The justice system isn’t always just, and I do not think that the outcome of sentencing of Jason Van Dyke was proper,” the governor said. “I am disappointed and I would have rather seen a different outcome. But this is where we are.” Backlash against Van Dyke’s release has been magnified by Chicago’s shaky record on police reform after McDonald’s murder and more police-involved shootings since, despite a consent decree mandating reform. The decree was issued after a blistering justice department investigation into the Chicago police department found excessive, racist force and widespread corruption. “We are not where we want to be when it comes to police reform and accountability, but we are further along in two-plus years of doing this work than any other city that has been under consent decree,” said the Chicago mayor, Lori Lightfoot. Jamie Kalven, the investigative journalist who broke the Laquan McDonald story and founded the non-profit Invisible Institute, told ABC7 Chicago that despite “discernible progress in some discrete areas, we have thus far failed and our institutions have failed to really rise to that challenge”. “The verdict is far more important than the sentence, and I’m not sure we’d be in a different place as a city right now if Jason Van Dyke had gotten 12 years or 20 years,” said Kalven. In October 2014, Van Dyke and another officer responded to calls of a teenager carrying a knife and allegedly damaging cars in the South Side area of Chicago. Within six seconds of exiting his police vehicle, Van Dyke shot McDonald 16 times as the teenager was walking away. Many of the bullets hit McDonald as he fell to the ground. Three other police officers, all acquitted of any charges but ultimately fired from the department in 2019, filed false police reports accusing McDonald of lunging towards officers with a knife and failing to interview eyewitnesses who saw the shooting. Discrepancies in their accounts were only uncovered once dash cam footage from Van Dyke’s car showing McDonald’s murder was released. The murder sparked nationwide protests and global coverage. Many accused then mayor Rahm Emanuel, who was recently confirmed as US ambassador to Japan, of a coverup ahead of his reelection campaign in 2015, after video of the shooting was withheld for more than a year.When my mother died recently, I’d budgeted for the funeral costs. What I had not budgeted for were the fees of the parish council which operates the only graveyard available. I was charged £2,000 for what was, effectively, permission to inter my mother in a plot we had already bought for my father, who died 40 years ago. The fee doesn’t include grave digging, and there’s a further £230 for permission to add my mother’s name to the headstone. It’s especially unfair because we are being discriminated against for living on the wrong side of a town that happens to be divided into two parishes, Oxted and Limpsfield. When my father died in 1981, there was no room in the Limpsfield cemetery, so we paid £40 for a 100-year lease on a plot at Oxted, a mile from my parents’ house. Twenty years later, Oxted parish council decided to charge residents of Limpsfield parish triple the interment rate in Oxted. If my mother had lived a few hundred yards away, over the parish boundary, it would have been £600. NG, Limpsfield, Surrey Interment charges levied by local authorities and parish councils are uncapped and unregulated and can dwarf the cost of a funeral director. One London borough charges £10,000 for people from outside the council’s jurisdiction. It’s reasonable for new plots to reflect the cost of land, its maintenance and popular demand. And a charging system that helps preserve cemeteries for local ratepayers makes sense. However, it’s extraordinary that those charges apply to someone joining their spouse in a plot already leased by the family. It seems especially unfair, given that the price differential was introduced years after you buried your father and, that, since your local cemetery is full, you say you had no other option. Most councils make exceptions for partners who have been forced to move out of the area, but your argument that this should apply to your mother’s situation held no sway at Oxted. It told the Observer that its fees were reviewed annually and were lower for parishioners who paid for the upkeep of the cemetery through a council tax precept. “Fees are in line with those of many other parish councils, and the same for a first interment or a subsequent one,” it says. According to the Institute of Cemetery And Crematorium Management (ICCM), the organisation that owns the burial ground can set its own fee and there’s no national guidance on what it can be. Since these organisations can be local authorities, private companies, charitable trusts, religious organisations or parish councils, they can vary wildly. “Many local authorities charge a discounted fee for residents, as they may have contributed to the provision and upkeep of the cemetery through the rates and/or council tax system,” says ICCM. “Non residents are charged more, as they haven’t made this contribution. This can seem unfair, particularly when a cemetery is very close, but isn’t actually in the same authority area.” Fees are likely to outstrip inflation as the provision of new cemeteries is not keeping up with demand. Labour MP for Mitcham and Morden, Siobhain McDonagh, raised the issue in the Commons after a constituent, who had moved out of area, incurred a non-resident fee of nearly £4,000 to be buried in the family grave. “No bereaved family should be faced with the burden of having to shop around for the best deal, but across the country the cost of burials and cremations varies significantly,” she told the Observer. “Even within boroughs, non-residents can be charged up to quadruple the costs, regardless of how long they had lived there. This outrageous exploitation of grief urgently needs to change.” Burials come under the remit of the Ministry of Justice, which says that burial authorities can charge such fees they think proper. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsPoorer, urban areas in England are the least likely to have protected local green spaces, despite the fact they need them the most, the first analysis of its kind has found. To “level up”, local parks in urban areas need to be given the same protections as national parks, CPRE, the countryside charity, has said. Important small local parks, at an average size of 1.8 hectares (4.5 acres), can be protected from development by applying to the council for them to be designated as local green spaces (LGS). Local green spaces are small parcels of land, close to where people live, that are demonstrably special to their community, for reasons that can include their beauty, historic significance, recreational value, tranquillity or richness of wildlife. It is a neighbourhood planning tool with unique power, because it implies being valued by local people is in itself a strong enough reason to protect small patches of green space. However, while more than 6,500 have been created across the country since 2012, when the designation was introduced, hardly any of these are in deprived, urban areas, and the majority are concentrated in wealthy parts of the south-east. While there are 5.9 local green spaces per 100,000 people in the north, people in the south-east enjoy 11.9. Birmingham, Manchester and Liverpool are among the cities with no designated local green spaces. Predominantly rural local authority areas account for 55% of LGS designations, despite the fact those who live there have far greater access to nature than their urban counterparts. Only 38% of the 100 local councils with the most green space-deprived neighbourhoods have at least one designated LGS. A report by CPRE calls for the government to introduce compulsory standards for access to nature into planning law and policy and to add an indicator on access to nature to the index of multiple deprivation to help facilitate easier access to nature for all. Crispin Truman, the chief executive of CPRE, said: “This is a solution to levelling up that has been hiding in plain sight; a planning superpower in the hands of ordinary people. All that people have to prove is they use and value the land for it to be eligible to be protected like it’s a national park. “Unfortunately, there is a sliding scale of injustice when it comes to who is benefiting. Put simply, the poorer you are and the more nature-deprived your neighbourhood already is, the less likely you are to have any protected local green space. It’s time to address this imbalance and level up everyone’s access to nature. “That is why we’re calling on the government to promise the equivalent of a national park for every neighbourhood. Local green space designation is a powerful way to protect vulnerable slices of nature, particularly in deprived areas. It has the added benefit of nurturing neighbourhood planning groups so that people get more of a say in what gets built locally. “Our iconic national parks are rightly celebrated and protected. But research repeatedly shows they are not accessible to all – and that the poorest in society benefit the least. That’s why it should be a national priority to protect our local parks and green spaces so that everybody, no matter where they live, has access to the benefits of nature.”Today marks the 100th anniversary of the publication of Ulysses, by Paris bookshop Shakespeare and Company. It’s also James Joyce’s birthday; he was born on 2 February 1882 – 140 years ago. Ulysses is contemporary with the Irish Free State, established on 6 December 1922; historians love to pore over its dense, riddling text for clues about the national psyche at the time. The novel and the year have come to be seen as key turning points in Modernism; TS Eliot, whose The Waste Land appeared in December 1922, called Ulysses “a book to which we are all indebted, and from which none of us can escape”. Joyce signed off his text with the words, “Trieste-Zurich-Paris, 1914-1921”. But it is to Dublin we best go if we want to celebrate Ulysses, which put the Irish capital on the map of premier cities of the imagination – beside the likes of Paris and London – and offered readers a detailed plan of the Irish capital in its perambulating plot, which unfolds over a single day. Since 1929, Joyce fans have celebrated Bloomsday on 16 June – the fictional date on which the novel’s events take place, in 1904 – with readings, talks, breakfasts, singing, jigs, reels and fancy dress. In 2020 and 2021, the event, forced to go virtual, was dubbed Zoomsday. This year there will no doubt be a bigger than usual Bloomsday – new films and radio productions are already in train and a themed film festival (bloomsdayfestival.ie) returns for a third time – but there’s also a lot happening in the build-up. There are many ways of taking a Joycean tour around the city. Close readers who like a challenge and a wander set off to trace the book’s clues, shadowing the route taken by protagonist Leopold Bloom, despite the fact many buildings and even entire streets have been demolished. Others follow actual maps prepared by others, tag along behind seasoned tour guides or take bus and bike tours. Some have even taken up Bloom’s challenge: “Good puzzle would be cross Dublin without passing a pub”. There are 14 brass plaques – laid in the pavement in 1988 – marking out the walk taken by Bloom during the course of the novel; there’s a geocache linked to these. But the other central character, Stephen Dedalus – Joyce’s alter ego – also spends much of the book walking, and the suggested stops below contain some of his route. The Martello Tower, Sandycove Ireland’s 50 or so Martello towers, likely named after a tower at Cape Martella in Corsica, were built by the British during the Napoleonic wars. This tower, now a Joyce museum, appears on the first page of Ulysses, with Buck Mulligan having a wet shave while testing his banter on Stephen. The opening lines of the novel are repeated over and over in the film Opening Ulysses, created by Ireland’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Museum of Literature Ireland in collaboration with 40 Irish embassies and consulates – a project that perhaps acknowledges many readers don’t get much further than the enigmatic opening. Sandymount strand “Am I walking into eternity along Sandymount strand?” wonders Stephen in one of the early stream-of-consciousness sections. Later the same day, Bloom masturbates from the prom while ogling young Gerty MacDowell. This long, broad beach is a place to clear your head before plunging into the labyrinthine novel/city. James Joyce Centre In the early 1900s this fine Georgian townhouse at 35 North Great George’s Street gave home to a dance academy run by Prof Denis J Maginni, a character who turns up a few times in Ulysses. The building was saved from the wrecking ball by a Joyce scholar. Leopold Bloom’s fictional house at 7 Eccles Street wasn’t so lucky, but the front door of the property is on display here. Due to Covid-19, the centre is currently closed; reopening date tbc. A pub No need to choose too carefully; Ulysses allows plenty of scope for “arsing around from one pub to another”. None of the pubs mentioned in the novel looks anything like they would have done back in the day. Davy Byrnes, which Leopold Bloom deems a “moral pub”, is OK for a pint, though the menu doesn’t feature the gorgonzola sandwich he enjoys with a “good glass of burgundy”. Kennedys on Westland Row, formerly Conways, has hosted Bloomsdays, and claims associations with Oscar Wilde and Samuel Beckett, as well as Joyce. The Oval feels kind of time-honoured and lived-in – though the original was destroyed in the 1916 Easter Rising. O’Connell Bridge This famous bridge over the River Liffey – built between 1791 and 1794 as Carlisle Bridge and renamed in 1882 after Irish political leader Daniel O’Connell – has a starring role in The Dead, the long, final story in Joyce’s Dubliners. The character Gabriel has an epiphany here, realising he must embrace his country’s quest for independence. In Ulysses, Bloom pauses on the bridge to feed seagulls Banbury cakes (currant-filled pastries similar to Eccles cakes). National Library of Ireland This classical building on Kildare Street, designed by Cork-born Thomas Newenham Deane, dates from 1877. In the Scylla and Charybdis episode, Stephen – who has just given some scholars a lecture on his “biographical” theory about Shakespeare’s Hamlet – and Bloom almost meet in the library entrance. The coffered ceiling of the main reading room, stained glass, reliefs and mosaic floor are worth a look. Museum of Literature Ireland Branded MoLI for 2022 in homage to Molly Bloom, Joyce’s heroine in Ulysses, and recently reopened to the public, the museum is hosting Love, Says Bloom (2 Feb-3 Jul), an exhibition curated by Nuala O’Connor dedicated to Joyce’s relationship with his wife, Nora Barnacle, their children, Lucia and Giorgio, and grandson Stephen. Until June 2022, the museum is also hosting Suzanne Freeman’s Ulysses, a Treasure Hunt: the episodes of the novel are depicted in a series of small wooden cases dotted around the museum. Copy No. 1 of Ulysses is kept here. Full details of all events can be found at ulysses100.ie. Booksupstairs You can’t pay homage to Joyce without popping into a bookseller’s; this independent bookshop at 17 D’Olier Street has itself gone walkabout since opening in 1978, passing from a site above a furrier’s on South King Street, George’s Street Market Arcade and 36 College Green – opposite Trinity College – before settling here. The shop stocks new and secondhand editions of Joyce’s works and has a cafe. Consuming Joyce (Bloomsbury), a new book by John McCourt, analyses, among other things, why we go on pilgrimages instead of reading James Joyce. Glasnevin cemetery Death is a key motif in Ulysses. Stephen is mourning his mother’s passing. Bloom is on the way to Paddy Dignam’s funeral at this large cemetery north west of the city centre. The tomb of drowning victim Matthew F Kane says he was the “model for Patrick Dignam” and four other people in the novel. While Joyce was writing Ulysses, the great influenza pandemic of 1918-1920 was slaying millions. In the Hades episode of the novel, Bloom muses: “Whooping cough … Only measles … Scarlatina, influenza epidemics. Canvassing for death. Don’t miss this chance”. Thinking as an advertising agent, he imagines the rival plagues as travelling salesmen, bidding for business (ie bodies). Howth Head This beautiful peninsula to the north east of Dublin has special significance in Ulysses. Bloom proposed to Molly here. Howth is also a prompt in Molly’s final soliloquy, when she recalls why she loves him (“yes he said I was a flower of the mountain yes”). Dublin is where Bloom is forced to confront the fact he is a cuckold. For hope and faith, you have to leave the metropolis behind, go to the edge, study the sea.The interview begins in uneasy silence, as we stare across at each other from our comfy armchairs. It is not exactly Frost/Nixon, because he is a dog. Being up on the furniture should be a treat for him, but we lost that battle long ago. I repeat my question again: “Why do you bark so much?” Oz, our Hairy Maclary-like lurcher, tilts his head a little, but remains silent. Perhaps if I were to impersonate a delivery driver and knock on the door, he would speak up. Or if I were to yelp and scream like a fox in the night. Or drive a motorbike past the house. Then he would be in fits of raucous barking loud enough to make the whole neighbourhood shake. At what point is his barking too much? And what can I do to help him tone it down a bit? This is a question many of us are asking, with dog ownership soaring since the start of the pandemic. “Some people can be very intolerant of their dog barking, particular if they are getting complaints from their neighbours,” says Ryan Neile, head of behaviour at the animal welfare charity Blue Cross. I have decided to sit down with Oz to try to work out exactly what his barks are telling me – to listen to his barks and work out what I am missing. So, first, what exactly is a barking dog trying to achieve? Before writing a book about dog cognition, I had lumped barking in a box named “attention-getting device” and left it at that. I had considered a dog’s bark to be a short, sharp “HEY!”, evolved to draw attention to situations in which there is uncertainty – a sudden noise to alert their owner of danger. But now I see that this idea is a bit debasing, because there are many different styles of barking. Oz has a delivery-driver bark, for instance. In the words of dog scientists, the delivery-driver bark is a “harsh, low-frequency, unmodulated” noise – deep and low, in other words. Its deepness tells strangers a story (or lie in this case) of a big dog with a deep chest that probably has sharp teeth, so you had best run away. Oz has another bark for the family when he wants our attention. If, for instance, his ball has rolled underneath the sofa, he opts for a higher pitch. No less loud or urgent, just less … foreboding. He has other barks. Sometimes, when playing, Oz might let out a few quick yaps at other dogs: “Hey! Play!” he seems to say. Often it works; the friendly dogs come over and Oz has lots of fun. So, although it is loud and a bit annoying, I wouldn’t want to deny Oz his natural means of expression. I just want him, occasionally, to tone it down a bit. “Barking is a normal behaviour for dogs, so you can’t expect them not to bark at all,” says Dr Zazie Todd, the author of Wag: The Science of Making Your Dog Happy. She advises exploring the situations in which the dog barks and thinking about the practical solutions. Is it the doorbell? Set up predictable situations, such as having friends over, in which you can teach better behaviour (expect it to take practice and plenty of rewards). Is it when neighbouring cats walk past the window? Try adding a screen to the window. Is it the noise of other dogs barking? Try leaving the radio on. Is it when you leave your dog alone? Build up slowly to such periods, working gradually, with warmth, positivity and (again) lots of treats. “Don’t yell at your dog!” Todd says. So-called “aversive training techniques”, including bark collars, have varying levels of success and don’t tend to solve the underlying issues (including fear) that can be at play in many dogs that bark excessively. As well as the above, Blue Cross’s official advice includes encouraging noisy dogs (through treats, believe it or not) to focus on neutral tasks, such as playing fetch or going to their bed, in situations when their barking becomes problematic. For attention-seeking dogs, barking should never be rewarded with attention – this includes shouting back. In time, your attention becomes a reward dished out only upon calm behaviour. If all else fails, seek help from an accredited animal behaviour expert or a vet. Does the breed have an impact? “Some breeds are much ‘chattier’ than others,” says Holly Root-Gutteridge, a postdoctoral dog researcher at the University of Lincoln. Loud breeds include jack russells, chihuahuas and German shepherds. Quieter breeds include cavalier king charles spaniels, shiba inus and labradors. I notice that Oz, a lurcher, is on the list of quieter dogs, yet he appears to have plenty to say. “Regardless of breeds, some dogs are just big talkers, so it’s good to look at why they’re talking and consider whether it’s related to something we can change,” Root-Gutteridge suggests. “If your dog is barking a lot, there may be a reason that isn’t obvious, like he’s under-exercised or he’s responding to some outside noises that you might not have picked up on.” Oz does bark a bit more in the afternoons, I realise, before we go out for his long walk. Perhaps two medium-sized walks, rather than one longer one, would help? Also, I should probably spend more time playing with his tug-rope in the mornings, once the kids have left for school. I resolve to make a few changes. As I write these words, he looks at me from the sofa, his legs like flagpoles pointing to the ceiling, his woolly head ruffled into the gap between the back of the chair and a cushion. I get up, walk over and gently tickle his tummy. With his adoring eyes and a wag of the tail, he gives me a warm look that says: “Hey!” in a different kind of language. “Hey!” I say back. Finally, I am reading him loud and clear. Wonderdog: How the Science of Dogs Changed the Science of Life by Jules Howard is published in May (Bloomsbury)The past week has seen artists such as Neil Young, Joni Mitchell, Graham Nash and Nils Lofgren stand up to Spotify, boycotting the streaming giant because of Covid-19 misinformation spread on its popular and exclusively available The Joe Rogan Experience podcast. Their protest has been applauded by many, but indie rapper Open Mike Eagle tweeted a very different perspective. “I love Neil Young but i’m not following that crazy rich man anywhere,” he wrote before adding: “what’s the protest option for non set for life musicians?” Eagle says that the logic of following in Young’s anti-Spotify footsteps seems convoluted to the point of absurdity, adding: “If we’re going to do collective work as musicians to try and affect something, why don’t we start with the low rates that Spotify pays musicians? That affects me more as a musician than whatever Joe Rogan said on his podcast.” While he wouldn’t give hard numbers, Eagle recalled earning 90% profits from each $10 CD he sold at the beginning of his career. Compared with the approximate .003 cents ra stream he earns from his approximately 120,000-150,000 monthly Spotify listeners, Eagle says that is “a pretty big change from the way things were”. The Young-Spotify saga (which prompted the platform to add an advisory pointing listeners to correct Covid-19 information, as the company began losing billions in market value before Rogan semi-apologized on Instagram) has also sparked debates in other genres. Eve 6, for instance, tweeted: “our stupid band gets close to a million monthly streams on spotify. spotify pays out .003 cents per stream. 100% of that goes to our former label sony who is a part owner of Spotify. this is why i’m mad.” What’s more: Eve 6 frontman Max Collins tells the Guardian many acts, including his band, cannot remove their music from Spotify because they do not own their masters. Some that do fret the loss of exposure and what income they do gain on the platform. One artist with such concerns is Nashville singer-songwriter Katie Pruitt, who tweeted: “Honestly wish I could take my music off Spotify as a form of protest but my broke ass actually needs the .00331 cents per stream. If you’re thinking about cancelling your Spotify membership please also consider buying concert tickets/merch/vinyl ect [sic].” While Pruitt didn’t respond to interview requests (along with reps for Young, Rogan, Spotify, Mitchell and Lofgren), a number of artists who commented on her viral tweet did. Anaheim Americana artist Bobbo Byrnes stood out as eager to join Young’s Spotify boycott, regardless of the impact on his comparatively meager bottom line. Byrnes says 2021 was his biggest year yet on Spotify and he was “added to 2,000 playlists and blah, blah, blah – I still haven’t broken 100,000 plays total, and I’ve now removed my highest play count songs”. Therefore, he didn’t feel he had much to lose by boycotting because, in his view, Spotify’s low payout per stream means “it takes over 10 million streams to make minimum wage”. Even though Eve 6 cannot yank its music like Byrnes did, Collins says he is “interested in hurting Spotify as much as possible because that is the only way we will ever wrest fair pay out of them”. Specifically: the band is attempting to change their profile header on the streamer to “delete spotify”. He points out this change is taking the platform “an inordinate amount of time … curious for a company taking an ‘anti-censorship’ stance”. While Eve 6’s methods may seem intense, Byrnes describes labels as “bullying” their artists into being on Spotify. The imprint that distributes all his music prior to 2020, when he began releasing albums himself, has refused his demands to pull those older songs from the streamer. Regardless, the music he has on Spotify and other such streaming platforms makes him merely one-fifth, at most, of what he earns by self-releasing and avoiding label gauging. Byrnes adds: “Spotify and streaming was a bad deal from the start. But we were told we just have to grin and bear it from our labels, because streaming is the future.” Such low offerings for musicians are all the more galling when Rogan is given unprecedented sums by the streaming service, and goes on to uncritically host anti-vax and anti-trans guests. Jennifer Moraca is a scientist by day who plays in the band the Odd Birds. As a non-binary musician, the Rogan podcast rhetoric led to a “breaking point”, despite not “blanket disagreeing with everything” the host and comedian says. Moraca admits that being subsequently compelled to pull the band’s music off Spotify was not a painful decision, because their albums that have been available to stream there for two years only made about $5 – less than one CD sale or a concert’s filled tip jar. Rogan’s licensing deal with Spotify, meanwhile, was worth $100m. Despite his growing infamy, Rogan and co are by no means the only source of misinformation in the streaming game. Jeremy Burchard, the co-founder of both pop-rock band Moonlight Social and a fintech platform called RootNote (designed to help artists better understand their content performance, revenue and growth opportunities), says he was pleased to see Pruitt specifically mention in her tweet “the money she gets per stream from Spotify”. That’s because that conversation becomes “conflated a lot” in his view “and people don’t realize that it’s different for every artist, just one of the many aspects of the current ecosystem that has led to a lot of frustration, confusion, misinformation and general ennui when it comes to specifically promoting your music on streaming platforms.” Since 2018, Moonlight Social earned about $7,500 from the masters side of their music on streaming, while their publishing earnings brought that total closer to $9,000. About half of that sum was from Spotify, which may sound impressive until Burchard says what they pay is “about half of what Apple Music and Amazon pay us”. And while the majority of their listeners are on Spotify, Moonlight Social are “definitely seeing more and more people choosing Apple Music, and Amazon Music to a lesser extent”. Burchard is also encouraged by the promise of other platforms. Patreon, for instance, allows for $5 a month pledges that would each be the equivalent in revenue of a Spotify user streaming an artist 1,500 times a month (the unlikelihood of which Burchard is quick to emphasize). He adds that performing on video livestreamer Twitch can drive major revenue for smaller artists (which he detailed in a recent video). While they are not direct replacements for streaming platforms, Patreon, Twitch and the merch store his band created on Shopify provide artists with huge opportunities, says Burchard. For instance, he adds: “Twitch is about interacting with viewers and providing value by performing and developing community. Spotify is all about volume. Crazy high volume just to get to sustainable revenue.” But when it comes to Spotify, Apple, or even Twitch, “it’s the same story”, according to Peter Tschmuck, professor for Cultural Institutions Studies at the University of Music and Performing Art Vienna. By that, he means they are, above all, “important promotional platforms”. Tschmuck says musicians need these services, especially the ubiquitous Spotify, to be heard, hence the trepidation around boycotts for so many. But as revenue sources, he stops short of calling the platforms “unfair, but it is uneven”. And because the systems of dividing such revenue are so complex – factoring in publishing and distribution, massive cuts for the platforms and labels, greater sums for artists that own their copyrights than those who do not, and much more – Tschmuck says the debate should be equally complex, and will likely remain ongoing. Rather than a definitive turning point, Tschmuck sees the current artist solidarity with Young as a chapter following many others, be it British MPs recently calling for a hard streaming reset to better protect musicians, or Taylor Swift bowing out of Spotify as far back as 2014. As Tschmuck puts it: “This is just another voice in the debate about artists not earning a lot of money from music streaming.”Like those of all political upstarts, Nigel Farage’s career is marked by generous helpings of luck. His story is full of tantalising what ifs, and in this definitive biography Michael Crick makes the most of them. Farage has survived three near-death experiences: twice in his early 20s, when he suffered a life-threatening car crash and then, months later, a misdiagnosed case of testicular cancer; and once in 2010, when on election day the plane in which he was flying for a publicity stunt got its banner caught in its tail fin and crashed in a field. Each time, Farage thought he would die; each time, somehow, he didn’t. He also benefited hugely from one death that did happen. In the 1997 general election James Goldsmith’s Referendum party outpolled the nascent Ukip by 8:1 and looked set to swallow its smaller, underfunded, chaotic rival. But then Goldsmith suddenly announced he was pulling back from politics and died of cancer 10 weeks after election day. Ukip picked up Referendum’s momentum and Farage never looked back. He has a rare ability to seize his moment and turn recklessness to his advantage. Though we only have his own word for it, Farage does seem to have approached impending death with a certain sang-froid, like the warrior-soldiers of the first world war with whom he is obsessed. As his plane went into a nosedive, he resigned himself to his fate and longed for a cigarette. When he emerged from the wreckage, bloodied but relatively unbowed, he made sure to allow a photographer on the scene to capture the image. It’s a good metaphor for his political fortunes. Farage takes his chances, and though things often blow up – planes, parties, countries – he walks away and on to the next caper. He’s also a seducer. This doesn’t just apply to his horribly messy love life, which Crick itemises with enough detail to convey the chaos. Some of the tales of wild womanising are boastfulness, some vengefulness on the part of embittered rivals or jilted lovers, but enough sound true to suggest that Farage doesn’t do boundaries. He’s insatiable, too, in his desire to have his political way with public figures who take his fancy. In 2004, he persuaded the former Labour MP and TV host Robert Kilroy-Silk to join Ukip, against the warnings of party colleagues who said it would end in tears. Kilroy-Silk’s profile helped Ukip to its best ever result in that year’s European parliamentary elections, pushing the Lib Dems into fourth place. Inevitably, he and Farage fell out, but by then Farage had got what he wanted. In 2014 he encouraged Douglas Carswell to defect from the Tories, giving the party its first MP. He and Carswell could hardly have been more different: his new recruit was high-minded, cerebral and deeply uncomfortable talking about immigration. None of that applied to Farage, who soon discovered he couldn’t stand the man. But Carswell served his purpose, and then, before long, he was gone. Farage induced Ann Widdecombe to stand for his new Brexit party in the 2019 European elections. She won a seat. But where is she now? And where is Farage? Dominating the headlines as ever. One word to describe this approach – if it weren’t a little pretentious for the Wodehousian world of Ukip – is Leninist. Many of Lenin’s Bolshevik colleagues worried that the party’s purity would be corrupted if they kept getting into bed with their political rivals. But Lenin’s line was why worry: they won’t corrupt us, we will corrupt them! Originally, Farage’s Ukip colleagues had argued that the party shouldn’t take up its seats in Strasbourg and instead should follow the Sinn Féin model of staying away (in that case from Westminster) to show principle. Farage disagreed: let’s go and see how much damage we can do. The answer, it turned out, was a lot, including to the EU’s generous expense accounts. His cavalier attitude has unsurprisingly left a litany of feuds in its wake. Crick, a notoriously tenacious political correspondent for Newsnight and then Channel 4, has dug deep in the mire of Farage’s fallings-out. He is excellent at following a virtual paper trail, particularly when it involves electoral trickery. His book is fair-minded, frequently amusing, but too long, in part because he insists on revisiting all the petty battles over money, seats, and party positions that have bedevilled Ukip. David Cameron once described the party as made up of “fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists” but here they emerge as more like a bunch of typical late middle-aged men, too many of them retired accountants with time on their hands. In the end, their endless fights about who shafted whom at which committee meeting gets a little wearing. Ukip has had 13 leaders over its three-decade history. But everyone knows there’s only one who matters. The Farage left standing at the end emerges with two key characteristics on Crick’s account. First, though he is a sharp tactician, he is a terrible strategist. He has stood for Westminster seven times and lost each contest, in part because he is hopeless at picking winnable seats. When they do arise, he often fails to notice. In 2014, Carswell easily won the byelection he triggered with his defection to Ukip. But because the party poured its meagre resources into that seat, it missed the chance to defeat Labour in another byelection on the same day, when it lost Heywood and Middleton by just 2% of the vote. Even Farage’s signature policy (a referendum on EU membership) was one he stumbled across by accident. For years he believed – idiotically – that the best bet for getting out of the EU was to get enough MPs in parliament to win a vote there on the issue. Second, Farage’s greatest gifts are his sense of humour and his stamina. Look up images of him on Google and see how often he is smiling. He can also get up and keep going the next morning whatever happened the night before, even after one of his legendary drinking binges. How he has survived the drinking is something even he doesn’t understand – as Farage says, many of his boozing buddies are now dead. The alcohol and the ability to laugh at himself are not things he shares with his current best political friend, Donald Trump, but the stamina is. Trump is one of the few people who seems to have seduced Farage rather than the other way round. Maybe that is the relationship that will finally end in tears for Farage himself. Crick asks the inevitable question – did Farage make Brexit happen? The answer is: he was perhaps necessary but certainly not sufficient. He kickstarted many of the developments that other, shrewder operators were able to exploit. Yet without his recklessness they may never have got the chance. He is the greatest support act in the recent history of British politics. Given the fate of so many of the leads, there are probably worse things to be. And he’s not done yet. • One Party After Another: The Disruptive Life of Nigel Farage is published by Simon &amp; Schuster (£25). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.At first sight, it could have been any normal year. Pilgrims, shrouded in white shawls, smiled as they walked the winding cobblestone streets, shaded from the glare of the midday sun by a sea of colourful umbrellas. Young men and women danced and sang, thrusting wooden sticks joyously into the air, as priests blessed onlookers beside a church carved into the mountainside. The Epiphany of Saint George, an ancient Orthodox Christian tradition, was celebrated in Lalibela on 26 January just as it has always been. The northern Ethiopian town, a Unesco world heritage site renowned for its dazzling rock-hewn churches, is coming back to life after several angst-ridden months on the frontline of Ethiopia’s devastating civil war. “It is a day of double joy for us,” says Father Tsige Mezgebu, the archbishop who officiated the ceremony. Yet beneath the surface of normality are telltale signs of a conflict that rumbles only a few hours’ drive away: soldiers slumped in cafes, armed police bristling behind the rows of priests, militiamen in faded uniforms, rusty Kalashnikovs at the ready. For those who thought the war was over, Father Tsige has a different message: Pray again for the fighting to end, and do not celebrate before it has. His words are a subtle riposte to the central government of Ethiopia’s prime minister, Abiy Ahmed. In recent weeks it has pledged there will be victory over rebels from Tigray, the region to Lalibela’s north led by the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF), and that, after more than a year of war, Ethiopia is entering a phase of reconstruction and national reconciliation. At the start of the year, on Ethiopian Christmas, the government released several high-profile political opponents from prison, including senior TPLF officials, in an act it described as “victor’s mercy”. On 26 January, it announced the lifting of a draconian state of emergency, imposed in November last year as Tigrayan forces fought their way to within 100 miles of the capital, Addis Ababa, before being pushed back by government forces abetted by newly purchased armed drones. “The whole world has accepted and recognised that we are indomitable and undefeated,” Abiy recently told triumphant supporters. Yet Lalibela, like much of Amhara, the country’s second most populous region and the focus of fighting in recent months, remains on a war footing. Several schools and some of the town’s hotels remain occupied by troops, as well as many of the fields and mud-brick homes lining the road from the airport. Tesfa Habte, head of the local branch of the ruling party, says authorities will continue to train people for battle in case Tigrayan forces overrun Lalibela again, as they did twice last year. “If the TPLF terrorist group is given time, they will reorganise and return to Amhara,” she says. “So we have to prepare ourselves.” The day before the Epiphany festival, at a military camp stationed in a kindergarten, volunteers known as Fanos took part in marching drills, shouting nationalist war cries and occasionally weeping with emotion. Those preparing to head into battle the next morning say the conflict is not over, and they are ready to fight to defend Amhara against what they see as a war of aggression waged by the TPLF. “The purpose of the TPLF is to destroy Ethiopia,” says Workeye Zenebe, a 21-year-old who left her home near the eastern Amhara town of Kobo soon after it was captured by Tigrayan forces last summer. Still lacking a gun, but soon to be dispatched to the frontline after just a month of rudimentary training, Workeye says she enlisted to avenge the rapes and killings she had seen in her village. “The TPLF is the worst thing,” she says. “They must be eliminated from the earth.” The TPLF, which dominated the central government before Abiy’s became prime minister in 2018, says its forces marched south into the neighbouring Amhara and Afar regions to break what the UN has called a “de facto blockade” of Tigray by Abiy’s government. Obstruction of aid delivery into the region, as well as ongoing fighting, has left millions severely hungry. More recently, the TPLF said it was withdrawing its forces from neighbouring regions to allow for a “decisive opening for peace” and to expedite the delivery of humanitarian aid. But fighting on several fronts has since continued unabated, with government forces conducting regular air assaults, including drone strikes on Tigray. On 8 January, at least 56 people were reportedly killed in an airstrike on a camp for internally displaced people, prompting aid agencies to suspend their work. A fortnight later, Ethiopia’s deputy army chief, in an apparent disavowal of official government policy, threatened that federal troops would return to “eliminate” the TPLF imminently. Then, on 25 January, the TPLF claimed they had been provoked into launching a new round of “robust” military operations in Afar. The vengeful cycle of atrocities and possible war crimes inflicted on civilians from all sides of Ethiopia’s civil war has left a poisonous legacy of mistrust. In Lalibela, though spared the worst, people reported cases of rape as well as looting of hotels, shops and homes during the four-month rebel occupation. Though they all expressed a strong desire for peace, most viewed the idea of negotiations, which the TPLF has called for and which the federal government is said to be considering, with suspicion. One such resident is Girma Sora, a Fano fighter with a uniform decorated with the Ethiopian tricolour flag, which was sewn in the tailoring shop he established after his release from prison four years ago. On returning to Lalibela alongside the advancing Ethiopian army last month, he found all his clothes had been stolen, along with the cement and construction materials he had been using to build a workshop next door. “I have to start all over again now,” he says. “The TPLF are terrorists, so the government has to destroy them.” As for Father Tsige, he applauds the government’s release of TPLF officials from prison, arguing that it was an important step toward making peace. But he too doubts the war is nearly over. “War is like football,” he says. “It swings one way, and then back the other.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:That’s where we will leave the live blog for Wednesday. Here’s some of what made the news today: The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said “no country is perfect and there are criticisms made of all countries” when asked to comment on an Amnesty International report that concluded Israel has conducted the international wrong of apartheid. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet said it was “terrible” that text messages allegedly between a federal cabinet minister and former premier Gladys Berejiklian in which the PM was described as a “complete psycho” were leaked. Government ministers lined up to deny they were the person behind the texts as the deputy PM called on the person to reveal themselves. Aged care and sports minister Richard Colbeck defended going to the cricket instead of a Covid-19 inquiry hearing stating that he “balances the elements” of his portfolio and that on 14 January “the predominant part of the day [was spent] on the aged care outbreak”. There were 40,090 new Covid-19 cases reported: 11,807 in NSW, 14,553 in Victoria, 9630 in Queensland, 1723 in South Australia, 549 in the ACT, 666 in Tasmania, 1133 in the Northern Territory and 29 in Western Australia. The national death toll is 3907 (+70): NSW 1451 (+27), Victoria 2054 (+25), Queensland 225 (+16), South Australia 121 (+one), ACT 26, NT three (+one), Tasmania 18 and WA nine. Covid rapid antigen tests will be manufactured in Victoria, premier Daniel Andrews announced. If approved by the TGA, full production could reach up to 50m Rats a year from October. Until tomorrow. Stranded travellers may be flown out of Coober Pedy, in South Australia’s north, with the road to Adelaide still flooded after heavy outback rains, AAP reports. Close to 20 people may be airlifted out by the RAAF, which came to the town’s aid earlier this week with 20 tonnes of food and other supplies. The Stuart Highway, the main road link between Adelaide and Darwin, remains underwater in parts with expectations it could be closed for close to two weeks. Premier Steven Marshall said he understood the frustration of those in Coober Pedy but the conditions in the area remained hazardous. “We really do need to be very clear that it is still a very dangerous situation,” he said on Wednesday. “We have roads we’re not sure of at the moment. There has been massive rainfall and this creates a dangerous situation.” The premier said a major logistical exercise was underway to repair road and rail infrastructure across the state’s north and also to ensure remote communities were supplied with essential items. As that exercise continued, the State Emergency Service said the risk of more rain across the north had reduced and water levels were dropping slowly. “But areas of water ponding will remain in the area for some time,” it said. Pumping was being explored as an option to allow repair crews access as soon as possible and alternative routes were being considered, with defence officials examining the possibility of using roads within the Woomera prohibited area. Repairs to rail lines across 300km of track were also underway but were not expected to be completed until mid-February. Rain across the affected area on Tuesday night was less than originally forecast after several centres copped a drenching the previous day, including Ernabella, on the Indigenous APY lands, which had more than 100mm. The deluge extended as far south as Port Augusta which had more than 50mm in a three-hour period, enough to turn roads into rivers and leave the town’s main oval underwater. Full damage assessments were continuing with a working group established to bring together data from local councils and state agencies. Police have used capsicum spray and made a number of arrests as they sought to move on protesters camped near the National Library in Canberra, AAP reports. It is understood as many as four people were arrested as police moved through the camp issuing orders. One man was also seen with a bandaged head being taken away by ambulance. It is the third day of an anti-vaccination mandate campaign, known as the Convoy to Canberra, which included a march on Parliament House on Monday and a rally outside the National Press Club on Tuesday where prime minister Scott Morrison was speaking. An ACT Policing spokesperson said police were engaging with protesters and campers located near the Patrick White Lawns adjacent to the library. “The rights of people to peacefully protest is always acknowledged by ACT Policing. However, when illegal actions take place, the people responsible will be dealt with in accordance with the law,” the spokesperson said. The National Capital Authority said in a statement it had asked the Australian Federal Police and ACT Policing to “take necessary action to enforce the laws and remove tents, camping infrastructure and vehicles from the site”. Unauthorised camping is not permitted in the parliamentary precinct or NCA-managed lands. Queensland’s education minister is urging Brisbane’s Citipointe Christian College to revoke student gender and sexuality contracts amid two probes into the controversial pacts, AAP reports. The Pentecostal school in Carindale is facing a possible review of its state funding and anti-discrimination action over the contracts sent to parents last week before the start of the school year next Monday. The pacts said “the college will only enrol the student on the basis of the gender that corresponds to their biological sex” and said homosexuality was “sinful”, like bestiality, incest and paedophilia. The Non-State Schools Accreditation Board is reviewing the contracts, about which complaints have also been lodged with the Queensland Human Rights Commission. Education Minister Grace Grace, who has a non-binary child, has urged Citipointe to rescind the contracts and protect their students’ mental health. “There is no need to put this additional stress with this hanging over the head of students simply because of their sexual orientation or their gender identity,” she told ABC radio on Monday. We’ve had a couple of years of very disruptive schooling with Covid. We certainly don’t need this now. And we certainly don’t need this kind of contract to go out without consultation, is what I understand, on a Friday afternoon before they’re due to start. The timing, I think, is very inappropriate. I think this is unacceptable and I call on them to withdraw these contracts as soon as possible. Citipointe reportedly sought legal advice before issuing the contracts and principal Brian Mulherin insisted that 350 families had been consulted about the contracts over the previous 14 months. “All these families acknowledged our Christian ethos as the basis for the education of their children,” he said in a video statement on Tuesday night. He said no Citipointe student had been expelled because they were gay or transgender. In all the excitement of the RBA and the blog handover, I neglected to mention the WA case numbers for today. There were 29 new cases reported in the west today, 17 of which were locally acquired. AAP reports dozens of teachers, students and parents face 14 days in quarantine after a teacher tested positive at Winterfold primary school in Perth’s southern suburbs. The school kept its doors closed on Wednesday to allow for deep cleaning. It will reopen on Thursday but with replacement teachers after isolation rules wiped out virtually all of the facility’s staff. Education minister, Sue Ellery, said the infected teacher had attended a professional development day on Friday with 55 other staff. They will all be required to quarantine for 14 days, along with 27 children who shared a classroom with the teacher on Monday. The children’s parents, and in some cases other household family members, will also have to isolate. Ellery had last week declared schools would be the “last to close” during WA’s Omicron outbreak, which grew by a further 17 local cases on Wednesday. She defended the government’s policy settings, insisting there was a pool of about 4000 relief teachers ready to step in during future outbreaks. “The particular circumstances here are that the whole of the teaching staff attended the professional development day on Friday. That doesn’t happen every day,” she told reporters. But WA Principals Federation president Bevan Ripp told ABC radio the pool of relief teachers had already been “absolutely decimated”. Government backbencher Jason Falinski has told ABC News whichever minister sent the text message in question about the PM is untenable in their position. I think their position as a minister would be untenable. It is a clear breach of character and I don’t think it’s appropriate to hold a position of office with that, with such a clear disregard for other people’s privacy and communication of that nature. Labor senator Malarndirri McCarthy says she has no doubt the person will be found out. There’s no doubt people in Scott Morrison’s cabinet and maybe the prime minister himself already know who this person is. Labor has called on the Australian government to “stand up for human rights everywhere” after Amnesty International published a report that concluded Israel has perpetrated the international wrong of apartheid. But while calling for the government to closely review the report’s “concerning” findings, Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong, stopped short of endorsing the use of the term apartheid. In response to a request from Guardian Australia for a response to the report, Wong said: The report’s findings are concerning, and we expect the government to review it closely, assess the situation on the ground, and make representations about Australia’s view. Labor does not agree with the use of the term ‘apartheid’. It’s not a term that’s been found to apply by any international court and is not helpful in progressing the meaningful dialogue and negotiation necessary to achieve a just and enduring peace. Australia must stand up for human rights everywhere. To be a credible voice we must call out human rights violations wherever they take place. We continue to call on all parties to the conflict to refrain from any actions that hamper peaceful outcomes for both the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. Comment has also been sought from the foreign minister, Marise Payne. As mentioned on the blog earlier today, Scott Morrison appeared to minimise the Amnesty findings by telling reporters “no country is perfect” and “there are criticisms made of all countries”. The prime minister said the Australian government would remain “a staunch friend of Israel”. In a 280-page report, released overnight, Amnesty International said it has concluded that “almost all of Israel’s civilian administration and military authorities, as well as governmental and quasi-governmental institutions, are involved in the enforcement of the system of apartheid against Palestinians across Israel and the OPT [Occupied Palestinian Territories] and against Palestinian refugees and their descendants outside the territory”. Agriculture minister David Littleproud is on ABC News, and was asked about the text messages we have been covering today about the PM. He says he “couldn’t give a rat’s” who sent the text messages, stating it’ll come as no shock some people in Canberra don’t like each other. I don’t think it’s a great revelation that some people don’t like one another down here in Canberra. That’s been the nature of this place for some time. It’s competitive. But it’s a place where it’s bringing together people from diverse backgrounds that wouldn’t necessarily be friends outside of politics. And so Parliament House and politics has brought them together. That’s a good thing because that diversity brings a different perspective and a different way of working through problems and we get better outcomes. The fact they don’t necessarily get on, I don’t think really matters. We’ve had great partnerships. Hawke and Keating, Howard and Costello. I don’t think they were sitting every Friday night knocking over a couple of tinnies over together but they got the job done and respected one another. The fact someone wants to play games is just a titillation of Canberra. He said there’s no doubt some in Cabinet “don’t think a lot of me either” but it’s about getting outcomes. Sometimes I don’t please people and other people sometimes don’t please me. But what is it important is outcomes. What happens to those people out there that we elected to serve and what they want to do is they don’t care about whether we like one another but they want to know we can work together to get outcomes. If you look at today’s results in the economy, we have worked well together despite some personalities may not get on. Seasonal workers have detailed exploitation at the hands of employers approved to run migrant worker programs by the federal government, AAP reports. The three workers from Vanuatu and two from Samoa moved to Australia to participate in a seasonal worker program designed to address workforce shortages in rural and regional areas. They told a parliamentary committee into job security that they had intended to support their families back home, where the economies have been affected by the pandemic. But the experience has been marked by squalid accommodation, bullying, exploitative working conditions and a lack of access to support services, the workers told the inquiry hearing on Wednesday. They said they are working 64 hours a week but earn just $100 after employer deductions which are not explained on their pay slips. Despite originally being offered a set hourly rate, they arrived in Australia to find they would be paid per tray of fruit picked, the workers said. “We are here, we work for the farms, we are part of (Australia’s) economic development so we should be treated the same as Australians,” said Moses, a seasonal worker from Vanuatu. “If you walk around the supermarket and you see all the beautiful fruits and vegetables, it is because of us. We contribute a lot.” Samoan worker Talipope told the committee he did not earn enough to support himself in Australia let alone his family. “It would have been better to just stay home, especially with the bad conditions here,” he said. Talipope lives in a small room, shares a bathroom with four others and a kitchen with 60 others, with no fans or air conditioning. He pays $150 for this accommodation which was organised by his employer. When he and his roommates became infected with Covid-19 they isolated for 10 days with little support. Solicitor and advocate Dana Levitt says the employers are making up their own rules and getting workers to sign exploitative contracts which are not translated into their own language. “Nothing in these contracts would stand up as legal in Australia and yet it is going unchecked,” she said. “The whole scheme is rife with abuse and no one is doing anything about it.” Australian Workers Union national secretary Daniel Walton says Australia’s reputation has been smashed worldwide because of the conditions of the farms. “The government priorities seem to be nothing short of finding more opportunities to allow more employees (into Australia) with less protections and less support,” he told the hearing. “Workers came to Australia expecting to get a fair day’s pay for a fair day’s work ... and they’ve turned up and it has not happened.” The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, has demanded an unnamed minister who leaked texts with Gladys Berejiklian which were heavily critical of Scott Morrison to “out yourself”, as speculation grows over their identity. But his office has been forced to clarify his comments, which were initially reported as Joyce claiming that the leaker was a woman - an assertion his office has disputed. In a press conference in his seat of New England on Wednesday, Joyce called for the leaker to fess up, claiming media would reveal their identity before long. “I would suggest that if you know anything about this don’t wait to be outed, out yourself,” he said. “And give an explanation. Maybe it was a bad day in the office, I don’t know. That’s a better way to do it.” “It getting out is one good rump steak, with horseradish sauce, vegetables and chips, two bottles of red wine, and some journo is going to say ‘you know who told me that? Blah blah blah.’ And she’s out.” However, Joyce’s office disputed a characterisation in initial reports, which latched onto the term “she’s out” and claimed the deputy PM had asserted the leaker was a woman. Joyce’s office told Guardian Australia that he had been speaking in a “colloquial” sense when he used the word “she” - as in, “she’ll be right” or similar - and did not mean to assert the leaker was a woman. Channel 10 political editor Peter Van Onselen, who broke the story on Tuesday, confirmed on Wednesday that the person who leaked him the texts was a federal cabinet minister. There are 23 ministers in federal cabinet, besides Morrison, eight of who are women. Earlier on Wednesday, Joyce called the leaker a “clown” in a 2GB radio interview. Foreign minister, Marise Payne, has “categorically” denied being the minister involved. “I have never held such an exchange with the former Premier, not have I ever used such language, and nor did I leak messages, if indeed they are genuine. It is ludicrous to suggest otherwise,” Payne’s statement reads, according to reports. Returning to the Senate hearing on Afghanistan: Daniel Sloper, Australia’s special representative for Afghanistan, says Australia calls on the Taliban to protect human rights - including the rights of women and girls and minorities - and media freedoms. He says there are rising concerns about allegations of “reprisal killings” and restrictions on education and employment opportunities for girls and women. Sloper is asked by a senator how confident we can be that the Taliban is not taking some of the aid that goes through the UN or partner agencies. Sloper tells the Senate committee hearing: It is a genuine concern, Senator. The United Nations is confident at the moment that the aid is flowing through to the people in most need. Partly that’s because even before the change in power there were many services provided by NGOs and the international community. Sloper says Australia’s assistance is being channelled through international partners that have experience on the ground. The decision to provide the assistance in that was “has restricted some of what we have provided to date” - but Sloper alludes to discussions about whether that approach needs to expand given the “dire situation” Afghanistan is now experiencing. We are very focused on humanitarian assistance, both because of the need to help the Afghan people in a dire situation, but also we would wish to see the country not implode, if I can be frank. Dfat officials have given an update on the number of Australians known to still be in Afghanistan: they have in their database 35 Australian citizens, 26 Australian permanent residents, and 148 foreign citizens who are immediate family members of Australian citizens or permanent residents. The former Facebook employee who blew the lid on what the company understood about the impact of its platform, Frances Haugen, is appearing before the parliamentary inquiry on social media and online safety tomorrow morning at 10am AEST. The Senate inquiry into Australia’s engagement in Afghanistan is hearing details of Australian officials’ “cautious” discussions with the Taliban. Katrina Cooper, a deputy secretary at the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, says Australia does not “recognise the Taliban regime”, but an Australian official “is authorised to engage with the Taliban” when in a group setting alongside Australia’s allies where it is seen as in Australia’s interests. In other words, those conversations with the Taliban occur “where we judge it’s worthwhile”. Cooper characterises it as a “cautious” approach. Daniel Sloper, Australia’s special representative for Afghanistan, is addressing the hearing by video conference from Doha, where he is based. He has personally been involved in two meetings with the Taliban alongside like-minded countries. Sloper says Australia works with other countries to secure commitments from the Taliban regime on “safe passage” (assisting people who wish to leave Afghanistan). Sloper says they also engage with the Taliban on the delivery of humanitarian assistance and ask that such assistance not be interfered with. Sloper says that commitment has largely been honoured, but from time to time “there have been localised incursions or seizures of goods or interference, particularly with women associated with the delivery of assistance”. On each occasion, Sloper says, Australia or other donors or UN officials have raised that directly with the Taliban leadership. The role of women and ensuring that assistance reaches women remains a concern and increasingly over the last few weeks, since the end of last year, we’ve seen a rise in reports of interference, including most recently a suggestion that in one province women who were unaccompanied - that is, working alone - were threatened with shooting. This has also been raised with the central leadership of the Taliban who has taken action in regard to that, and given us an assurance, but that is yet to be tested - it’s obviously very concerning. Protesters camped near the National Library in Canberra have been told they are in the area illegally and may be subject to fines and other penalties, AAP reports. It is the third day of an anti-vaccination mandate campaign, known as the Convoy to Canberra, which included a march on Parliament House on Monday and a rally outside the National Press Club on Tuesday where Prime Minister Scott Morrison was speaking. An ACT Policing spokesperson said police were engaging with protesters and campers located near the Patrick White Lawns adjacent to the library. Move-on orders may be issued in the coming days, police said. “The rights of people to peacefully protest is always acknowledged by ACT Policing. However, when illegal actions take place, the people responsible will be dealt with in accordance with the law,” the spokesperson said. The National Capital Authority said in a statement it had asked the Australian Federal Police and ACT Policing to “take necessary action to enforce the laws and remove tents, camping infrastructure and vehicles from the site”. Unauthorised camping is not permitted in the parliamentary precinct or NCA-managed lands. Organisers of a number of upcoming events, which have official permits, are seeking to set up temporary facilities in the area. An SAS soldier has told the federal court he saw Ben Roberts-Smith order another Australian soldier to execute an unarmed, kneeling Afghan man during a raid on a village in 2009. The soldier, still a member of the SAS and anonymised in the court as Person 41, said he was part of a raid that was clearing a compound in Afghanistan known as Whiskey 108 on Easter Sunday, 2009. He was investigating a room in the compound where he had discovered bomb-making materials and opium when he emerged into a courtyard to see Roberts-Smith and another soldier, known as Person 4, standing above a kneeling elderly Afghan male, near the entrance to a tunnel. The aged care services minister, Richard Colbeck, has told the Covid committee the sector is performing “extremely well” despite the Omicron outbreak. Colbeck says in 2020 there were 28,000 Covid cases in Australia, of which 2,051 were in aged care (7.2%), but now the figure is 1.8m Covid cases, of which 10,500 are in aged care (0.58%). Colbeck says that “despite all the difficulties” the sector is performing “so much better” with the proportion of total cases twelve times less than in 2020. For this he credits vaccination, improved screening processes for visitors, advice on infection control and training with the states. But Labor senator Katy Gallagher rejects the rosy view, noting: almost half of centres have outbreaks; there are 10,000 cases, with residents locked down; there are difficulties filling shifts and inadequate numbers of registered nurses; and there have been some 657 deaths in aged care. Colbeck’s response is that as case numbers go up generally, they also go up in aged care, and he rejects the suggestion that the “majority of deaths” are in aged care. This is slightly terrifying. The aged care services minister, Richard Colbeck, is now before the Covid committee in Canberra and is standing by his decision to attend the Ashes Test in Hobart on 14 January to 16 January, after declining to attend a Covid committee meeting on 14 January. Colbeck said that he “balances the elements” of his portfolio and that on 14 January “the predominant part of the day [was spent] on the aged care outbreak”. Colbeck outlined meetings he attended: with Lt Gen John Frewen in the morning to discuss aged care boosters; and a 3.30pm meeting with deputy chief medical officer and head of the aged care advisory group, Prof Michael Kidd. He said: I did make a specific decision about the balance of my portfolios. The Test match in Hobart was a significant event for Tasmania. As minister for sport I had to be conscious of that as an issue. I was very cognisant of the circumstances the [aged care] sector was in. All through that weekend I continued to work on matters in both portfolios, particularly aged care, even though it was a weekend and I attended the Test match. It was decision I made – and I have to live with it. Colbeck said he stands by the decision and it “would be hypocritical of me not to”. He denied putting sport above aged care, insisting he “continued to work on both”. I wasn’t just at the cricket – I continued to work with officials to manage the issues in aged care. Colbeck then counterpunched by noting that Labor’s shadow agriculture minister, Julie Collins, also attended, after leaving Anthony Albanese’s tour of regional Queensland. Some quick stats out of the federal Covid committee. An update on that grassfire in Victoria we reported earlier, via AAP. A grassfire burning near the Victorian regional city of Ballarat has been brought under control. Authorities had issued an emergency warning about 11.30am on Wednesday for the fire travelling in a northerly direction on Dalglish Road towards Beaufort. People in the warning areas of Beaufort, Brewster, Lake Goldsmith, Mena Park, Nerring and Trawalla were told leave immediately in a northerly direction towards Beaufort. By 1.20pm firefighters with help from air support had brought the fire under control and the threat was dropped to an advice level. Residents are urged to keep across potential changes in conditions. The federal government didn’t consider the possibility of a collapse in Covid testing before the Omicron wave, officials from the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet have told the Covid committee. Alison Frame, the deputy secretary of social policy, said that Omicron became “of concern” in late November, when the variant was not yet in Australia, but the government decided to delay border reopening to seek more time to get information about its severity, transmissibility and vaccine escape. Frame revealed that in December the health department commissioned new modelling from the Doherty Institute. Labor’s Katy Gallagher asked if a collapse in testing capacity was considered. Frame: Not that I’m aware of. Frame explained that earlier Doherty modelling considered a more transmissible variant, but the government believed that because PCR testing had held up well during “significant” waves in NSW and Victoria they thought it could cope with higher demand. She said: The preference was for PCR as a higher standard of testing. [We thought] rapid antigen testing may complement that, but it was not the mainstay. Frame then blamed the states, noting that “test to travel” requirements added 20% demand to PCR testing and that wasn’t anticipated. She said the system didn’t collapse, but PCR testing came under acute stress over summer in some jurisdictions. That’s where we will leave Philip Lowe and the National Press Club for now. My colleague Peter Hannam asked Lowe why he didn’t discuss climate change in his speech today. Lowe said he was keeping to time but it didn’t mean it wasn’t a focus for the RBA: Our institution is spending a huge amount of time on various perspectives based on the effects of investment. Particularly the implications of that. It has an effect on pricing, through the financial regulators and insurance. The risk profile of the banking system. The desirability of Australia as an investment estimation. I could give you a 50 minute talk on that but I will choose not to. Most of the questions to the RBA governor are variations on “when will interest rates rise?”, more or less, trying to get a different response. Lowe isn’t deviating much. Solving the housing affordability crisis cannot be solved through raising interest rates, Lowe says. The supply of housing is fixed. Demand goes up – what happens to the price? It goes up. And there’s nothing that we can do with monetary policy to offset that. And probably, and maybe last year or the year before, I was asked a similar question. I think that we have higher housing prices in this country because of structural factors. The choices that we make as a society give us high housing prices meant we all choose to live, most of us, in the fabulous cities on the coast. We want larger blocks of land. We have restrictive zoning. We’ve under invested in transport over the years. And we’ve got a tax system that’s conducive. That’s why we have structurally higher housing prices in the country - they’ve risen in the past year because of lower interest rates and the increased demand for space. But monetary policy can only do so much and we can’t counteract all of the other things if society doesn’t like the current level of housing costs, I think that there are structural solutions. But the solution isn’t to put up interest rates. Lowe says there is a “plausible scenario” where interest rates go up this year, but there are many other scenarios. There is clearly scenarios where we would be increasing rates later this year if some of the uncertainties are resolved in the way that I hope that they would. But time will tell. So, it’s certainly a plausible scenario that rates go up later this year. But it’s... You know, there are a lot of other scenarios as well. So the point I was trying to emphasise in my prepared remarks is that there are a lot of uncertainties, both on the supply side and the labour market dynamics. And because inflation is not that high at the moment, we can wait to see how those uncertainties resolve. If they resolve in one way, then we’ll raise rates. If they resolve in another way and it is still plausible that the first increase in interest rates is a year or longer away. Lowe says the timing of the federal election doesn’t factor into the RBA’s decision making at all, when asked about potential interest rate rises: What we’re driven by is achieving full employment, inflation consistent with the target. And there’s a lot of discussion of inflation at the moment, rightly so. We’ve got to remember that underlying inflation has only just got to the midpoint of the target point for the first time in seven years. So I don’t think that that requires an immediate response. We’ve been below that in previous addresses, people criticised us because inflation was too low. And we’re also on the cusp of this historic milestone of getting unemployment below 4% and I think that we can test how much we can get the unemployment rate down without having an inflation problem in the country. And that’s worth doing. I didn’t expect us to be in this situation. He said there is a lot of uncertainty, and the RBA has responded to changed circumstances. I hope that people can see that the fact that the economy evolves in unexpected ways and we respond to it and actually, this is good news. And I’m hoping that we get further good news over the course of this year, and as we make further progress towards full employment and we can sustain inflation at roughly 2.5%, we will be able to normalise monetary policy. I hope and expect that to happen. But as we know, unexpected things can happen and when they do, we’ll respond. Lowe says the RBA’s ending of its quantitative easing program is not a sign that interest rates will go up. The fourth and the final point is that the decision to end the bond purchase program does not mean that an increase in the cash rate is imminent. I recognise that in a number of other countries, the ending of the bond purchase program has been followed closely as it is expected to be followed closely by an increase in the policy rate. This is in contrast to earlier episodes of quantitative [easing] and it reflects the current circumstances of these countries, which are quite different to our own. As you can see here, while inflation in Australia has picked up, it remains substantially lower than the 7% rating in the United States, the 5.5% rate in the United Kingdom, nearly 6% rate in New Zealand, 5% in Germany. So, our situation is quite different. The pick-up in inflation Australia has also not been accompanied by strong wages growth as it has been in the United States and the United Kingdom where labour force participation rate with the decline. So the outcomes on inflation so far are quite different in Australia to many other countries. On inflation, Lowe says it has been driven by the strength of the economy and the supply disruptions, and has been boosted in particular by the 32% increase in petrol prices over the past year, and the 8% increase in building a new home. He said there was little discounting in December, due to the strong demand coming out of lockdowns, staffing issues, and supply issues. Lowe said underlying inflation will increase further, off the back of supply difficulties, and then labour costs will become the dominant factor driving inflation. Underlying inflation will be around 2.75% this year and next he says. Wages growth is just returning to the rates before the pandemic, but he said the inertia in wage growth comes from multi-year enterprise agreements which haven’t finished yet. He says the wage price index will increase 2.75% this year and 3% next. Turning to employment, Lowe says the RBA expects the unemployment rate to go to 3.75% by the end of this year, which will be the first time is has been below 4% since the early 1970s. The decline in the unemployment rate has been accompanied by a welcome decline in under employment. Under employment is the lowest that it’s been in 13 years. There’s also been a sharp rise in labour force participation in Australia. This stands in stark contrast to what’s happened in the United States, in the United Kingdom, where labour force participation has declined quite significantly. He says the demand for workers will remain strong, and job vacancies reached a record high in November, and this did not change with Omicron. More than half of the businesses that we’re talking to on a regular basis say that they intend to increase their workforce over the coming months, and very few business that we talked to say they’re going to cut their workforces. As you would all know, there’s been an increase in staff turnover and many firms are reporting to us that it’s quite difficult to find workers with the right skills at the moment. Once the labour market disruptions from Omicron have dissipated, we expect some of the additional demand for labour to be met with a further rise in labour force participation. Again, to reach new highs. We also expect an increase in average hours worked as part-time workers have more success in finding the additional hours that they want to work than they’ve had over recent years. So expecting both unemployment and underemployment to decline further. The Reserve Bank of Australia governor Philip Lowe has begun his speech at the National Press Club in Sydney. Lowe says the Omicron wave in Australia delayed the economic recovery but did not derail it: Prior to Omicron, the economy had established strong positive momentum. It had bounced back quickly following the Delta-related lockdowns. This momentum, though, wasn’t sustained into the new year with Omicron leading to many people having to isolate at home and interrupted supply chains, and it affected spending as people limited their activities. Yet, once again, the economy has shown remarkable resilience. Australians have adjusted and they’ve adapted and we still expect GDP growth to be positive in the March quarter, although only modestly so. The worst of the disruptive effects from Omicron now appear to be behind us. Supply chains and workforce management issues, which have been significant, are gradually being addressed. And I think as case numbers trend lower over the weeks ahead, the economy will bounce back strongly and we’ll see a sharp pick up in spending. While Omicron has delayed the recovery of the Australian economy, it’s not derailed it. He says the recovery has been underpinned by strong household balance sheets with over $200bn in household savings, an upswing in business investment, residential building to be completed in the next year, and governments planning significant infrastructure spend. Hi, Josh Taylor here taking over this afternoon. Thank you Caitlin for guiding us through this morning. RBA governor Philip Lowe is giving a speech at the National Press Club right now. I will provide updates as they come. With that, I will pass the blog to Josh Taylor’s capable hands. To recap, Australia has recorded 69 deaths today with case numbers still to come in the ACT, the NT and WA. This afternoon, reserve bank governor Philip Lowe is making his first major address of the year. We’ll bring you the highlights here. The ACT’s vaccination rate among five- to 11-year-olds is double that of Queensland’s. Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 69 Covid deaths: ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 549 In hospital: 61 (one person in ICU) NSW Deaths: 27 Cases: 11,807 In hospital: 2,622 (170 people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 16 Cases: 9,360 In hospital: 764 (49 people in ICU) South Australia Deaths: 1 Cases: 1,723 In hospital: 233 (21 people in ICU) Tasmania Deaths: 0 Cases: 666 In hospital: 16 (one person in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 25 Cases: 14,533 In hospital: 768 (99 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 29 In hospital: 1 Some reactions are filtering in responding to Morrison’s comments earlier today that Australia maintains a strong relationship with Israel and “no country is perfect”: Interesting. In South Australia, flooding in remote APY Lands communities as well as Covid-19 outbreaks are delaying the return to schools. Meanwhile, in NSW: Queensland’s chief health officer Dr John Gerrard says the child under 10 died in the past 24 hours and had a “very serious, underlying rare inherited medical condition”. “But even so, this as a very, very sad for the parents of this child”, he said. He said over the next weeks and months, it would be almost inevitable a child would come across Covid-19, so get them vaccinated. Of the 16 Covid deaths in Queensland overnight: Sadly, Queensland has recorded 16 Covid deaths in its latest reporting period. A child under the age of 10 is included in today’s toll. There have been 9,360 new Covid cases overnight. There are 764 people being treated in hospital with the virus including 49 in ICU. Queensland’s vaccination rates among children aged five to 15 are still lagging behind the national average. Just 35% of eligible children under 11 have received a vaccination dose, with schools returning this week. Queensland is providing a Covid update: In the past half hour, an emergency fire warning has arisen west of Ballarat and south-east of Beaufort in Victoria. A grass fire is travelling in a northerly direction towards Beaufort that is not yet under control. People in the warning area covering Beaufort, Brewster, Lake Goldsmith, Mena Park, Nerring and Trawalla are being urged to leave immediately. New Zealand has shortened the interval between second and third doses of the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine from four months to three, as the country races to inoculate its population against an Omicron outbreak. A million more New Zealanders over the age of 18 will be eligible for their booster from this Friday, the Covid-19 response minister Chris Hipkins says. Bringing forward the booster timing will help those who have been immunised more recently. It will mean more people, especially Māori, will be able to receive a booster before Omicron takes hold in communities. Hipkins says it is a significant step in the Covid-19 response and means a total of 3,063,823 people aged 18 and over – two thirds of New Zealand’s population – will be eligible for their booster from this weekend. More than 1.3 million people have already had a third dose: I urge every New Zealander who is eligible for a booster to get it as soon as possible. We are in a race against Omicron and the more people who are boosted the more we can reduce the impact of the outbreak. There were 142 new cases of Covid-19 reported across nine regions in the community on Wednesday, with six people in hospital. Economic policy is very much in the news mix this week, with prime minister Scott Morrison signalling he’d much rather talk about the economy than Covid. (Must be picking up a few vibes.) We also had the Reserve Bank of Australia returning from its summer recess/slumber with its first board meeting yesterday. As we noted here, the RBA is bowing to the reality that holding off on rate rises until 2023 and 2024 was not an option – especially when the jobless rate is at a 13-year low and heading below 4% this year on current predictions, and inflation is at its highest since mid-2014 and rising. Anyway, RBA governor Philip Lowe will address the National Press Club after midday today (AEDT), so more of his thinking will be revealed. And if we needed yet more, the RBA releases its quarterly statement on monetary policy on Friday. While the federal government is touting Australia’s unemployment rate heading to below 4%, it’s worth noting the US is already there, as are our mates across the ditch. New Zealand’s unemployment rate is down to 3.2%, the lowest on record (according to data going back to 1986, anyway). As the ANZ Bank notes, wages are rising in New Zealand, with labour costs up 0.7% in the December quarter from the previous three months, and they are up 2.8% from a year earlier. “But wage growth still has a way to go to keep up with inflation running at nearly 6% (and expected to peak at 6.4% in the current quarter),” the bank said. And that is a key issue in Australia too. The Commonwealth Bank sees signs of improvement, saying its internal data along with the ABS’s and private surveys show wages growth accelerated over the final quarter of 2021 and into this year. The CBA expects Australians’ wages to have risen at an annual rate of 2.5% in the final quarter, and will be growing at a 3% rate by mid-2022. Sounds promising but the underlying annual inflation rate was 2.6% in that quarter and the CBA is predicting it will be running at a 3.5% pace by then. In other words, wages here (and in NZ) are not keeping up with inflation despite all that tightening in the labour market. Consumers – and voters – may have more reasons to be grumpy. Back in Victoria, where premier Daniel Andrews has announced the state will produce its own rapid antigen tests: An aid worker currently based in Afghanistan has spelled out the “desperately heartbreaking” scenes in the country. Fiona McSheehy, an acting country director at Save the Children, addressed a Senate hearing in Canberra by videoconference. I’ve been involved in humanitarian work for more than two decades now and this is by far and away the most complicated and also deeply saddening situation I’ve ever been in. She said half of Afghanistan’s population was aged under 18 and “they have no real future at the moment”. She told the Senate inquiry: I’ve been here for about three months. Since I arrived, I have seen the number of children on the street increase dramatically. You see them rooting through things like rubbish bins to try to find things that they can then sell – plastic and things like that. We see them lined up in streets begging as people try to get to the airport, and they’re selling face masks one by one, that’s how desperate they are for an income. McSheehy said she had travelled to some of the provinces: Over the time I’ve been here I’ve seen more poverty and more desperation ... Every now again you’ll see a women and her children just sitting in the middle of the road begging for food and money, while cars and lorries drive either side of them. It is desperately heartbreaking. McSheedy said each morning in Kabul she saw men sitting in wheelbarrows waiting for a day of work. If she went back three hours hours later, most of those men were still there waiting because there was no work. That meant it was hard for parents to feed their children: It could be so easily resolved by both increasing the amount of money to come into this country and opening up the flow of money ... Banks simply will not transfer money into Afghanistan at this point in time. The Victorian Ombudsman announced today that she has launched an investigation into whether public and community housing complaints are being handled fairly, effectively and with sufficient focus on tenants. The investigation follows the release late last year of the state government’s Social Housing Regulation Review interim report, which included a recommendation that there ought to be greater focus on satisfying tenants, as the purpose of public and community housing is “to serve the needs of tenants”. Ombudsman Deborah Glass said in a statement that her office had received more than 1,000 complaints related to public and community housing in the past year: All too often we receive complaints about basic needs such as running water and electricity, and reasonably maintained, clean and safe premises. Many tenants tell us they don’t know how to complain or feel they are not being listened to. Some come to our office with concerns or misunderstandings about how their complaint was handled. Neither the number of complaints nor the common issues have lessened over the years. With the current government’s focus on housing reform and funding of community housing, it is timely to review the dispute resolution mechanisms in place. The Victorian Greens responded this morning, welcoming the investigation and saying it ought to be a “wake up call” to the state government. The Greens argued public housing in Victoria had been “left to rot” and that residents who do try to complain have found the system unclear and difficult to navigate. Samantha Ratnam, leader of the Victorian Greens, said in a statement: Public and community housing residents are treated like second-class citizens in Victoria and it’s unacceptable. For decades successive state governments have neglected our public housing units and left them to rot, while ignoring the concerns of countless residents. This investigation needs to be the writing on the wall for the current Victorian Government - public and community housing residents deserve the same rights and dignity as anyone else in this state. Back to Morrison’s press conference in Richmond, and he was also asked why he was waiting to open up Australia’s borders, which have been closed since early 2020 at the outset of the pandemic. The prime minister said that he empathised with remarks made by the Qantas chief executive Alan Joyce who has complained that the border closures now made no sense: He (Joyce) knows my very strong commitment to getting to that point as quickly and as safely as we possibly can so I’m looking forward to making progress on that issue. The key issue that I’ve tasked our health officials to advise me on in opening up the borders to international arrivals is what impact that might have on the hospital system and the pressures that could come from additional people coming into the country at this time. I just want to be confident that before we take that decision, that we are confident about the situation that our hospitals are in. Morrison said getting through the peak of the Omicron wave was key to being able to “open up that opportunity”: So I’m optimistic about that, but cautiously optimistic, as you’d expect me to be. He rejected suggestions that the country’s low unemployment rate was due to the closed borders, saying it was the result of the Coalition’s economic management. SA’s Covid-19 numbers are in, and there have been 1,723 new cases detected overnight. Sadly, there has been one further death. Still in Melbourne: Covid rapid antigen tests will be manufactured in Victoria, premier Daniel Andrews says. If approved by the TGA, full production could reach up to 50m RATs per year from October. New South Wales premier Dominic Perrottet has weighed in on what happened at Scott Morrison’s National Press Club address yesterday. He says it’s terrible for the media to be reporting the alleged comments about the prime minister. Perrottet says the content of the text messages is general gossip and the front-page reports are a poor reflection on politics and the media: I’ve always found the prime minister to be a thoroughly decent man. I think yesterday was a dark day for the media and politics generally in this country. To have news now reported from an unsubstantiated text message, I think, is terrible. We should be asking the prime minister about policy. This is ... this prime minister has worked tirelessly and I have seen that, day in, day out, for two years, during a pandemic. You haven’t had a leader, or the leaders, Labor and Liberal premiers and chief ministers across the country who have worked every single day during this crisis. We haven’t seen that since the second world war. To be in a position where we’ve now reverted from a media sense to smear and innuendo ... is a terrible day for politics in this country. Save the Children is set to appear before the Senate Inquiry into Australia’s Engagement in Afghanistan this morning on a panel with ACFID and World Vision Australia. Acting CEO Mat Tinkler will call for greater aid and funding in the region in the wake of the worsening humanitarian crisis. An excerpt from his speech: The humanitarian needs of Afghans has increased 32% since our original submission in October. It’s hard to contemplate a living hell getting worse, but it did ... By the middle of this year, Afghanistan’s economic freefall threatens to leave more than 95% of the population living in poverty. We welcomed Australia’s previous funding commitment of $100 million to Afghanistan. But the devil is in the detail: of the $100 million, $52 million was already funded in 21-22 and $35 million will be spent across the forward estimates to all to 2024, leaving about $13 million in new funding dedicated to the crisis this year. In the last week, the Australian Government has announced $1 billion to protect the coral reef, $50 million for koala conservation and $60 million today to counter violent extremism. We spent roughly half a billion dollars annually on our military engagement in Afghanistan. Yet in Afghanistan, we have committed a paltry $13 million in new funds to support 14 million children on the brink of starvation. The UN estimates A$7 billion in aid is needed for Afghanistan in 2022 to avert a humanitarian catastrophe. Australia and the world needs to ask itself: are we comfortable watching a projected 1 million children die of acute malnutrition this year? Tasmania’s case numbers are in. There have been 666 new Covid-19 cases reported overnight. There are 16 people being treated in hospital including one person in intensive care. If you missed it, Tonga, previously Covid free, has entered into a lockdown after recording two cases. Several countries including Australia, New Zealand, the UK, China and Japan have delivered aid to the nation. The last question at Morrison’s presser is on Israel. Amnesty International has accused Israel of committing apartheid. Does he condemn Israel in light of a comprehensive report detailing human rights abuses? Morrison says “no country is perfect”: Australia has been one of the closest and strongest friends of Israel of any nation in the world other than the United States and we continue to be a very strong friend of Israel. No country is perfect and there are criticisms made of all countries, but I can assure you that Australia and my government in particular will remain a staunch friend of Israel. Morrison is asked about aged care, where there are 11,000 Covid cases in NSW alone. Does he take responsibility for that? We have visited 99% of all aged care facilities and offered all residents in those facilities a booster shot – 70% of them have taken up those booster shots in those facilities. That’s the advice that I have now. Regrettably, the figures that I have, as recently as yesterday, is we have lost around 566 people in our aged care facilities through this most recent wave. They were in end-of-life care, in palliative care, and the balance also had – as you’d expect for people and at that advanced age, [they] had many other medical conditions. And yes, when they passed away, yes, they did have Covid, but they also had many other health issues that they were battling with and every life that is lost is a great sadness, but every life that is saved is a great blessing and in Australia, when we look at the outbreaks, they are 13 times greater in Canada than they are in Australia. Reporter: Prime minister, you said you’re sure that that minister in the leaked text messages is not sitting in your cabinet. What makes you sure? Morrison: I have confidence. Morrison is asked whether no matter who was in power, Australia would have a low unemployment rate by virtue of borders being closed. He reiterates Australia is on track for an unemployment rate with a three in front of it and repeats the party’s five point plan of keeping taxes low and getting rid of red tape. Then he abruptly flips to the coal industry: You won’t hear me flipping and flopping on whether we should build a gas plant up in Kurri Kurri ... you won’t hear me saying one thing about the coal industry in central Queensland and another thing in the inner-city suburbs of Sydney or Melbourne, you won’t hear me doing that. I didn’t do it at the last election. I haven’t done it as prime minister. What you hear from me is the same in the Hunter as you hear from me in the inner suburbs of Melbourne. Morrison says the Australian people don’t care about “scuttlebutt” (the leaked text messages); they care about their job, their security, their health and wellbeing: The scuttlebutt that runs around Canberra, who cares? What matters to people is keeping their jobs, keeping the cost of living down, electricity prices down 8%, what matters to them is to ensure downward pressure on interest rates ... how you manage the economy, how you manage the nation’s finances is what matters to the Australian people. Because that impacts them. What people say in text messages and on Twitter, frankly, that doesn’t matter anything to their job, to what they pay for at the supermarket or anywhere else for that matter, and so I’m focused on keeping Australia’s economy strong, keeping Australians safe, and standing up to those who would jeopardise and threaten Australia’s interests. Morrison is asked if anyone has confessed to him that they were the minister behind the leaked texts that have been doing the rounds since his National Press Club appearance yesterday. He says no. Reporter: Have you asked your office to investigate who that minister is? Morrison: I’m not fussed. Morrison is going hard on jobs, still. Here in Australia, “we build stuff”, he says, “we make stuff”: I’m very proud about what our manufacturing industry is achieving and a big part of our manufacturing industry is our defence industry. Here what you see is how they maintain what they build. We build stuff here in Australia. We make stuff here, in western Sydney, in particular and we look after it here in western Sydney as well. And yesterday I announced another big part of our manufacturing strategy which is about fusing together the great ideas of our wonderful world-class researchers, not far from here, at the Western Sydney University and the many campuses they have, with our best entrepreneurs and I have no doubt that those research entrepreneurs that we will see come out of this plan, many of them will come out of here in western Sydney. And they will start businesses here in western Sydney like so many have before and they will employ hundreds and thousands of Australians. That’s how you get unemployment with a three in front of it in the middle of a global pandemic. And that’s what this is all about, we’re about jobs. Morrison is touting the unemployment rate “with a three in front of it” to be achieved by the middle of this year again. He says the defence industry is “creating jobs”, for young women, for young men, “for those at all stages of life”: We have a five-point plan to grow our economy that we’ve been working through, which has ensured that Australia has had one of the strongest economies in the world through this pandemic. By keeping taxes low and cutting red tape, by ensuring they’re investing in the skills and infrastructure and growing our workforce that a growing economy needs. We’ve got unemployment down to 4.2%. We’ve got a million more women into work. Youth unemployment is now below 10% for the first time since 2008, and we’ve got our sights set on an unemployment rate with a three in front of it this year and we can achieve it because of the plan that we have put in place to take Australia through and our economy through this pandemic. Scott Morrison has stepped up at the Richmond RAAF base. He thanks “all of those who have served and serve today”. He says “no government” has done more to lift defence spending than the current one. Last year, I had the privilege to be in the UAE ... and meet with those who ... evacuated those out of Kabul and I thanked them because so many thousands of those who were liberated and evacuated at that time are now living in Australia safe with their families. Our defence industry is an incredibly important part of our sovereign defence capability and no government, no government has done more to lift our defence spending than this government. We have restored our defence spending to above 2% of the size of our economy, having inherited it at its lowest point than we had seen since prior to the second world war. In Alice Springs, the Todd River is currently sitting at 2.57 metres at its peak. Some areas of the NT have seen rainfall above 50mm in the last 24 hours, with a flood watch still in place for the south. FYI, the prime minister is due to hold a press conference from Sydney in the coming half an hour or so. We’ll bring you the updates here. A Sydney ophthalmologist who died of Covid earlier in the week has been remembered by the sector. Dr Con Moshegov, a father of two, practised at George St Eye Centre in Sydney’s CBD with expertise in anterior segment conditions, particularly cataract and laser eye surgery. The Australian Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgeons (AUSCRS) posted on its website paying tribute to Moshegov: We are very sad to hear of the loss of Con Moshegov after a battle with Covid. Con was one of our regular AUSCRS family members and is remembered as one of the most genial and vibrant individuals one could hope to meet. He contributed much to cataract and refractive surgery and we all vividly recall our conversations over the years. He will be sadly missed and we extend our thoughts and sympathies to his family. Back in Melbourne, Det Insp Ben Jarman is set to hold an appeal for information following the incident at 2pm today. Morrison is asked about the text messages calling him a “horrible person” again. He says Australians care more about jobs than gossip: What people send as texts to each other, what does that mean for someone’s job or if their kid’s getting training or the cost of living? ... What scuttlebutt goes around really doesn’t distract me, all you’ve got to do is look at someone’s Twitter feed and you can see more bile that comes through ... which is another problem. As long as you keep focusing on the things that matter, that’s all Australians expect of us ... whether it’s stopping the boats ... with Anthony Albanese, what you see is not what you’re going to get ... what you see on the other side of the election is what you’re going to get ... the guy’s all over the shop. Hadley continues: The Newspoll was saying in 2019 you were going to get bashed up and it didn’t turn out that way. Morrison vehemently agrees: I know a lot of tradies listen to you, Ray. There are more apprentices in trade training than ... when records began in 1963. ... We increased the wage subsidies for them and I’ve spent the last two years meeting those apprentices ... and they’re still on the tools, they’re still in the jobs. On economic security, you’ve got Josh Frydenberg or you’ve got sneaky Jim [Chalmers]. In defence you’ve got Peter Dutton ... and someone most people wouldn’t have heard of, Brendan O’Connor ... You vote Labor, you get Labor. Morrison says the line of questioning at yesterday’s Press Club was “pretty brutal”, but it didn’t come as a surprise: I’m happy to face the music, I’ve been doing it all throughout my political life ... it was pretty brutal yesterday but I thought it would be, frankly. If they’re prepared to provide the same blowtorch to Anthony Albanese then fair enough, that’s a matter for them. The PM is up on 2GB with Ray Hadley now. Hadley begins: I don’t often feel sorry for people, I felt a bit sorry for you yesterday. More from Peter van Onselen on those leaked text messages. He has also confirmed they were sent during the time of the 2019/2020 bushfires. There have been a total of 1,399 deaths in NSW over the course of the pandemic. Some 61% of cases in Victoria in the past fortnight have been people in their 30s and under. We will see how the caseload changes with students returning to school. Turning to Victoria, hospitalisations have declined for the seventh day in a row. There are 83 fewer people in hospital with Covid-19 since yesterday, and seven fewer people requiring intensive care. Ventilation numbers are staying relatively stable at 31. But there have also been 25 deaths overnight. It appears there has been an earthquake in Darwin following heavy rain and storms overnight. We are still seeing a steady decline of hospitalisations in NSW. ICU patients are down 8.6%. But it comes with 27 deaths overnight. Victoria’s case numbers are also in. There have been 14,533 new Covid cases detected overnight from PCR and rapid antigen tests. Sadly, there have been 25 deaths recorded overnight. There are 768 people being treated in hospital with 99 people in ICU, including 31 requiring ventilation. NSW case numbers are in. There have been 11,807 new Covid cases reported overnight from PCR and RATs and, sadly, 27 more deaths. There are 2,622 people being treated in hospital including 170 requiring intensive care. If you missed it, Glenn Wheatley, who managed high-profile Australian artists including Little River Band, John Farnham and Delta Goodrem, has died aged 74, reportedly after being hospitalised with Covid-19. On those leaked text messages: “Not actually all the milk even comes from a cow any more.” Former Australian of the Year Grace Tame has broken her silence on her frosty exchange with the PM at The Lodge – condemning “civility for the sake of civility”. ACTU secretary Sally McManus has weighed in. This morning, acting employment minister Stuart Robert said border closures were only partially responsible for the low unemployment rates, and it had been accompanied by investment in training at “unprecedented levels”. The Labor leader’s response to Scott Morrison’s assertion the unemployment rate will “have a three in front of it” by the middle of 2022: He’s been chatting education this morning on Facebook live. Speaking of which: Scott Morrison is asked about those leaked text messages between a cabinet minister and former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian put to him at the National Press Club that suggested he was, among other things, a “horrible person”. Berejiklian said she didn’t have a recollection of the messages – again, not an outright denial. Morrison’s response is to turn it on the questioner: I can’t speak about it because I don’t know anything about it, Gladys doesn’t know anything about it and those that are raising it, well, frankly, there are a lot of questions being asked about them at the moment. Scott Morrison is now up on AM. He is asked why an $800 bonus for aged care workers has been lamented as “not enough” by many in the sector: That is being dealt with by the Fair Work Commission ... we have a process for setting wages and that is being done ... it’s not the first time we did it, we did it earlier in the pandemic and the same union leaders criticising us now told us it was a very good initiative ... we’re providing that extra support to keep people there in the aged care facilities. That help has been coming and it’ll continue to flow. It’s incredibly tough in the aged care sector during this pandemic ... I’m not disputing the fact it’s really tough for the aged care sector providers, it’s really tough for the staff ... where more can be done, we will be doing it ... Pandemics are tough, they’re really tough, and they’ve been toughest on those working in our health sector and in aged care. Asked why rapid antigen tests took so long to arrive in Australia, and remain in short supply, Scott Morrison said they were only approved for home use in early November: Right throughout this pandemic it’s been put to me over and over again, are you following the health advice? Are you listening to the health advice? Health advice was that the TGA would need to approve ... and I am not criticising them at all, because rapid antigen tests are not as good as PCR tests. Because PCR tests are reliable and the Delta phase of the variants, the Delta phase, PCR tests was the best thing to do. Omicron changed all of that and no country in the world could avoid Omicron. The PM is asked about the question he was unable to answer yesterday – the cost of basics like bread and petrol and, in this day and age, rapid antigen tests. Scott Morrison says he “didn’t hear” the question about RATs. To be honest, I heard bread and milk on the question yesterday, it was a pretty robust and torrid time at the press club yesterday, I must admit I didn’t hear the question about RATs, that’s the honest truth. Didn’t hear it. It’s about $15 to $20 and they can be less than that ... if it gets above that they will be coming after those who are price gouging, so to be honest I didn’t hear that part of the question, I heard bread and milk and for the record, it depends which bread. How many types of different milk, not actually all the milk even comes from a cow anymore ... there are so many different things that people have available but if it’s two, three bucks, you can get petrol from $1.60 to $1.80. That’s what it is. It’s one of those old things they do with the press club to make a bit of a headline. Asked if he is a “sourdough or multigrain”, Morrison says: I am just normal white bread toast. That’s me. Meanwhile, Scott Morrison has appeared on Sunrise this morning after his National Press Club address yesterday afternoon. He was immediately asked about those leaked texts between a cabinet minister and Gladys Berejiklian. Had he spoken to the former NSW premier? No, I haven’t had the opportunity to do that but I appreciate what Gladys said yesterday in our own dealings with each other ... I think we work very positively and I think we work very well together as a premier and PM to do very great things from New South Wales in particular ... I can’t speak to the other things that are all anonymous and she doesn’t recollect it but it’s certainly not a conversation we have ever had. People say nasty things about the prime minister all the time, they say nasty things about people in the media – just switch on social media. You will get yourself quite a giggle and I get one all the time. It goes with the job. Patricia Karvelas asks Stuart Robert a question that stumped the prime minister yesterday afternoon – what’s the price of bread, milk and petrol? Robert says he’s a “big french baguette guy” and the last time he filled up it was $1.69. But with the amazing choice we have these days, there’s a lot of price disparity. Robert says his milk is around two bucks, but his children are into almond milk and beans – “I think it’s soy.” Asked why Scott Morrison couldn’t answer the question, Robert says if the PM’s wife Jen was sitting with him “she’d be able to rattle off all the things they buy”. Acting employment minister Stuart Robert is up on Radio National. He says “as a goal” the government wants to see the unemployment rate drop below 4% no later than the second half of this year. We’re seeing a generation of skills coming through that we hadn’t seen for a long, long time ... this is something we are very committed on seeing happen because it just changes lives ... The economy always throws up jobs that meet demands and needs ... the economy will move around, there will be a portion that are part time, there are a portion that are casual ... it’ll be right across the board. Asked how vital the shut borders have been to low unemployment, Robert says: No, the borders have been closed, so there’s been less visa holders, [but] there’s been a greater investment in training at unprecedented levels ... we’re seeing a great rate of economic activity ... huge investment in training and, of course, we’re seeing the borders being closed but they’re open now. The Australian Council of Trade Unions has responded to prime minister Scott Morrison’s National Press Club address, downplaying his confidence Australia’s unemployment rate would drop below 4% by next year. ACTU secretary Sally McManus said the casualisation of the workforce had contributed to the low unemployment rate, which is now sitting at 4.2%. She said lowering unemployment rates didn’t necessarily translate to better pay or job security for workers. This came after former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian released a statement in response to an explosive question at the address that she had called the PM a ‘horrible’ and untrustworthy person in leaked text messages. Berejiklian said she had “no recollection” of such messages – not an outright denial by any means. Meanwhile, the government’s handling of Covid-19 in aged care will be put under the microscope when a parliamentary committee meets today. Aged care minister Richard Colbeck will be grilled by senators after large outbreaks at aged care facilities across the country, as well as shortages of rapid antigen tests and protective equipment for staff. It was revealed last month that the minister said he was unable to attend a Covid-19 committee hearing on the same day he attended the Ashes Test match in Hobart. And a supercell thunderstorm rolled through Brisbane and Logan yesterday afternoon, leaving tens of thousands of properties without power. Cleaning up continues in the area, with roofs ripped off some homes and reports of a tornado that briefly touched the region. More wild weather is expected today. Caitlin Cassidy here to guide you through this morning’s news. There’ll no doubt be more fallout from the press club address, so let’s dive on in.A dispute about the takeover of one of the UK’s biggest GP practice operators by the US healthcare giant Centene Corporation has reached the high court, in a case that could overturn approval for a deal condemned by campaigners as “privatisation by stealth” of the NHS. The request for a judicial review, which will be heard in the high court in London on Tuesday and Wednesday, was crowdfunded by a coalition of NHS campaign groups and the Unite union. It is being brought by Anjna Khurana, an NHS patient and Islington councillor. She claims she is one of 375,000 patients across London who were only informed of the takeover of their GP surgeries after the event. Health campaign groups Keep Our NHS Public, 999 Call for the NHS and We Own It have joined Unite in bringing the case. Two crowdfunding campaigns by Khurana have raised more than £77,000. A year ago, Operose Health, a UK subsidiary of Centene, acquired the privately owned AT Medics, which was set up in 2004 by six NHS GPs and ran 37 GP practices across 49 sites in London. The merger created the largest private supplier of GP services in the UK. The group now serves 570,000 patients across 67 practices, and employs 1,500 healthcare professionals, including 350 GPs. Alongside GP practices, Centene’s UK interests include Circle Health Group, one of Britain’s biggest private hospital operators. A coalition of doctors, campaigners and academics has voiced concerns in a letter sent last year to the then health secretary, Matt Hancock, describing the takeover as “an example of the privatisation of the NHS by stealth”, and asking him to order an investigation by the Care Quality Commission. They claimed at the time the change of control was approved for eight practices in the London boroughs of Camden, Islington and Haringey in a virtual meeting on 17 December that lasted less than nine minutes, during which no mention was made of Centene and not a single question was asked. Approval was granted by the North Central London clinical commissioning group (NCL CCG), a local NHS body that purchases health services from GPs, hospitals and others using taxpayer funds. The judicial review will focus on the lack of consultation of patients, and will ask the court to quash the decision by NCL CCG. Since the news broke, hundreds of patients, councillors and members of the public have written letters and protested outside surgeries. Khurana said: “Like everyone else, I want to feel I can rely on my GP to be on my side. That is what we get with the NHS. But without my knowledge, my surgery has been sold to a giant American healthcare company, one with a very poor reputation. How can that be right? I needed to stand up and make my voice heard. So many people have been in touch to let me know they support me that I know I am not alone. We cannot allow this stealth privatisation of the NHS to carry on.” The court will rule whether, in making their decision, the NHS commissioners acted unlawfully in three respects: misdirection – they failed to consider all the implications of the takeover because they assumed they had no choice but to accept and approve the proposal; lack of due diligence – they failed to give due consideration to the risk to patients, if the GP contracts they agreed to transfer to Operose Health turned out not to meet its parent company Centene’s profitability targets; and lack of consultation/involvement of patients. An NCL CCG spokesperson said: “We are committed to offering residents high-quality, safe and accessible care. Our commissioning practices in relation to AT Medics have followed the same rules and guidance we apply to all our GP contracts, with decisions informed by legal and national guidance. “The CCG is defending its decision and the process and will not comment further while a judicial review is under way.” Dr Louise Irvine, a London GP and member of Keep Our NHS Public, said: “Of course patients are worried. When a large American corporation like Centene takes over this many GP practices we have to question their motive. It’s a deeply worrying situation and I am delighted that the high court has seen the important public interest in this case.” Doctors in Unite supported a protest outside the high court at the Royal Courts of Justice, with more protests planned on Wednesday. The Unite general secretary, Sharon Graham, said: “This is a landmark case in the fight against the accelerating pace of privatisation of the NHS in England. Unite, with 100,000 members in the health service, fully supports the judicial review. We will not allow our GP services to be hived off to profit-hungry American private healthcare companies.” An Operose Health spokesperson said: “It is not appropriate for us to comment as the judicial review is between an individual and the North Central London Clinical Commissioning Group over issues of process.”Ben Roberts-Smith shot dead an unarmed civilian outside a compound in Afghanistan – firing his machine-gun into the back of the man lying on the ground – one of his former SAS comrades has told the federal court. Minutes earlier, the court was told, Roberts-Smith had allegedly ordered a subordinate soldier to execute an elderly man. In a day of extraordinary evidence, a still-serving member of the SAS gave evidence he saw the decorated soldier “frog-march” an unarmed captive Afghan man outside the compound, and throw him to the ground on his back. “‘RS’ then reached down and grabbed him by the shoulder and flipped him onto his stomach. Then I observed him lower his machine gun and shoot approximately three to five rounds into the back of the Afghan male.” Roberts-Smith then turned to his comrade and said “are we all cool?,” the court heard. The SAS soldier, anonymised in the court as Person 41, was part of a raid on a compound in Uruzgan province known as Whiskey 108 on Easter Sunday 2009. Roberts-Smith is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts Smith denies any wrongdoing. The alleged murders of two men - one an elderly man, the other a disabled man with a prosthetic leg - who were allegedly found hiding inside a secret tunnel inside the compound, are two of the key allegations made against Roberts-Smith as part of the newspapers’ defence. Roberts Smith has previously given evidence describing the allegation that he ordered the killing of the elderly man as “completely false” and saying that other man killed was an insurgent carrying a weapon outside the compound. Whiskey 108 was a compound in the village of Kakarak, known as an insurgent stronghold, on the western side of the Dorafshan River, and nearby to an allied forward operating base. On 12 April 2009, Australian troops were ‘clearing’ the compound, checking for insurgents, weapons, and bomb-making materials. Person 41 gave evidence he was outside a walled compound when, he said, he saw Roberts-Smith “frog-marching” an Afghan man away from the compound entrance. “He [Roberts-Smith] had his machine gun in his right arm, holding it up, and sort of frog-marching the Afghan by the scruff of the neck with his left arm. “I turned to face ‘RS’ to see what was happening. He then proceeded to throw the Afghan male down onto the ground. The Afghan male landed on his back. ‘RS’ then reached down and grabbed him by the shoulder and flipped him onto his stomach. Then I observed him lower his machine gun and shoot approximately three to five rounds into the back of the Afghan male.” “After he’d done that, he looked up and saw me standing there, and looked at me and said ‘are we all cool, we good?’ And I just replied, ‘yeah mate, no worries’.” Person 41 said he did not walk towards the man’s body to examine it after the man had been shot. He did not comment on whether the body had a prosthetic leg. Person 41 told the court that, earlier in the raid, he saw and heard Roberts-Smith order a subordinate soldier to execute an elderly man allegedly found inside a tunnel in the compound. He was investigating a room in the compound where he had discovered bomb-making materials and opium when he emerged into a courtyard to see Roberts-Smith and another soldier, known as Person 4, standing above a kneeling elderly Afghan male, near the entrance to a tunnel. Person 41 said: “RS [Roberts-Smith] walked down and grabbed the Afghan male by the scruff of his shirt.” He said Roberts-Smith walked the man about two metres until he was in front of Person 4, “then kicked him in the back of the legs behind the knees until he was kneeling down … RS pointed to the Afghan and said to Person 4 ‘shoot him’.” Person 41 said he did not want to witness what he realised was about to occur, and stepped back into the room where he had previously been. He said he heard a muffled round fired from an M4 rifle – “I’ve fired thousands of those rounds and I know what they sound like”. He waited another “15 or so seconds” before stepping back into the courtyard. He said Roberts-Smith was no longer in the courtyard, but Person 4 was standing above the Afghan male, who was dead from a single bullet wound to the head. He inspected the body. “There was quite a lot of blood flowing from the head wound.” The two Australian soldiers did not speak. “He seemed to be in a bit of shock to me.” The court heard Person 41 had suffered anxiety over being subpoenaed in this case and he was queried by lawyers for Roberts-Smith over who he had spoken to about what he had seen in Afghanistan. Lawyers for Roberts-Smith also drew attention to alleged contradictions in the newspapers’ case. In the newspapers’ defence, it is alleged the elderly Afghan was executed on the orders of a different soldier, known as Person 5, and that Roberts-Smith was only a bystander who did nothing to intervene. Person 41 was also queried about antipathy towards Roberts-Smith within the SAS. He agreed there were “haters” within the regiment, jealous of his decorations. Before giving his evidence, Person 41 sought, and was granted by the judge, a certificate under section 128 of the Evidence Act, protecting him against self-incrimination. Person 4 is scheduled to give evidence, on behalf of the newspapers, later in the trial. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Roberts-Smith’s defamation trial recommenced on Wednesday in the federal court after another months-long delay caused by Covid restrictions and lockdown. During earlier evidence before the court, Roberts-Smith was questioned over the alleged murder of the elderly man inside the compound. He said he never ordered the man shot and allegations he had were “completely false”. The events of Easter Sunday 2009, in Whiskey 108, in a village known as Kakarak in Uruzgan province, have emerged as central to the allegations made against Roberts-Smith, a Victoria Cross winner, and one of Australia’s most decorated soldiers. The newspapers have also alleged that during the same raid on Whiskey 108, Roberts-Smith dragged the detained Afghan man – who had a prosthetic leg – outside the compound, threw him to the ground, and shot him with a machine-gun “10 to 15 times”. Roberts-Smith says he killed the man with the prosthetic leg, but that he was an insurgent, running outside the compound, and carrying a weapon. Roberts-Smith insists the man was a legitimate target, a threat to soldiers’ safety, and was killed within the laws of war. The prosthetic leg was later souvenired by another soldier and used as a drinking vessel at the Australian soldiers’ unofficial bar on base, the Fat Ladies’ Arms. Roberts-Smith said he never drank from the leg, though conceded in court he “contributed to and encouraged a culture where it was acceptable to drink from the leg”. He has been photographed alongside soldiers who were drinking from the leg. The trial, before Justice Anthony Besanko, continues.Most of Tommy Jessop’s acting plans are, he says with a smile, “top secret”. His biggest ambition is to play James Bond, and there’s an opening now. Jessop laughs, and says he has been told he looks like Bond. “It’s when you’re wearing black tie,” says Jessop’s mother, Jane, who is sitting next to him. Jessop has had cause to wear black tie a fair amount – last year, Line of Duty, in which he starred as murder suspect Terry Boyle, picked up a National Television Award. Jessop’s first big role saw him star alongside Nicholas Hoult in the 2007 BBC drama Coming Down the Mountain, which was nominated for a Bafta. Last year was a particularly successful one for Jessop. As well as appearing in 2021’s biggest TV show, he has been filming a Steven Spielberg-produced second world war drama, Masters of the Air, for Apple TV+ (those are the rumours, at least, after he was photographed on set). He was awarded an honorary doctorate at the University of Winchester and, most significant of all, added his voice to the campaign for the Down Syndrome bill, which passed its second reading in the Commons in November. “We can be proud and honoured that it has been passed,” says Jessop. “It can also be history-making, changing the world for the better. We really have waited long enough to be treated equally and it really is time now for people living with Down’s syndrome to have the same chances in life that anyone else has, to live their lives to the full, and not get hidden away.” Likely to become law this year, if passed at further stages, it was introduced as a private member’s bill by the Conservative MP Liam Fox, and will place an obligation on local authorities to assess and meet the needs of people with Down’s syndrome across aspects of life including healthcare, education and housing. People with Down’s syndrome are born with an extra chromosome, which causes a degree of learning disability, and are more likely to have a range of physical conditions. There are about 47,000 people with the syndrome in the UK. Previously, people with Down’s syndrome were not expected to live rich lives and had short life expectancies but this is improving all the time; now many live into their 50s and 60s, with some into their 70s. Fox said it would be “a stain on our country and a scandal” not to make provision to ensure they live full, independent and happy lives. Although there is existing legislation, says Peter Brackett, chair of the National Down Syndrome Policy Group (NDSPG), “it will clarify what the position is, what support people with Down’s syndrome should be getting”. It will help, he says, professionals providing services, as well as people with the condition, and their parents and carers, to navigate the system. Brackett’s 15-year-old son has Down’s syndrome and he says “at every stage in his life, whether healthcare or education, we’ve had to go through the process of explaining what his requirements are, and almost educate the professionals. Unfortunately, we hear that from everybody else. There has to be a more efficient way of doing this, and it has to be something that is not dependent on where you live, the postcode lottery. It’s all about clarification of existing duties, and ensuring people understand what they should be doing.” By treating people with Down’s syndrome as a specific group – though this, too, has been criticised as divisive, leaving out those with other learning disabilities or chromosomal disorders – it will identify and meet their appropriate needs, as the 2009 Autism Act was designed to do for people with autism spectrum disorder. How will life change for people with Down’s syndrome if the bill passes? “Hopefully for the better,” says Jessop. “To get proper care from people who believe in them – teachers, doctors, nurses and employers too, just like other people, so we can all be healthy, happy and living our lives to the full.” For himself, he says, he has always “lived my life to the full. I have also been campaigning for better chances in life for people with Down’s syndrome all my acting life.” Jessop is one of a number of people with Down’s syndrome who have worked with the NDSPG, and other organisations, giving talks to universities and conferences, and being interviewed on podcasts and in the media. “It involves speaking up, and recording video messages to MPs, speeches, press interviews,” he says. “What [people with Down’s syndrome] need is to have a voice, so they can say what they really want in life.” Why does he think it has taken this long for people with Down’s syndrome to be given a voice? “I think [other people, including politicians] tend to label us, saying that we cannot do things. Except we can do things. People think we are all the same but that is wrong. We all are different with different skills and personalities.” When we speak over Zoom, Jessop is at home near Winchester and it’s clear he has a keen sense of humour – he joins the call, ensuring his novelty T-shirt with a picture of a pizza on it, is on full show. Jane sits nearby, helping him when he needs it, which he rarely does. Instead, he teases her. At the start, Jessop’s parents didn’t take his professional acting ambitions seriously. Did they realise they’d got it wrong when he was cast in Coming Down the Mountain? “Er, no,” he says, deadpan. “We did!” protests Jane, smiling. “Walking on set, the very first day, there were 100 people, and huge contraptions for cameras and lights and things. I thought: ‘Wow, I hope Tommy can pull this off.’ And then they got Bafta-nominated so …” Jessop laughs. He is one of the UK’s most high-profile people with Down’s syndrome, although the field is not exactly crowded. How does it feel to be a role model? He smiles broadly. “I am really proud and honoured to be noticed that way. Hopefully I can inspire other people as well.” Would it have helped to have seen someone like him on primetime TV when he was growing up? “Yeah,” he says. He would love to see more people with Down’s syndrome being cast in high-profile shows “because it will make a difference. You can see what we truly are capable of.” Jessop is the middle of three children; Jane was a publishing and marketing executive, and his father is a retired doctor. As a child, says Jessop, he liked performing. “I do like making people laugh and cry, in real life and in character.” He attended a mix of mainstream school and schools for those with special educational needs. He remembers in his first school play, he played a snowman. “That was quite intriguing,” he says with a smile. After leaving college, he auditioned for a play, Adam, which would go on to be performed in schools around Hampshire, and at Chichester Festival theatre. It was political, about giving people with learning disabilities the right to make choices about their lives, and the start of Jessop acting as a voice for people with Down’s syndrome. He played the title character, who wants to be a chef, although nobody takes him seriously. It was the same for Jessop with acting, says Jane. “We’d asked him what he’d like to do with his life and he said he wanted to be an actor. We thought: ‘No, we’ll get him a job in the library,’” she remembers. The producer of the play suggested Jessop apply for an initiative run by the BBC and Channel 4 to discover and nurture talented disabled people. From about 2,000 applicants, just over 20 were chosen; Jessop was one of only two with a learning disability. That led to the role on Coming Down the Mountain, written by Mark Haddon. That experience, says Jessop, was “wicked”. “My favourite scene was talking about what sex was like, with Nicholas [Hoult].” They kept getting the giggles during filming. Working on film sets, he says, “makes me feel quite alive and free”. Filming Line of Duty, with its budget, secrecy and slick professionalism “was like being on a James Bond set”. People have recognised him in the street. “I do not mind being the centre of attention,” he says. He would love to see more people with Down’s syndrome being cast in high-profile shows “because it will make a difference. You can see what we truly are capable of.” Jessop had searched for an inclusive theatre company to join but found most were based in London. In 2005, his mother set up an arts organisation, Blue Apple theatre, in Winchester, to give people with learning disabilities opportunities to perform in dance and drama. They put on ambitious productions, including a lot of Shakespeare. “My favourite play has to be Hamlet,” says Jessop, in which he has played “the main man himself”. He breaks into the “to be or not to be” soliloquy, lines still remembered. Jessop also played Prospero in The Tempest, but there have been contemporary dramas too, such as Living Without Fear, in which he played a victim of disability hate crime. He also appeared in a short film, Freddie’s Story, which was inspired by a Mencap report, Death by Indifference, that exposed healthcare inequalities for those with learning disabilities, and detailed the NHS failings that it believes led to the deaths of six people (a further report blamed institutional discrimination for the deaths of 74 people with learning disabilities within a decade, though Mencap believes this is “a tiny proportion” of the real figure). Jessop says he doesn’t spend too much time thinking “about living with Down’s syndrome. If I do think about it, it’s a label, which is really quite depressing.” Most people, he says, “are nice to me” and when I ask if he experienced any bullying growing up he replies: “Not really.” Did he feel different from other people? “Possibly,” he says, but not because he has Down’s syndrome. “I’m the exact opposite of other people, really. Other people tend to be serious and I see the fun side of life and have a laugh.” Since the summer, non-invasive prenatal testing has been available to pregnant women in England on the NHS (Wales brought it in in 2018, and Scotland introduced it in 2020). The blood test can detect Down’s syndrome fairly early in the pregnancy and previous research has found that about 90% of women choose to terminate a pregnancy when Down’s syndrome is diagnosed. Campaigns led by those with Down’s syndrome, such as Don’t Screen Us Out, want to end the remaining stigma and improve life for those with the condition, rather than eliminate it. Jessop finds it too painful to talk about. The idea of antenatal testing “really does scar me for life”, he says. Jane picks it up instead, explaining that people with Down’s syndrome “were still segregated a lot, right up until this century. So they never had a chance to explore their skills or find out about life, or do anything interesting, so they had nothing to talk about.” Many people with Down’s syndrome weren’t encouraged to eat healthily or exercise, which led to health problems, she says, “because we hid them away”. Jessop, on the other hand, says he has always been a confident and positive person. Aside from acting, he follows football news avidly, loves music, likes travel and cooking. The pandemic has given him a quieter life, as it has for many of us, but he says, “I’d like to get back to the theatre.” He would also love to have a girlfriend, “hopefully, at some point”. He will continue to speak out, especially as his profile grows. Last month, it was announced that he had become an ambassador for Mencap. By living fully, he wants to show what people with Down’s syndrome can do. This includes working, he says, and “falling in love and living really healthy good lives”. It’s also the reason why he believes it’s “about time” the bill becomes law.To adapt Ronald Reagan’s adage, the nine most terrifying words in the English language are “I’m from the government, and I’ll set you free.” Every time this government says freedom, it means freedom for someone other than you. Seeking to distract us from his own pursuit of freedom during lockdown, this week Boris Johnson announced what he calls a Brexit freedoms bill. Its purpose is to accelerate the removal of EU rules from our legislation, and to “cut £1 billion of red tape for UK businesses”. This announcement happened to fall on the first day of the final stage of the inquiry into the Grenfell Tower catastrophe, which will investigate the role of government. It will explore the long history of “cutting red tape” that likely led to this disaster. A timeline published by Inside Housing shows how the process began with Margaret Thatcher’s 1984 Building Act, which deregulated the industry and part-privatised building control. It continued with the decision by Tony Blair’s government to ignore the recommendations of a parliamentary committee, that all cladding should be “entirely non-combustible”. Later, in 2005, Blair’s government transferred responsibility for assessing fire risk from the fire service to building owners, a classic exercise in self-regulation. In the same year, it relaxed restrictions on the use of combustible insulation on tall buildings. In 2011, David Cameron announced a programme to “cut red tape”. His government later boasted that, under this scheme, “businesses with good records have had fire safety inspections reduced from 6 hours to 45 minutes”. In 2012, his minister Eric Pickles repealed crucial fire safety measures in the London Building Act (1939). In the same year, Cameron announced that he would “kill off the health and safety culture for good”. No new regulation, he decreed, could be introduced unless two were removed. In 2014, the housing minister Brandon Lewis used this rule to justify rejecting the call by MPs to make sprinklers mandatory in tall buildings. In 2016, Cameron’s rule was ramped up: three regulations would have to be removed for every one introduced. The Conservative MP leading a government review into “cutting red tape”, Oliver Letwin, toyed with the idea of scrapping building regulations altogether. On the morning of 14 June 2017, a panel working for Letwin’s review met to consider whether EU rules on the fire resistance of cladding materials should be dismantled. A document produced for the review described these rules as “red tape folly”. As the panel discussed the issue, Grenfell Tower burned, and 72 people were killed. When politicians like Johnson, Cameron and Blair inveigh against “red tape”, as often as not they mean the public protections that permit a safe and decent life. These include the rules that prevent workers from being exploited and elderly people from being scammed. They include the rules that stop food manufacturers loading their products with sugar and fat, and prevent tower blocks from being incinerated. They include the rules that stop our rivers being turned into sewers and the air from poisoning our lungs. Freedom for the builder is jeopardy for the residents. Freedom for the boss is exploitation for the worker. Freedom for the driver is death to the pedestrian. Freedom for the food business is sickness for the consumer. Freedom for the water company is rivers full of sewage. Freedom for the oil company is an uninhabitable planet. Interestingly, the government press release announcing Johnson’s Brexit freedoms bill also celebrated “ending free movement”. Clearly, Brexit’s freedoms are not universal. In fact, the bill appears designed to circumvent democratic freedoms, using Henry VIII powers to cut regulations without parliamentary scrutiny. It also seems to have terminated some of the democratic freedoms of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, as their governments were not consulted. But this bill is the point of Brexit. The multimillionaires who funded the campaign to leave the European Union sought freedom from the decencies they owe to other people, freedom from the restraint that defines civic life. Our country has been torn apart in the civil war within capitalism: between the businesses seeking stability and predictability, and the asset-strippers and oligarchs who want to rip everything down and then sift the rubble for gold. While the Conservatives attack public protections, genuine red tape – that is, pointless form-filling and officialdom – has boomed. A central feature of the neoliberal revolution that brought Boris Johnson to power is a proliferation of corporate and governmental bureaucracy: new barriers to obtaining public services, an impenetrable thicket of train franchises and test-and-trace companies, the life-consuming nightmare afflicting people stuck in unsellable flats clad in flammable materials, the paperwork in which importers and exporters are now drowning, the endless queues at Dover. As a paper in the journal Safety Science shows, deregulation causes chaos, and chaos causes bureaucratic overload. Far from liberating the nation from red tape, government assaults on public protection tie us up in knots. It is not we who are being set free. It is a particular class of capitalists, who fund the Conservative party and protect the politicians who deliver for them, regardless of public disgust. I’m talking about the property developers, money launderers, suppliers of dodgy PPE, newspaper proprietors and the other wealthy ghouls who have formed a square around the prime minister. Freedom for them is misery for us. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnistIn the mid-70s, when I was a young reporter on the London newspaper the Evening News, I was sent to Peterborough – then pretty much on the edge of the paper’s circulation area – to do a story. I had finished my interview, and had an hour to wait until the next train back to London, so, having nothing to do, I went to look at Peterborough Cathedral. As you approach it from the west, there are three huge arches: they look like doorways for giants. Inside, I looked around and was completely fascinated. Most people who look at a cathedral feel this, usually asking themselves two questions: why did medieval people want one of these? And how did they build it? The people of the 12th century were very poor, yet they created these wonderful buildings: very beautiful, very expensive, very difficult to build for people who had crude tools and lacked the mathematics to calculate stresses. When you look up at the big stones, particularly if there is a tower, you think: how did they get that all the way up there? Then there is the sheer beauty of these wonderful churches, the way the arches sweep up, and the perspective down the nave. The view from a distance is often enrapturing, too. It was the first time that I had really looked at a church like that. I was brought up in the Plymouth Brethren, a puritanical religious sect. Our churches were never called “churches”; they were halls with plain white walls. Pictures and statues were forbidden; the only bit of decoration might be an embroidered text. So for me, it was all new, and standing there in Peterborough Cathedral was the beginning of my fascination. Before long, I would seek out other cathedrals. If I was travelling somewhere that had a cathedral, I would give myself extra time to visit it, sometimes a couple of days. Now, I go armed with all the textbooks so I know the curiosities to look for; a lot of the interesting things in cathedrals are where something has gone wrong, and you see a little bodge that the builders had to make. A visit to my German publisher in Cologne is never without a visit to that city’s cathedral, which I’m sorry to say we nearly destroyed in the war. I have climbed into the dusty spaces under the roofs of many cathedrals, including Canterbury and Florence, and stood on the mighty beams that spanned the naves. Several decades later, I am still discovering new things. About five years ago, as part of a fundraising drive to raise money for repairs to Peterborough Cathedral, I was invited up on to the roof. It has pinnacles, little towers about 3ft high, and some of them had been replaced in the 50s with rather crude, plain versions. When you were on the roof, they looked awful, but from the ground, you couldn’t tell. People in the 50s had thought: you can’t see it from the ground, nobody will notice, so why spend the money? But what they thought in the middle ages was: this pinnacle has got to be beautiful because God can see it. That first trip to Peterborough sparked an idea: a novel about building a cathedral. Looking back, I can see that I couldn’t have written it then. I wasn’t good enough to write the book that I had in mind – set around the building of a 12th-century cathedral, which would take decades, and the lives of the people who worked on it – and it was too ambitious for me. It was about 10 years later, in 1986, that I thought about it again. It took me more than three years, but I was able to write The Pillars of the Earth, which is still my most successful and popular book. Then, in 2019, I published a book about Notre Dame Cathedral – a building I got to know well over many visits to Paris, and has meant a lot to me – to raise money for its restoration after the devastating fire that year. So, decades after The Pillars of the Earth was published, I am still writing about cathedrals. My lifelong passion for these places is more than just the architecture. When you go into a cathedral, you find yourself enveloped by a feeling of peace – it’s like a rest for your soul, especially in the busy 21st century. I walk into a cathedral and feel that I want to sit down and let that wash over me. That is one of the things that keeps me going back. I rebelled against my parents’ puritanical faith. I studied philosophy at university because I felt I needed help to make my mind up about religion and, within a year, I was an atheist and have been ever since. That also led me to spurn everything spiritual for a while. Cathedrals brought me back; I am still an atheist, but I do have a spiritual life. I feel grateful to Peterborough Cathedral for showing me something. I certainly never dreamed, in those days, that I would end up writing my best book about a cathedral. But, in a broader sense, I never dreamed that these wonderful buildings would become such an important part of my life. Ken Follett’s new novel, Never, is published by Macmillan in hardback at £20. To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy for £17.40 from guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply“As a Blackburn fan I put more stock in 19th century trophies than perhaps I should,” writes Simon Elliott. “However, are Rovers unique in winning major trophies in the 19th, 20th and 21st centuries? Are there any equivalents from other countries? For the purposes of this, the 2002 League Cup is a major trophy.” “Though organised football was more or less restricted to these islands in the 19th century there are a number of other clubs who can match or better Blackburn’s achievement,” begins Sean DeLoughry. “Celtic, Rangers, Linfield and Glentoran have won every major domestic competition available to them each century. Additionally, Hibernian, Hearts, Bangor, Distillery and Cliftonville have racked up major honours in each century. Here’s an overview: England: Blackburn (19th Century Cup, 20th Century League/Cup, 21st Century LC) Scotland: Celtic (19C League/Cup, 20C League/Cup/LC, 21C League/Cup/LC), Hearts (19C League/Cup, 20C League/Cup/LC, 21C Cup), Hibernian (19C Cup, 20C League/Cup/LC, 21C Cup/LC), Rangers (19C League/Cup, 20C League/Cup/LC, 21C League/Cup/LC) Wales: Bangor (19C Cup, 20C League/Cup, 21C League/Cup) Northern Ireland Cliftonville (19C Cup, 20C League/Cup, 21C League/LC), Distillery (19C League/Cup, 20C League/Cup, 21C LC), Glentoran (19C League/Cup, 20C League/Cup/LC, 21C League/Cup/LC), Linfield (19C League/Cup, 20C League/Cup/LC, 21C League/Cup/LC) “Other English clubs who could match Blackburn during the 21st century are Aston Villa, Everton, Wolves, Sheffield United, Sheffield Wednesday, Preston and Sunderland (plus Bury if you count 1900 as the last year of the 19th century).” Jason Sarfo-Annin picked out the same examples from the British Isles but also looked at some potential three-century major trophy-winners from other nations. “Argentina and Italy established their leagues in the 19th century but the usual suspects didn’t win their first titles till the 20th century,” he writes. “Genoa can still become the only Italian club to have titles across three centuries if they win something in the 21st century. If you consider winning other leagues in the professional football pyramid as major honours then RFC Liège in Belgium fit the bill having won the top flight in the 19th and 20th centuries and the fourth tier in the 21st century. “In Switzerland Grasshoppers are a fun case. They won the top Swiss league in the 1897-98 season but it isn’t considered an official season as the league was not run by the Swiss FA that year. They also won the league in the 1899-1900 season. So if you agree with the view that a new century starts in 1901 and 2001 rather than 1900 and 2000 – then they just meet the criteria. They’ve won the top Swiss league across all three centuries. Peñarol in Uruguay are in the same boat as Grasshoppers with a league title in 1900.” Another team triumphing in 1900 were AIK, notes David Ekstrand: “This means that when they won their first Swedish championship on 29 July 29 of that year, it was still the 19th century. AIK then won nine Swedish titles in the 20th century and have so far won two in the 21st, the latest being in 2018.” Z v Z “Has there even been, in a UK match, another pair of opposing captains whose surnames start with Z,” posed this commenter. “Katie Zelem (Manchester United) and Shelina Zadorsky (Tottenham) faced each other.” “I get that we’re specifying the UK to avoid listing hundreds of matches in countries where ‘Z’ players are commonplace,” mails Chris Page, “but can we make an exception for something as big as a World Cup semi-final? Back in 1982, a victorious Italian team captained by Dino Zoff defeated Wladyslaw Zmuda’s Poland. Similarly, the Euro 2004 quarter-final between France and Greece saw the teams captained by Zinedine Zidane and Theodoros Zagorakis. I did wonder if Zidane had ever captained a French team that went up against a Slovenian team captained by Zlatko Zlahovic, for a pair of ‘ZZ’ captains, but although they did line up against each other a couple of times, they didn’t do so with the armbands on.” The Uniteds question “Which player has played for the most Uniteds?” tweets Ryan Murphy. Chris Page – again – has an answer we can all unite around. “With this sort of question, John Burridge never lets you down. Here were go: Southend, Sheffield, Newcastle … oh, that’s all. Of the 30-odd clubs he played for, only three I can see were ‘United’. There are plenty of well-known players who can match that, such as Rio Ferdinand (West Ham, Leeds, Manchester), Alan Smith (Leeds, Manchester, Newcastle) and Teddy Sheringham (Manchester, West Ham, Colchester).” There’s also Freddie Sears (West Ham, Scunthorpe, Colchester). “Scott Wootton can bring us up to four (Manchester, Peterborough, Leeds, Rotherham). And although we’re dipping into the non-league scene here, how about former Dominican international Jefferson Louis, who has had spells at Thame, Aylesbury, Oxford, Maidenhead, Hayes &amp; Yeading, Banbury and Chesham, totalling seven.” Andy Brook also throws Imre Varadi into the mix with an impressive six (Sheffield, Newcastle, Leeds, Oxford, Rotherham and Scunthorpe). It would have been seven but after joining Boston, he was cut loose without playing a game. Knowledge archive “In the 1985-86 Screensport Super Cup, Liverpool played the first leg of the semi-final against Norwich City on 5 February (1-1) but the second leg did not take place until 6 May (3-1 to Liverpool). Is this the longest gap between two legs of a tournament,” asked John Martin in September 2012. Michael Haughey pointed us in the direction of the 1955-58 Fairs Cup. It began on Christmas Day 1955 and ended on 1 May 1958 and the group stage was initially split into four groups of three teams, with each team to play the others twice. However, the withdrawal of the Cologne XI from Group C left Leipzig and Lausanne Sports to battle it out over what was essentially two legs. The German side won 6-3 in Leipzig on 6 March 1956 but Lausanne mounted a stunning fight-back nearly eight months later, winning 7-3 on home soil on 21 October 1956 to progress to the semi-finals (the first leg of which did not take place until 16 September 1957). “The query brings to mind the Anglo-Scottish Cup,” wrote Darren Hudson. “I recall the competition was revived in 1987 in which the FA Cup and Scottish Cup holders would meet over two legs. This pitted Coventry and St Mirren together in their version of a ‘Battle of Britain’, with the first leg taking place on 23 December 1987 at Highfield Road and ending 1-1. “The first leg was poorly attended and two sides couldn’t agree on a return date. As a result 23 December 2012 will mark 25 years since the playing of the first leg with the outcome still to be decided.” Can you help? “Are Cameron Brannagan’s four penalties (out of four) for Oxford at Gillingham a domestic – or world record – during a 90-minute game?” asks David Weston. “Frank Lampard is the seventh Everton manager that Duncan Ferguson will be a member of the coaching staff for,” notes Brendan O’Mahony. “Is this a record for one continuous spell at a club?” • Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.There is no doubt about the most unusual clause of this transfer window. Internazionale signed Robin Gosens on loan from Atalanta with an obligation to buy him for €25m (£20.8m) when they score their first goal of 2023. But perhaps the most interesting theme of the month was what it showed about clubs who have a clear strategy and those who do not. This was a typical January window, with slow weeks followed by a crazy final few days, but whereas some clubs moved late and had real moments of panic, others had an obvious plan. Aston Villa did good business relatively early by bringing in Philippe Coutinho and Lucas Digne, and Chelsea, Manchester United and Manchester City are also examples of clubs with a policy. Chelsea decided not to make a panic buy at left-back even though Ben Chilwell is out for the season. They wanted Emerson Palmieri back but there is no recall clause in his loan with Lyon so they decided to continue with the current squad rather than sign a player they only want for six months and maybe create a problem. City taking Julián Álvarez from River Plate for £14m was a smart strategy with an eye on the future and United were also looking ahead. They did not include buy options when they loaned out Anthony Martial, Donny van de Beek and Amad Diallo because they want whoever the manager is next summer to decide whether they want to keep those players. Similarly, United did not buy a midfielder even though they were offered opportunities such as Denis Zakaria, who went to Juventus from Borussia Mönchengladbach, and Marseille’s Boubacar Kamara. They preferred to carry on with this squad and keep the funds for the manager in the summer. The club turned down a lot of money from Newcastle for Jesse Lingard on deadline day, too. Newcastle were prepared to pay a big sum after missing out on Hugo Ekitike, and Lingard told Ralf Rangnick again at lunchtime on Monday that he wanted to leave, but the situation with Mason Greenwood meant United decided to keep him – even though the 29-year-old will go as a free agent in the summer. Newcastle then tried to sign Dele Alli in the final hours, after a deal was agreed between Everton and Tottenham and the player had started his medical. The answer from Alli’s side was clear, though: he was not going to change his mind. A big reason was that he had been waiting for a move all month and there had been no real interest from Newcastle, whereas Frank Lampard quickly showed he wanted him when he got the Everton job. Lampard was a big reason why Van de Beek went to Everton. If Vítor Pereira had been appointed the Dutch midfielder would have joined Crystal Palace. An agreement was in place and there had been a positive conversation with Palace’s manager, Patrick Vieira, but Lampard made Van de Beek a priority and was calling him all the time during negotiations. Money also played a part, with Everton paying a loan fee and 100% of the wages, whereas Palace were able to pay 85% of the wages and no loan fee. Deals falling through are part of transfer business but it was unusual to see Bruno Guimarães’s Newcastle move almost collapse three times. First, Lyon changed the price from €40m to €50m and Newcastle were furious. Then there was a disagreement over the payment of agent commissions. And finally there were big complications over the medical because the player had to fly from Ecuador to Belo Horizonte. The signing is a real achievement for Newcastle because Arsenal and Juventus had started talks to buy Guimarães this summer. But maybe the most incredible signing belongs to Liverpool with Luis Díaz. Tottenham were really close to buying him – they made a €35m bid and a representative from Spurs was flying to Portugal to negotiate with Porto. But when Liverpool heard, they jumped in. Jürgen Klopp had Díaz as a top priority for the summer and didn’t want to miss out. They put an offer of €40m plus €20m in add-ons on the table and sealed the negotiations unbelievably quickly. Within 24 hours everything was done, including sending people to South America for the medical, and Spurs were furious. Liverpool couldn’t quite get a deal done for Fulham’s Fabio Carvalho on deadline night but they will be back soon to find a solution because he is another one Klopp really wants. Liverpool have a plan – and they usually execute it.Almost one in 10 households are now experiencing “fuel stress” amid surging gas and electricity prices – a figure expected to treble overnight after the new energy price cap comes in on 1 April. The Resolution Foundation forecasts that energy bills will become unaffordable for 27% of households when the price cap rises to about £2,000 a year. The poorest households may have to spend half their income on energy. Six people speak about how rising fuel costs are affecting them. ‘I struggle to feed myself and have lost two stone’ Thirty-nine-year-old Sarah Moorby in Kirkby Lonsdale, Cumbria has been “absolutely terrified” about providing a meter reading to her new energy supply company since being switched over from People Energy, which went bust in September. “I was paying £105.78 a month before but my duel fuel bill for electric and gas which covered October to mid-January with British Gas was £627.” Moorby, who works as a welfare assistant and has three children aged 15, 18 and 19, has applied for a warm home discount after she started receiving universal credit in March 2021. She said if her energy bills remain at the same rate for the rest of the year she is looking at an increase of about £2,500 for the year but is still waiting to hear if the discount will be applied to her bill. “I’ve got used to shaving off money here and there to make the pennies go further, but an extra £115 a month is going to have to come out of my food bill, or clothing for the kids,” she said. “Everything’s so expensive now – even if it’s just 10p or 20p more. I used to spend around £60 a week on food but now it’s more like £75 still buying the same items. I’ve already lost two stone because I struggle to feed myself and choose to feed the kids. I just don’t think I’m going to be able to afford it. The fear I have is if I don’t pay it or can’t pay it they’ll put me on a prepayment meter which will cost me more and some days I just won’t have the money to be able to put the electricity on.” ‘I can’t see how we can go on, unless we sell and move’ Pensioner Steven Tuszynski says he was “absolutely shocked” to learn that his energy provider was doubling his bills from next month. “Why is no one up in arms about this?” the 72-year-old asks. Tuszynski, who lives in Flintshire, north Wales, is on a fixed dual fuel contract with Octopus, and will see his monthly bills rise from £120 to £238 from mid-February. Tuszynski looked at several price comparison sites, but has decided to stay with his current provider, as he worries about smaller companies going bust. The jump in costs means Tuszynski and his wife, who live in a house dating back to 1745, will look at cutting back on how many months they heat their home for. “We live in an old stone house – it takes a lot to heat it. Normally, come the end of April we switch off the central heating for good. It’ll probably go off earlier this year, in mid-March,” he says, adding that energy costs aren’t “the only thing that’s going up”, as he’s noticed a spike in food prices and is expecting council bills to rise too. The 72-year-old, who has lived in his home for 25 years, says: “I can’t see how we can go on, unless we sell and move – only we love our house so much, and we don’t really want to.” ‘I only partially heat three rooms to 15C max’ In North Essex, retiree Lyn said it was “disturbing” to find the £140 warm home discount she receives on her bill has effectively been cancelled out because of the rise in energy costs. “I’ve never had the discount before but because of the media and the possibility of increased bills I thought I’d apply for it [last year] along with pension credit,” said the 69-year-old. Lyn was moved to EDF Energy on a dual fuel tariff expiring in 2024 after Green Network Energy ceased trading in January 2021. Her monthly direct debit has increased from £66 to £79. She said she asked for it to be reduced but was refused. “It seems a little inflexible given the situation we’re all in,” she said. “My house is well insulated and only partially heated in three rooms to 15C max for part of the day. My income is low as my private pension collapsed and was replaced by the Financial Assistance Service, so I’ll have to pull back on food costs. “I don’t know what the government can do to help our energy bills, but it’s not totally down to energy as inflation generally is becoming evident.” ‘My account fell into a black hole after my provider went bust’ Andrew Davies, a self-employed gardener in his 50s, hasn’t been billed for gas since 27 September, when his gas provider Green Supplier Limited (Green) collapsed. He was moved over to Shell Energy but an account has not yet been set up in his name, meaning his bill is building up. Davies, who lives in Llandrindod Wells, mid Wales, paid his final bill from Green in October and says his customer account “fell into a black hole” when Shell Energy took over. “They have not yet set me up with an account. I have contacted customer service many times by email and or phone,” he says, explaining that customer service is unable to find his meter point reference number in their system. “They can’t help me as they have not created an account for me … I can’t get anywhere.” He says that while he is able to budget, he worries that some people may struggle. As he lives in a small property, he doesn’t think his bill will have grown too large, but acknowledges that there could be “other people with [unpaid bills of] £500 or £600 or even more that is just sat there getting bigger.” He adds: “I know mine’s not unmanageable, but I can’t speak for other people.” ‘Thousands of people could be thrown into poverty’ “In November we managed to negotiate our electricity bill down from £276 to £150 a month,” said Chris in Devon, who is on a variable rate with Octopus. She and her partner used to pay £68 a month but were asked to increase their direct debit in October because they weren’t covering the cost. They now owe Octopus about £1,400 but have decided to stick to the new monthly payments for the foreseeable future. “We are absolutely shocked at how much energy has gone up and has left us with debt,” said the 25-year-old NHS worker. “My partner’s job is seasonal and my income is mostly based around universal credit because I have a toddler and only work part-time. “The increase has been difficult for our finances and we budget more tightly with food but thankfully we have family to support us. It’s not just energy though: everything is going up. We shop at a local Lidl and we’ve noticed the price changes there. With everything costing so much there must be thousands of people who could be thrown into poverty.” ‘The cold really affects me’ In Northampton, pensioner Will has seen around a 50 per cent increase in his electricity usage since his landlord moved supplier recently after the previous one went into bankruptcy. “It used to cost approximately £5 a week but it’s now gone up to around £10 depending on how cold it is,” said the 72-year-old. Will, who has been living in shared accommodation for three years, uses a prepayment meter which he “pops coins into” when he needs to. “I probably use the electricity the most in the household. I had major heart surgery last June and the cold really affects me, and because I’ve not been well I’m virtually at home all day.” His income is about £1,300 a month, which includes his state pension and financial assistance he receives for housing and council tax. He believes he would be eligible for a warm home discount but because his landlord receives the electricity bill he doesn’t think he can apply for it. “It’s been tough. I’m having difficulty walking so at least I’ve been able to reduce my expenditure by not going out, but I’ve also been eating less. If the electricity price goes up again it will become quite a concern. We’ll just have to wait and see.” • This article was amended on 2 February 2022 because an earlier version referred to the collapse of gas supplier Green Energy when Green Supplier Limited (Green) was meant.The Florida teenager demanding Elon Musk hand over $50,000 to stop him tweeting the location of the billionaire’s private jet has said he is creating dozens more accounts tracking the movements of other rich and famous people. Jack Sweeney, a 19-year-old college student and aviation enthusiast, said he had created 16 automated Twitter accounts, or bots, similar to @ElonJet to follow jets owned by Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates (@GatesJet), Amazon’s Jeff Bezos, the billionaire entrepreneur Mark Cuban and the rapper Drake. In an interview with the Guardian, Sweeney said he had also created a website, Ground Control, to “monetise” the service by offering bespoke tracking services to celebrities’ superfans and to host web versions of the Twitter bots if the microblogging site closes his accounts because of privacy concerns raised by the subjects. “They’re either really prominent people or just like really interesting,” Sweeney said of the people he tracks. “Lately I have been adding people that [his followers] have requested.” Recent accounts he has set up after requests include Cuban and Drake, who he said was the most interesting. “He has the biggest plane out of all of them, it is a giant Boeing.” The rapper’s plane, Air Drake, is a $185m 59ft-long Boeing 767-200ER that can carry 216 passengers. Sweeney, who created @ElonJet in June 2020, said he hoped Musk would reopen negotiations to buy and close down the account. The co-founder and chief executive of Tesla has refused the teenager’s demand for $50,000. Musk, the world’s richest person with an estimated $220bn fortune, has urged Sweeney to delete the account. “Can you take this down? It is a security risk,” Musk, wrote in a direct message to the teenager. “I don’t love the idea of being shot by a nutcase.” Sweeney said receiving the direct message from Musk, whom he described as his idol, was a surreal experience. “I was just about to go to sleep actually, and I’m like, ‘Oh my gosh Elon just messaged me to take down my account’,” he said. “It was insane.” “And then he offers me $5,000 to make it harder for people to track him and to take down the account, and I make my counter-offer.” Sweeney attempted to negotiate with Musk, replying: “Any chance to up that to $50K? It would be great support in college and would possibly allow me to get a car, maybe even a [Tesla] Model 3.” Musk later said he did not feel comfortable paying anything. Sweeney replied that if Musk did not want to pay, he would delete the account in return for an internship at Tesla. “That was the last thing I said [to Musk],” Sweeney said. “And then he blocked me.”Australians have been talking about foodstuffs this week after the prime minister was unable to nominate the price of a loaf of bread when quizzed during his National Press Club appearance. A Sky News journalist on Tuesday asked Scott Morrison if he had “lost touch with ordinary Australians”. Could the PM, for instance, name the price of “a loaf of bread, a litre of petrol and a rapid antigen test?” Morrison stated that he “wasn’t going to pretend to you that I go out each day and I buy a loaf of bread and I buy a litre of milk”. To make matters worse, the prime minister’s frontbench colleague Stuart Robert came to his defence on Wednesday, suggesting on the ABC that if Morrison’s wife, Jen, was with him she’d be able to “rattle off all the prices of all the things they buy”. Morrison is not the first politician to fall at this incredibly low hurdle. In fact, it seems every time a politician talks about, or even worse enters, a supermarket, disaster ensues. Here are some of the strangest and most embarrassing retail-based political blunders. Of course, we must begin with the infamous incident when a bloke called then prime minister Tony Abbott a “dickhead” in a hardware store. On the other side of the aisle (literally) former Labor leader Bill Shorten may not have been quizzed on the price of lettuce, but he did manage to produce some of the most excruciatingly awkward small talk in human history in the salad section at Woolworths. There was also that time in 2012 when now deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce suggested Labor’s carbon tax would hike up the price of a Sunday roast to $100. Despite his efforts to justify this wild prediction to the media in the following days the statement was still roundly derided as ridiculous. Back in the days before Brexit, the British prime minister David Cameron was cornered in a radio interview, unable to name the price of a cheap loaf of bread. “I don’t buy the value sliced loaf, I’ve got a breadmaker at home … but you can buy a loaf in the supermarket for well north of a pound.” The price was not “well north of a pound” for the record, at the time it was 47p. To make matters worse he then recommended people buy a £100 breadmaker instead, and use Cotswold Crunch flour which cost £30.20 for a 16kg bag. Now, you might think there is no way to make yourself seem posher than that, but the then London mayor – now UK prime minister – Boris Johnson found a way the very next day. When asked the same bread-based question by a reporter, Johnson initially got it right, suggesting 40-50p, but managed to undo all that good work by sarcastically stating that he has “no idea” how much value bread costs but could “tell you the price of a bottle of champagne” instead. Unfortunately, the country didn’t seem to find the joke as funny as he did. Back home and back in time, there was of course the infamous birthday cake debacle between Labor prime minister Paul Keating and opposition leader John Hewson. The year was 1993 and Hewson was basing his election campaign on this wild new concept of a “goods and services tax”, or GST. But he faced a wave of public humiliation after an infamous interview on A Current Affair, where he was unable to explain if a birthday cake (candles and all) would cost more or less under his new taxation system. Keating had a field day with this, staging a media opportunity in Brisbane whereby he entered a pharmacy and asked which items would be subject to GST. The pharmacist didn’t know, the media lapped it up, it was a great success. But alas there was food-based humiliation to come for Keating as well. He attempted the stunt a second time, this time walking into a Nowra bakery suggested by Labor’s local candidate for Gilmore, Peter Knott. But instead of happily chatting about how bloody confusing the idea of GST was, the bakery owner grilled Keating for minutes on end about the payroll tax in front of a crowd of eager journalists. The payroll tax was actually a state tax, but the damage was done. Legend has it that Keating referred to Knott from that time on only as “the cunt from the pie shop”. It truly is a wonder that media minders still let politicians within a kilometre of a supermarket.The levelling up secretary, Michael Gove, has said it is a “bogus argument” to suggest there is no new money going into his flagship levelling-up agenda. Gove defended long-awaited plans to close the gap between rich and poor parts of England in the face of accusations they contain no new money and little fresh thinking. Responding to claims there is no new money for the wide-ranging plans, Gove told Sky News: “I think that’s a bogus argument because the chancellor gave us a huge cheque in the spending review and now we are spending it. “We’re making sure in Wolverhampton, in Sheffield and in other areas that we put our money where our mouth is. And that we make sure that money which in the past was spent too much in London and the south-east is now spent in the north and the Midlands where it’s needed.” Later on BBC Breakfast, he said: “The key thing about the spending review is that it gave me and other government departments a significant amount in the bank and now we’re cashing those cheques and the money is getting out.” He told the programme the government had “12 big missions” for levelling up, adding the pledges “commit us to ensure that research and development spending, the sort of rocket fuel that will help our economy grow, is spread more equally and also that we tackle some of the other underlying inequalities in health and education and housing”. People in the north of England and Midlands had been “overlooked and undervalued for years” by politicians, he said. Gove declined an offer to appear on ITV’s Good Morning Britain, prompting the presenters to “empty chair” the minister – broadcasting an image of a vacant seat in which he would have appeared had he accepted the invitation. “The Brexit referendum was a wake-up call,” Gove told Sky News. “As well as a clear commandment to leave the European Union it was also a way of saying to people in SW1, people like me: ‘Look, it’s vital that you change the economic model of this country. It’s all very well if people are in London and the south-east in financial services and others do well, we don’t begrudge that. But you’ve got to listen to us.’” Gove said mistakes had been made by “parties of both colours” and that “one of the things in the past is there have been sincere and committed attempts by politicians left and right to deal with this”. “But nothing as comprehensive or as long-term as the plan that we’re setting out today,” he said. He again raised the prospect of the House of Lords moving out of London as an example of levelling up. He told Times Radio: “We’ve got our friends in the House of Lords who will have to move out of their current building, at the moment, because of the renovation of the Palace of Westminster. “I think it’d be a really good thing if the House of Lords were to meet for at least part of the time in Glasgow or in York. I think it would do us all good.”Everton Women are looking for their third manager of the season after sacking Jean-Luc Vasseur after only 10 games in charge. The Frenchman replaced Willie Kirk in October. Vasseur was in charge of Lyon Féminin between 2019 and 2021 and was expected to move Everton up the table but managed only one win in six league games. Everton, who invested heavily in their squad last summer, issued a statement that said: “Everton can confirm that Jean-Luc Vasseur has left his role as manager of the club’s women’s team. Assistant coaches Frédéric Piquionne and Franck Plaine have also left the club. “Everyone at Everton would like to thank Jean-Luc, Frédéric and Franck for their service and wish them well for the future. Chris Roberts and Claire Ditchburn will take charge of the team on an interim basis.” Everton are third-bottom of the Women’s Super League and face Reading on Sunday.Sochi in 2014, Seoul in 2018 … and now Beijing in 2022. In recent years the Winter Olympics has gained an intriguing reputation for pitching up in geopolitically sensitive places. With concerns about human rights issues, and an Omicron outbreak disrupting preparations, Emma Graham-Harrison and Vincent Ni consider how China still hopes to stage manage the Games to its political advantage. And, amid rising global temperatures, there’s a fascinating look from the Guardian’s interactive graphics team at the long-term future of the Winter Olympics, given the fast-declining number of cities with reliably cold enough weather to host the event. A redacted report into the lockdown party culture in Boris Johnson’s Downing Street operation was released this week. Despite a police-enforced lack of detail, the “update” compiled by civil servant Sue Gray conveyed heavy criticism of No 10 – but more damaging was Johnson’s apparent lack of contrition in the face of parliamentary and public outrage. Tory leadership rebellion fears seemed to have subsided for now – but whether voters will prove as understanding remains to be seen. In Opinion, Timothy Garton Ash writes on the west’s division over the future shape of Europe, in stark contrast with Vladimir Putin’s clarity of vision. And on the second anniversary of Brexit, Anand Menon highlights how Britain’s exit from the EU is beginning to bite economically. For a generation of infants who have grown up with masks and social distancing, the end of the pandemic will represent an entirely novel way of living. How are they coping with the new normal, asks Gaby Hinsliff in our features section. Then, in Culture, we catch up with Ben Whishaw, the reticent but in-demand actor who seems to pop up everywhere from James Bond to Paddington. Get the Guardian Weekly magazine delivered to your door.Eleven people at the Winter Olympics are in hospital with Covid, Beijing 2022 officials have revealed, although none are in a life-threatening condition. Organisers have also downplayed concerns that the virus is spreading within the ‘closed-looped’ system in Beijing, which completely separates Olympic personnel from the general public, despite a further nine athletes and 23 team officials testing positive in the last 24 hours. The overall number of cases now stands at 232 since 23 January, leading to fears that some top athletes will miss out when the Games officially begin on Friday. However, Dr Brian McCloskey, chair of the medical expert panel for Beijing 2022, struck an upbeat note in front of the world’s media. “The vast majority of people who have tested positive are well, a lot of them are asymptomatic,” said McCloskey. “There have been 11 people hospitalised, because they had a symptom but none of those are seriously ill in any way.” Everyone travelling to Beijing, including athletes, coaches, team personnel and the media had to test negative twice before travelling, then again upon arrival at the airport. They also have to have daily PCR tests. McCloskey said there were no signs of a spread within the closed loop, adding: “It’s early days to look at all the gene sequencing, but at present that’s not a problem we’re particularly worried about.” “If we found evidence there was sustained community transmission, then we will activate our response plan, which then means more testing, tracing, isolating and a more aggressive approach to contact tracing. “But we are nowhere near that level at present. But it is not about the numbers, it’s about the extent to which there might be spread within the closed loop.” On Wednesday Sweden and Norway both confirmed they had two new cases each. So far none of Team GB’s 109 athletes, coaches and team officials here in Beijing have caught the virus. The biggest name to test positive so far has been the American bobsledder Elana Meyers Taylor, who has won medals in the past three Olympics. On Tuesday she confirmed she was in an isolation hotel in Beijing but said: “I feel great, I feel like I could go out and train. That’s the most frustrating thing.”Millions of trees are being planted beside Scotland’s remotest rivers and streams to protect wild salmon from the worst effects of climate heating. Fisheries scientists have found rivers and burns in the Highlands and uplands are already too warm in summer for wild Atlantic salmon as they head upstream to spawn, increasing the threat to the species’ survival. Fisheries on the River Dee in Aberdeenshire, one of the country’s most famous salmon fishing rivers, have planted 250,000 saplings along key tributaries. They plan to plant a million in the Dee’s catchment by 2035, including native rowan, aspen, Scots pine, birch, willow, hawthorn and juniper. In 2018, the year Scotland recorded the lowest rod catch for salmon since records began, climatic changes meant water temperatures in 70% of salmon rivers were too warm for at least one day that summer. They exceeded 23C, a temperature that induces stress and behavioural change. A coldwater species, Atlantic salmon prefer summer temperatures above 10C; at 33C, they cannot survive. Marine Scotland scientists found that only 35% of Scotland’s rivers, which stretch for 64,000 miles (103,000km), have adequate tree cover. Lorraine Hawkins, the river director for the Dee District Salmon Fishery Board, a statutory body, said: “These rivers and burns are the nursery grounds for young fish and it’s the young fish which will be affected by summer temperatures – their feeding and growth rates are affected. If it gets hotter, we will see fish dying.” Fishery boards across Scotland have similar tree-planting programmes, to provide essential shade to lower water temperatures. Many will be fenced off to prevent the saplings from being eaten by deer. Hawkins said these projects improved the overall health and biodiversity of rivers across the uplands, increasing insect life, leaf fall, managing essential nutrients and flood control. Alan Wells, the director of Fisheries Management Scotland, an industry body, said climate forecasts were clear that water temperatures would continue to climb, even if governments succeed in limiting climate heating to close to 1.5C. “We’ve seen situations where the temperatures in our rivers are approaching critical levels for our salmon, temperatures that they can’t tolerate,” he said. “This will get worse. We need to grow trees now to create that cooling shade.” The dramatic decline in wild salmon numbers is blamed on numerous factors: climate change affecting food availability; weirs and other obstructions in rivers; predation by soaring seal populations; sea lice attracted by fish farms; bycatch by trawlers at sea and poor river quality. Wells said that while Scottish ministers were proposing new conservation strategies, he remained frustrated with the slow pace of change. The Dee marked the start of its angling season on Tuesday by inviting two female anglers who won a fundraising competition last year to make the first cast, an annual ceremony at Banchory. Women are increasingly taking up the sport, Hawkins said, eroding the sport’s traditional domination by men in solitary pursuit of a catch. Camryn Stewart, 14, one of the first cast fishers, said she had been brought up fishing by her parents, Deirdre and Jim. The sport is targeting women and children as it strives to expand its participation and appeal. Stewart fishes with three other girls of her age and said she did not feel like a revolutionary. “I have been surrounded by people who fish, and I’ve wanted to fish all my life,” she said. “We need more people fishing, not just women and children. We gain so much from it. Just being outside and being in the wild. Even if you don’t catch anything, you come back from the day fulfilled.”News from around the world Phasing out animal agriculture over the next 15 years would have the same effect as a 68% reduction in carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, a new study suggests. The paper was co-authored by Patrick Brown, founder and CEO of the fake meat company Impossible Foods. Brown has previously said he wants to eliminate the need for foods from animals. The EU has been told to bring in better conditions for the transport of live animals, including limits on temperature, by MEPs. However, MEPs ignored calls from campaigners to ban live exports to third countries outside the EU altogether. Analysis published by the Guardian has suggested the EU could be responsible for up to 80% of the global trade in live farm animals – a total of 1.8 billion in 2019. As many as 3.4 million hens may have died in Argentina after a spell of hot weather and temperatures as high as 45C (114F). Reports suggested there were farms that had up to 40% mortality due to heatstroke. As global temperatures rise, farmers across the world are being forced to adapt, experimenting with new breeds and cooling methods. Claims by a Spanish government minister that factory farming is damaging the environment and leading to the export of poor-quality meat have provoked a backlash from industry. “What isn’t at all sustainable is these so-called mega farms … They pollute the soil, they pollute the water and then they export this poor-quality meat from these ill-treated animals,” Alberto Garzón had said. A government spokesperson said the livestock industry was “an absolute priority”. Americans throw out about a quarter of the meat, poultry and fish they buy which, it has been reported, equates to about a billion chickens, more than 100 million other land animals (mostly turkeys, pigs, and cows) and 25 billion fish and 15 billion shellfish (mostly shrimp) that end up wasted and slaughtered unnecessarily. China’s pork production jumped by almost a third in 2021, according to reports. Some analysts estimated at least 40% of China’s 360 million pig population could have been lost due to an outbreak of the deadly pig disease African Swine Fever (ASF), which started in 2018. The disease caused major disruption to the global pork industry as China pivoted to imports to plug a shortfall of its most popular meat. In Russia, a vaccine against ASF is getting closer to being ready, according to officials who want it to start being used in 2024. The country has reportedly been forced to cull almost 1 million pigs following outbreaks of the deadly pig disease and has said a vaccine could be used to stop the spread of the disease in wild boar. Charges against a US-based animal rights activist who conducted an undercover exposé of conditions at the pork company Iowa Select Farms have been suddenly dismissed. Reporter Marina Bolotnikova investigated why. Separately, prosecutors are reported to be keeping gruesome evidence of animals in distress from juries in trials involving animal rights activists. From the Animals farmed series The Dutch government has unveiled a €25bn (£21bn) plan – the first of its kind in the world – to radically reduce the number of livestock in the country as it struggles to contain an overload of animal manure. “We can’t be the tiny country that feeds the world if we shit ourselves,” said Tjeerd de Groot, an MP from the Democrats 66 party, which is part of the coalition government in the Netherlands. As the UK battles a biodiversity crisis, with about one in six native species threatened with extinction, rewilding and carbon trading are being touted as solutions. But Welsh farmers have spoken out about their fears of being sidelined and how they hope for the chance to pursue more nature-friendly farming routes. New restrictions on administering drugs to healthy animals have come into force across the EU. Campaigners have criticised the failure of the British government to pass equivalent rules to tackle antibiotic use in farming in the UK. Meanwhile, US sales of farm antibiotics classified as “medically important” fell by 3% between 2019 and 2020, according to US officials. Sales remain slightly up on 2017. Should animals have the same rights as humans? Writer Philip Ball has explored the debate around recognising animals as sentient beings. Experiments have shown, he writes, that farmed pigs respond as if “depressed” when kept in barren conditions devoid of mental stimulation. Finally, in rural Pakistan women have always reared animals but been excluded from selling them. Zofeen Ebrahim reports from one market in Sindh province that has been putting women at the centre of trade. “For the first time I felt free, I could make the decision of buying and selling myself,” said goat farmer Rozina Ghulam Mustafa. Share your stories and feedback Thank you to everyone who continues to get in touch to share their thoughts on the series. Reader Jacqueline Savill has written to warn of the failure to tackle the threat of antibiotic resistance. I’m a retired pharmacist. In the 1960s a House of Lords committee warned that the routine use of antibiotics in animal husbandry would cause resistance. By 1980, the first bug resistant to all antibiotics was found in the US. As you know everybody is aware of resistance, but unfortunately the generation that could remember the horrors of life without antibiotics has died out Please do send us your stories and thoughts to us at: animalsfarmed@theguardian.com. And sign up for this Animals farmed monthly update to get an email roundup of some of the biggest farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations.Brexit formally took effect two years ago this week, but the economic and political consequences are still unfolding. It is clear that the UK has manoeuvred itself economically into a difficult situation by leaving the single market. Now, in addition, recent numbers show dramatic consequences for a country that is struggling to recover from the pandemic. In October 2021 trade in the eurozone exceeded pre-Covid December 2019 levels by 4%, whereas the UK stagnated at a much lower level. UK trade had shown signs of a strong recovery from the coronavirus shock by the end of 2020, but this fell back significantly in 2021. Research undertaken by the IFO (Institute for Economic Research) in Munich suggests that further negative effects have materialised as the British economy adjusts to an array of non-tariff barriers ushered in when the Brexit transition period ended on 1 January 2021. These figures reflect the continuation of a trend that had been predicted. In a report for the German government published in 2020, the IFO quantified the effects of Brexit for Europe. We forecast GDP losses for the EU and much more significant losses for the UK, even in the scenario of a Brexit agreement. Some of the negative effects on GDP and trade kicked in even prior to the withdrawal agreement in 2020, as uncertainty increased and business adapted to the new environment after the 2016 referendum. The UK’s share of EU exports fell from 7.1% in 2015 to 6.2% in 2019 while its share of imports fell from 4.4% to 3.9% – these statistics include trade between EU member states. Over the course of the pandemic, we saw additional trade diversion away from the UK, estimated at a further fall of more than one percentage point. More red tape is part of the problem. Whereas the terms of the Brexit deal allowed Britain to avoid higher trade tariffs, most products now face at least one new “non-tariff barrier” to enter the EU market. Certificates of inspection, new customs requirements and a large volume of new paperwork all increase the time and complexity of crossing the border and push up the costs of trading. These barriers are devastating for EU-UK business during a pandemic, as it is harder for firms to find alternative markets, even more so for small and medium-size enterprises. For the UK, non-tariff barriers are even more problematic than for the EU. Even if the UK signs trade agreements with other countries, the idea that deeper economic exchange with the US, India, Australia, New Zealand, Canada or Japan could offset lost trade with the EU is misleading. One important lesson of the pandemic is the importance of diversified supply chains. But another is the importance of geography: countries trade primarily with their immediate neighbours. In 2019, 50% of UK imports were sourced from the EU and 47% of its exports went to the bloc. In a study on product dependencies, we show that these linkages are particularly strong for goods imported into the UK from five or fewer suppliers: 64% of them come from the EU. Most of these are intermediate goods (such as raw materials) which means that higher trade costs due to Brexit may also increase the costs of final production in the UK and exert additional inflationary pressure – on top of a global trend of rising prices and already distressed supply chains. For Europe, the negative consequences and challenges of Brexit go way beyond the GDP effect: the EU lost about one-sixth of its economic power and a far greater share of its foreign and security policy weight with the exit of a country which has considerable global influence. Brexit leaves a financing gap that will have to be met in part by higher budget contributions from the remaining 27 states. Moreover, the shift of power after Brexit means the EU in future risks becoming more protectionist and less inclined towards reform. The protracted nature of the Brexit negotiations should also act as a warning to EU countries. The agreement done with the UK could never eliminate all trade uncertainty as the conditions mean some critical issues will sooner or later be up for renegotiation. The final day of January 2020 marked the end of a more than half-century-long trend toward greater political integration in Europe. The consequences will affect us for a long time to come. Lisandra Flach is director of the Center for International Economics at the Munich-based IFO (Institute for Economic Research) and professor of economics at Ludwig Maximilian UniversityWisconsin residents cheered when Oshkosh Defense, a Wisconsin-based manufacturer, won a large contract to build a new generation of post office delivery vehicles - up to 165,000 – but now Wisconsinites are fuming about the company’s decision to produce those vehicles in South Carolina, rather than Wisconsin. Wisconsin’s political leaders and labor unions are stepping up pressure on Oshkosh Defense as well as the US Postal Service and White House to get the company to do that manufacturing to Wisconsin. The 10-year contract, which could exceed $10bn, is expected to create more than 1,000 jobs. These leaders warn that unless the production is done in Wisconsin, Democratic candidates will be hurt in that pivotal swing state in this November’s elections as well as in 2024. “We are extremely disappointed in Oshkosh Defense’s decision to accept the money from the US Postal Service and then turn around and send their production to a different state,” said Stephanie Bloomingdale, president of the Wisconsin State AFL-CIO union federation. “This is just another slap in the face to Wisconsin workers. People are very outraged about it. It doesn’t fit into president Biden’s vision to have high-road manufacturing.” Many Oshkosh Defense workers are wearing buttons to work, saying, “We Can Build This.” These workers, members of the United Auto Workers (UAW), say they’re dismayed that the company – unionized since 1938 – plans to do postal vehicle production in one of the nation’s most anti-union states. UAW Local 578 in Oshkosh has collected over 1,500 signatures urging the company to rescind its South Carolina decision, and Wisconsin’s unions are planning a big rally in February to further pressure Oshkosh Defense. “When we were notified the company won the contract, we were all excited – that’s another contract under our belt, more work for us to do,” said Thomas Bowman, a welder at Oshkosh Defense. “But when we were told it wasn’t being built here, we were all asking, why not? We know we can build it. We got the workers. We got the tooling. It can be done here.” When the Postal Service first awarded the contract last February, it described the effort as a “historic investment” in next generation delivery vehicles that will replace many postal vehicles that are 20, even 30 years old. The new vehicles will be designed to carry more cargo and will have 360-degree cameras, air conditioning and a front and rear collision avoidance system. The Postal Service noted that Oshkosh Defense was “evaluating which of their several US manufacturing locations” it would choose to produce the vehicles, and since all its existing plants were in Wisconsin, some people said there was a bait-and-switch when the company chose South Carolina. In a statement, Senator Tammy Baldwin, a Democrat of Wisconsin, said: “Oshkosh Defense has a history of manufacturing trucks for government service in Wisconsin with skilled union labor, so I remain deeply concerned that they decided to manufacture the postal trucks in what appears to be a newly acquired facility with inexperienced, likely non-union hires, in South Carolina.” Baldwin said she would continue urging Oshkosh Defense and the Postal Service to do further scrutiny of the production site in South Carolina. “I want these trucks made in Wisconsin,” she said. On Tuesday, the UAW’s president, Ray Curry, issued a statement saying that production of the new postal vehicle “is an opportunity for the Biden administration to make real investments in both a cleaner future and good union jobs, but the contract, as it currently stands, fails on both accounts.” Curry urged the administration to have the Environmental Protection Agency review the postal service’s contract because the union asserts the project will have “adverse environmental” and socioeconomic impacts that it says the postal service failed to examine in its Environmental Impact Statement. The post office says its impact statement was done in full accordance with federal environmental law after having reviewed all comments submitted. When Oshkosh Defense announced plans to produce the vehicles in South Carolina, it chose to use a large, empty, former Rite Aid warehouse in Spartanburg. The company said it was eager to have a “turnkey” plant where it could quickly begin production to help meet its goal of delivering the first vehicles in 2023. At the time, John Bryant, president of Oshkosh Defense, said Spartanburg “has a skilled workforce and a proven history in advanced automotive manufacturing”. BMW has its only US assembly plant there. Bryant said: “We evaluated sites in multiple states, including Wisconsin, for production of the [Next Generation Delivery Vehicle]. The Spartanburg, South Carolina, facility ranked highest in meeting the requirements of the NGDV program and gives us the best ability to meet the needs of the USPS.” Bryant noted that the company plans to establish a postal vehicle technical center in Oshkosh that will employ more than 100 people. When the Postal Service was asked about Wisconsin leaders’ demand to move production to Wisconsin, it said: “We remain committed to modernizing our delivery fleet in service to our customers.” It added: “The NGDVs will be manufactured in the United States, which is consistent with the terms of the Postal Service’s contract with Oshkosh Defense.” In October, the White House announced that in one of the administration’s first, big green projects, the infrastructure package would give the Postal Service $6bn so that 70% of its new delivery fleet would work on battery-electric power. But Cindy Estrada, a UAW vice-president, said: “We’re saying Build Back Better, but you’re getting it wrong right out of the gate. These are public dollars where we could have more control over making sure this goes to good, union jobs. “This is not good for the Democrats. Working people are hearing one thing about Building Back Better and seeing the results the other way,” Estrada added. “This is an opportunity. A mistake was made. This is not Build Back Batter. This is building back worse.” Biden administration officials say they have no ability to alter the Oshkosh Defense contract, noting that it was awarded by the Postal Service, an independent agency that the White House doesn’t control. They say their hands are, in essence, tied. Asked about the Oshkosh Defense controversy, a White House official responded, “As the President has said, this is the most pro-union administration in history. President Biden is focused on creating good union jobs across the country and believes firmly that every worker in every state must have a free and fair choice to join a union.” In November, AFL-CIO President Liz Shuler and 30 union presidents wrote to President Biden saying the Oshkosh Defense contract “missed an opportunity” to “ensure high-road, union manufacturing”. They concluded by asking him to “support our call” to have the Postal Service make sure the contract “supports and protects Oshkosh Defense’s existing, union workforce. In this way, the administration can join us in opposing Oshkosh’s use of a USPS contract to facilitate union evasion and a race to the bottom in wages, benefits and working conditions”.More than 100 far-right candidates are running for political office across the country as Republicans this year according to the Anti-Defamation League (ADL), a non-profit that monitors hate groups. Aside from those expressing extremist rhetoric and far-right views, the ADL has found at least a dozen of the candidates had explicit connections to ‘“white supremacists, anti-government extremists and members of the far-right Proud Boys”. It includes primary challengers running to the right of some sitting Republicans. In Arkansas’s third district Neil Kumar, who the ADL found has written for white supremacist publications, is challenging the incumbent congressman, Steve Womack, who broke with Republicans in voting in favor of creating the January 6 commission to investigate the Capitol attack. The openly racist views of Kumar prompted the Arkansas state Republican party to take the unusual step of declaring him a “non-recommended candidate” in the upcoming primary. The wave of far-right candidates includes sitting legislators like the Arizona state senator Wendy Rogers, who has admitted to being a member of the Oath Keepers, a far-right militia with 11 members currently under federal indictment for seditious conspiracy. Other militia groups have candidates running or already in local office. The Washington Three Percent militia claims members in dozens of elected offices throughout the Pacific north-west, the Washington Post found, “including a mayor, a county commissioner and at least five school board seats”. In Idaho the far-right anti-government activist Ammon Bundy – who led an armed standoff against federal agents at Malheur wildlife refuge in 2014 – is running for the governor’s office. Bundy’s group, the People’s Rights network, has now increased its national membership to 33,000 members and has at least 398 activists in 39 states, according to a report by Institute for Research &amp; Education on Human Rights. Many far-right candidates have no direct links to violent extremist groups, but do support a range of far-right views. The ADL tracked at least 45 candidates running for office this year that have “lent credence in some way” to the QAnon conspiracy theory movement. Many more hold on to Donald Trump’s “big lie” – the false belief that the 2020 election was stolen. Nationwide there are 207 current elected officials who aided former president Trump in efforts to overturn the 2020, according to data compiled by the Insurrection Index, a project of the voting rights group Public Wise. The index includes senators like Ron Johnson from Wisconsin, who voted against certifying the 2020 election and spread misinformation including suggesting that the January 6 attack was carried out by “fake Trump voters”. While many candidates are seeking local or national legislative seats, some are purposely running for bureaucratic offices whose chief responsibility is to certify elections. At least 11 election denying candidates are running for attorney general in 10 states,, according to tracking by the States United Democracy Center, a non-partisan group that monitors election races nationwide. Fringe political candidates are a part of every US election cycle, but while these 2022 candidates hold far-right views they are also part of a wave within the Republican party that is no longer fringe but increasingly represents a powerful – even dominant – wing in the party. “The real danger is not just the wave of extreme candidates, it’s their embrace, their mainstreaming by the Republican party,” said Steven Levitsky, a professor of government at Harvard University and the co-author of How Democracies Die. “The United States has always had nutty, extremist, authoritarian politicians around the fringe. What is new and really dangerous for democracy is that they’re increasingly running as Republican candidates.” Levitsky added: “At first you had a flirtation and tolerance with a handful of extremists at the fringes. We’re now seeing an army of extremists embraced by the former president. They’re marching in and taking over the Republican party at the state and local level.” In Oregon, Daniel Tooze, a prominent associate of the Proud Boys who has participated in street brawls with anti-fascists in Portland, is running for Oregon’s state legislature in the 40th district. Tooze ran for the same seat in 2020, failing to secure the Republican nomination in the primary, but he received 40% of the Republican vote in the primary. This year Tooze is the only Republican who has filed to run again. “When mainstream parties take onboard figures who deny the legitimacy of elections, refuse to accept electoral defeat, condone or even engage in political violence, you are putting democracy at risk,” said Levitsky. Tooze declined to be interviewed for this article but stated in correspondence: “I’m just a regular guy.” A review of Tooze’s campaign website and filing statement show no mention of affiliation with the Proud Boys. Tooze campaign messaging uses the language of mainstream Republican talking points. The Guardian has previously reported on far-right groups shifting their focus to local communities. Since the Capitol attack members of groups such as the Proud Boys have shown up to local venues including school board meetings to stand alongside mainstream conservatives, especially around issues such as Covid-19 restrictions. This month Tooze tweeted a video of Thomas Renz, a far-right anti-vaccine influencer, speaking at a panel convened by Senator Johnson that promoted misleading information about Covid-19 and vaccines. The video of Renz went viral in alt-tech platforms but also within mainstream social media. Tooze wrote of the video: “It’s time to hold the government accountable for what they’ve done to the people.”François Truffaut’s Jules et Jim from 1962 is the love triangle that feels like it’s happening in the swinging 60s present moment, like Godard’s triple-header Bande à Part. Actually, it’s set before and after the first world war, and the three principals finally reunite by bumping into each other at a Paris cinema showing a newsreel about the Nazis’ book-burning. (It’s based on a novel by Henri-Pierre Roché, who wrote another love-triangle story, Les Deux Anglaises et le Continent, which Truffaut filmed as Two English Girls in 1971.) Appropriately for this film’s internationalist ethos, neither male hero has a homeland-appropriate name. Oskar Werner is Jules, a diffident young Austrian living in 1912 Paris: scholar, translator and Francophile. He befriends the rather more worldly Frenchman Jim, the journalist and would-be author played by Henri Serre. They are instantly as thick as thieves, a couple of jaunty swells and elegant flâneurs, devoted to art and avowedly uninterested in money – though each, apparently, has some modest private income. They drink in cafes, discuss poetry, box together at the gym and in a rather desultory way pursue women, including the madcap Thérèse (played by Truffaut stalwart Marie Dubois) who has a party trick of puffing a cigarette from the wrong end like a steam train. Thérèse, too, turns out to be a journalist, revealing that she has sold a memoir of her amorous adventures to the Sunday Times magazine in Europe – presumably referring to the New York Times, though maybe it’s an anachronistic nod to the British Sunday Times magazine, that had just launched in the same year as the film. Whichever is meant, it’s a startling newspaper appearance in French cinema, to go with the New York Herald Tribune in Breathless and the Daily Telegraph in Monsieur Hulot’s Holiday. Both men fall for the same bohemian, beautiful force of nature, Catherine (played by Jeanne Moreau) having persuaded themselves that she resembles a beautiful Greek statue that they have seen; like a sculpture, Catherine is revealed to them without a past. She entrances them both with her beauty and wild freedom, and Jim instantly starts writing a roman à clef about the intensity of their three-way romance. When war breaks out, Jules and Jim must fight on opposite sides. So is Jules et Jim a secret queer love story? Or is their friendship an antiwar fable, Catherine symbolising what they vitally have in common? She is arguably a fatuous male creation, the original manic pixie dream girl, whose function is to showcase the men’s more substantial nobility. Yet perhaps her passion and restless unhappiness point up the essential flimsiness and mediocrity of these men. At any rate, Jim is on the winning side in the war and has the more flourishing career (although his novel doesn’t find a publisher) and there is something very literary about the film, with dialogue line-readings that often sound like the voiceover narration by Michel Subor. The dangerous quality of Catherine is obvious from the outset. She flings herself in the Seine on a whim while the trio are on a nighttime stroll, just to make them rescue her. And before they go on an impulsive trip to the coast, she empties out a bottle of sulphuric acid she had been meaning to take along in her suitcase (“for the eyes of men who tell lies”). It is a truly strange moment; the writing is on the wall. Moreau’s most remarkable scene comes when she insouciantly sings in front of Jules and Jim a song of her own composition, accompanied on the guitar by another of her lovers: Le Tourbillon de la Vie, or The Whirl of Life. (“She had eyes, eyes like opal / That fascinated me … The oval of her pale face / Of a femme fatale who was fatal to me.”) Moreau sings with a delicate, birdlike, non-fatale chirrup. And perhaps the film’s meaning resides in that idea of a fatal whirlwind. Before the war, Catherine asks Jim to meet her in a cafe at seven, and doesn’t show up. Later, she explains something about a hairdresser, and reveals she is marrying Jules. If she had made it to their date, and Jim had the courage to get his proposal in first, would things have been different? Happier? Or even more unhappy? Do love and destiny hinge on something as random as a missed date? Catherine is missing from the title but she dominates the movie. • Jules et Jim is released on 4 February in cinemas.Shielders are feeling abandoned. In the nearly two years since they were first told to cut themselves off from the world, people whose health conditions made them particularly vulnerable to Covid have seen official support fragment and then lapse, mask wearing become politicised, and lockdowns that have come and gone. But they have remained indoors and afraid, acutely aware of how the same society that renders them vulnerable – with the familiar indignity of rushed visits from carers or, now, demands to return to the office – doesn’t seem to care whether they survive. For many, the headlong rush back to “normal” means the end of the few freedoms they had been able to enjoy. A trip to a shop enabled by everyone wearing masks and prescribed social distancing becomes too much of a risk when those measures disappear. Shielders are forced to make unenviable decisions about risk, balancing their physical safety with the need for connection. Many have found solace in the online disability community, but fear that this will represent their only socialising for months, if not years, to come. Shielders do not want a return to lockdown, even if in some ways it was when they felt most supported. As three of them tell us below, they simply want mask wearing and some social distancing to remain, so they can venture out without being scared. Heather Cawte, 60, York I never thought that being unable to get out much would mean I was ready for a global crisis. But when lockdown struck, I was ready. Since I collapsed at the top of the stairs one day in 1999, ME – and later a reliance on additional oxygen for my severe asthma – had limited my ability to get out and about to a few trips a month. When Covid appeared, that changed to a few trips a year. I already knew how to keep myself occupied and cheerful during long periods of isolation. When people were panicking at the start of lockdown, I wanted to say: “Welcome to my life – this is how it’s been for me for years!” If anything, I have been able to socialise more. I now have regular scheduled Zoom calls that provide a link to the outside world, and friends FaceTime now when they didn’t really before. But I can count on my fingers the number of times I’ve left the house in the past two years: three times for my vaccines, a couple for hospital appointments, and a few times to sit in my sister’s garden to have a socially distanced cup of tea. Before we were jabbed, she would stand outside the window and call me, so we could see each other while we chatted. With vaccines offering a little bit of reassurance, she comes inside now, wearing a mask and socially distanced. We still can’t hug. My last trip where I went inside somewhere other than a doctor’s office was the first Saturday in 2020; I’d seen reports of the virus in China and other places and thought there was a chance it could be here. And it turns out it was – the first recorded UK cases were in York, where I live. My doctor has told me not to go inside anywhere, so I can no longer go to the embroidery groups that were once my social life. A friend sends me emails about each meet-up, but it’s not the same. I worry that as people move on with their lives, they’ll forget I still want to be included. The worst part has been the unending fear. Some friends think I’m overly cautious, but my doctor told me that, with my lungs, Covid would almost certainly kill me. I don’t want to die. So every time I do see someone, even though they’re tested and wearing masks, I spend the next week anxious and scared. I can’t see how I will ever be able to stop shielding. I’m 60 now, and I’ve just accepted that this is how life is going to be. Alan Benson, 53, Richmond-upon-Thames, London I’d been enjoying a small reprieve – and some social contact – at the beginning of last summer. People were wearing masks and socially distancing; people seemed to be aware of the virus. Even before Christmas, I was taking the calculated risk of seeing very small groups of people in spacious places. But now masks are gone and people aren’t being careful, so I’ve been forced back inside. I don’t think I’ll be going anywhere now until the weather improves in the spring and we can do things outside. The official lockdown was easier, because there was so much online. Some things are still online – I’ve been doing virtual cheese tastings! – which makes them much more accessible, but lots of things have gone back to in-person. I’m lucky that a lot of my friends are also shielding, so there’s that camaraderie, and I’ve made new friends on social media. But there’s still people who try to persuade me to go to the pub. They don’t understand that we’re still scared. This winter feels hard; the weather is horrible and I’ve run out of box sets. If I didn’t have my partner, I think I’d have gone round the bend. I am terrified of catching Covid – in the past 10 years, I’ve been hospitalised twice just from catching a cold – and I don’t know how to deal with that fear. So I just ignore it. I’m naturally inclined to put a positive spin on things, but there just isn’t anything positive to say. I’m taking one day at a time. I find it really hard to understand how someone can be so selfish as to not wear a mask or get the jab. I’m the first person to argue for bodily autonomy – disabled people are so often denied it – but this is a public health crisis. Your decision not to wear a mask puts others at risk, not just you. The rising misinformation makes me really angry. People care much more about their own ability to go to the pub and get drunk than my ability to just step outside my front door. With people so desperate to pretend the pandemic is over, I’m worried that if we’re not careful, we’re going to get to a situation where disabled people like me are pushed aside and left stuck inside. Jess Thom, 41, Peckham, south London The more society opens up, the more my world shrinks. When people were wearing masks, socially distancing, and reducing their contacts, I could take the calculated risk of going swimming to help manage my chronic pain. Now, with Omicron being allowed to rage through the population, I’ve been advised not to do even that. Seeing as I want to stay alive to see my niece grow up, I’m having to sacrifice my long-term health because some don’t want to wear a mask. I’ve been lucky that I’ve been able to keep working. But because I run an arts collective for disabled people, the weight of keeping all my staff safe has been heavy. Add to that the need to keep myself and my large care team safe, and there’s hundreds of extra impossible decisions to make each week. I’ve had to have really difficult conversations with my PAs about what risks they’re taking outside work. They’ve been really understanding but I hate it. Disabled people have been left to keep ourselves alive, without realistic advice, and it’s exhausting. Shouldering that responsibility is really lonely. The original shielding advice told vulnerable people to isolate – it gave no thought to the fact we have carers or families or jobs. We can’t just hide away for ever. When the pandemic started, I thought people writing this advice didn’t understand our lives; now, two years in, I know it’s that they don’t think our lives are valuable. That’s really hard to process, but I’m here to argue because I know how valuable we are. One of the big myths of the pandemic has been that there is nothing that can be done to help disabled people, because we’re inherently vulnerable. But that’s not true. My medical condition is a tiny part of what makes me vulnerable – problems with care, for example, are a much bigger problem, as are people who simply don’t care. If Covid protections were kept in place, I’d be safer. In the past few months, I’ve felt increasingly left behind by the government and everybody else. And that’s horrible. There is one thing that gives me hope: seeing more and more disabled people raise their voices in solidarity with each other. Covid itself has been a mass disabling event – think of all the people with long Covid – so I think our community will only get stronger. I believe that in the future, we’ll be so much harder to ignore. That’s what keeps me going right now, when there’s so much to make me angry.No one knew why Patrick Foster wasn’t performing better – he should, by rights, have been the star player for his club. Foster had been signed by Northamptonshire in his teens, developing through their academy and second XI. As a student at Durham University, he was mentored by Graeme Fowler and by his early 20s he had played against and alongside the likes of Virat Kohli, Josh Lalor and Dawid Malan. Even now, his teammates at Oxford’s Horspath CC would still see the occasional flash of the former professional’s undeniable talent; the problem was, he didn’t seem to be trying. The 27-year-old Foster batted recklessly, like someone working off their anger issues, or trying to get out as quickly as possible. Bowling – his specialism – seemed a chore, and he was unengaged in the field, preferring to stay out on the boundary. There didn’t seem much team spirit about him either. The young man spent most of the lunch and tea breaks on his phone, and his commitment was increasingly flaky. For someone who had once been desperate to play cricket for a living, he always seemed to have a reason why he couldn’t make the next fixture. When Foster left the club in 2016 it was under a cloud. “I’d taken advantage of their support,” says Foster. “My relationship with the game had become quite a sad one.” He had borrowed considerable sums of money from both the club and a couple of individuals involved at it, wrongly assuming that each would never find out about the other. Worse, he’d stopped making any repayments. The truth was, he owed a lot of other people too. Foster’s gambling addiction began at 19, the first time he ever laid a bet. In a new book, co-authored with cricket journalist Will Macpherson, he describes how his student mates dragged him into a betting shop, and while he was waiting for them to put on their complicated football accumulators, he took a turn at online roulette on a fixed-odds betting terminal. He won £72 on his first spin, and from that moment he was hooked. When his mates left, he slipped back into the bookies and stayed for the next five hours. Professional sportspeople are three times more likely than the average person to develop a gambling addiction. “As somebody who has a competitive personality, in an industry where gambling is normalised, you are more vulnerable,” says Foster. “You have huge amounts of free time and you often have more money than your peers. But the dangers are underestimated because in sport it’s almost seen as the ‘healthy’ vice. Drugs are tested for, drinking has a huge impact on your performance. Gambling’s something you can do as a pressure release, and a way of combatting boredom, that isn’t going to the pub.” There is no doubting, when you read Foster’s book, that it was his obsession with gambling that ruined his chances of a first-team career at Northants – or that his environment contributed to the issue. “The nature of cricket as a sport really lends itself to the problem,” says Foster. “You have sustained periods of time off the field, you can’t play when it rains, and the default in cricket changing rooms is to get the cards out and play poker or put horse racing on the TV.” In 2013, four years after his first-class retirement, the New Zealand batter Craig Spearman spoke publicly about the devastating effect that gambling had on him during his career. Two years ago, Hampshire’s Chris Wood became the first cricketer to open up about his addiction while still playing, and the help he sought has enabled him to continue his career. “There are without doubt quite a few in cricket who need help,” says Foster, who works with the Professional Cricketers’ Association to raise awareness of the issue, and is currently employed by Epic Risk Management, a consultancy that works to minimise gambling harm. “There are people we know of who need support, and a significant number on top of that who are treading a very fine line.” In October 2020, the Sporting Chance clinic founded by the former England and Arsenal captain Tony Adams announced that gambling addiction was now accounting for almost half of their referrals. When Foster started out on his career, he didn’t even know that it was possible to become addicted to gambling. “I knew full well about substance addiction but not about behavioural addiction,” says Foster, whose role focuses on educating young people, be they at schools or sports clubs. Not only is gambling what he calls an “invisible addiction” – in that it can take hold of someone without appearing to change their life on the surface – but it still carries a stigma which makes it hard for those in its grip to seek help. Foster’s gambling habit had lasted for 12 years when he hit his own rock bottom and could no longer hide the monstrous scale of his debts, or the chaos of his daily life. He was often making hundreds, sometimes thousands, of bets a day across dozens of online accounts; treated as a “VIP customer” by the bookmaking firms, he was showered with hospitality and free bets. But he was wagering far more than he could afford, and owed enormous sums to everyone from loan companies to work colleagues. As a private school teacher and cricket coach, he had even exploited his relationships with his pupils’ parents to fund his addiction. While his story is a shocking one, it’s not at all unique. Is it possible that sports bodies have kept their head in the sand about problem gambling because of the huge amounts of funding they receive from betting companies? “The one thing I would say is that things are improving, in that the issue is being noted and acknowledged,” says Foster. “But it needs to be taken a lot more seriously, because it’s only going to increase. “And where there hasn’t been improvement is around the advertising and sponsorship side. I understand that there are a lot of people who can gamble and not have a problem with it, just like a lot of people can drink without being alcoholics. But the volume, the saturation of advertising and sponsorship and exposure of betting in sport has gone past the point of any kind of balance.” The regulation and education around gambling in cricket has previously focused on anticorruption: when Wood made his own addiction known, he received a suspended ban from the England and Wales Cricket Board for betting on cricket matches. Yet – as Wood himself has since pointed out – those who watch and play sport are subject to an overwhelming barrage of messaging and frankly irresponsible promotions that encourage them to gamble. At Epic, Foster, now 34, tries to engage with all those who have a stake in this issue, including those working in the gambling industry. He wants to see the government, regulators, sports bodies and bookmakers take collective responsibility. “The gambling industry cannot take advantage of vulnerable people as they have previously because they do know what’s happening and there’s more they could and should do,” he says. “But until someone tells them they have to, they can do what they want – that’s where the regulators and the lawmakers have to do more. “The only way it’s going to work is if people get together and work collaboratively. That’s the only successful solution rather than everyone trying to defend their own position and blame each other. And that’s not happening at the moment.” As for his own cricketing narrative – it’s going pretty well, thanks for asking. After five years in recovery, which included setting up a financial plan to pay back every one of his creditors over the next decade and a half, Foster is once again taking the field for Horspath. “I wanted to pay them back through a positive impact on and off the pitch,” he says. “Plus I’m still a competitive being – I still need that fix. But now I play for the right reasons again, and with a smile on my face.” Might Bite: The Secret Life of a Gambling Addict by Patrick Foster (Bloomsbury, £14.99) is published on Thursday and available to buy now • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, visit this page and follow the instructions.The beer-soaked samba session was drawing to a close and, as usual, the crowd was preparing to vent its spleen. As percussionists from one of Rio’s top samba groups hammered their tamborins and tantãs, revelers raised their glasses and let out loud, cathartic cheers demanding the removal of a president they despise. “Fora Bolsonaro!” jeered the sweat-drenched throng. “Bolsonaro out!” The explosion of dancefloor dissent was nothing new to Renascença Clube, a storied association in north Rio that has been a potent symbol of black pride and resistance since it was founded by black Brazilians in 1951. In recent years – as public anger at Brazil’s far-right president, Jair Bolsonaro, has intensified – Renascença’s weekly Samba do Trabalhador (Worker’s Samba) hootenanny has hosted metronomic displays of anti-government rage. Yet last week’s protest prompted an unusual and incendiary reaction from the club’s management that has scandalized the world of samba and exposed the rancorous political fissure that has opened up in Brazilian society during Bolsonaro’s three years in power. The morning after the 24 January show, a statement signed by Renascença’s president, Alexandre Luiz Xavier Alves, appeared on its social media accounts, declaring that club statutes forbade “any kind of party-political demonstration”. The pronouncement appalled progressive sambistas and fans – with many attributing it to pressure from Bolsonarista board members trying to silence criticism of their embattled leader. “He who accepts evil without protesting against it is really cooperating with it,” one infuriated music lover wrote on the club’s Facebook page, quoting Martin Luther King Jr. Many saw the club’s perceived fealty to Bolsonaro – who has a long track record of hostility towards Afro-Brazilian and Indigenous people and culture – as a betrayal of its 70-year history as a cauldron of black resistance. “Here’s a club that was created to embrace people who were excluded from society – a club that was born to fight an oppressor – taking the side of the oppressor. It just makes no sense,” said Gabriel Cavalcante, a cavaquinho player and singer who is one of the Samba do Trabalhador’s nine members. The musicians hit back at the club’s communique, declaring themselves “tireless enthusiasts of freedom of speech”. “I felt furious – we all did,” said Cavalcante, describing how samba had emerged in early 20th-century Rio as a profoundly politicized form of expression for marginalized black Brazilians who had only recently escaped slavery. “There’s no such thing as samba without politics – samba is politics.” Cavalcante quoted a lyric from Candeia, a legendary 20th-century sambista, to explain the genre’s role as an outlet for protest and pain: “Samba is sorrow, it is suffering, it’s the flight of my woes.” The outcry forced Renascença’s directors to backpedal. They deleted their controversial statement and issued a second, insisting the “politically neutral” club was not responsible for political protests from artists or audiences. The president, Alves, claimed the first statement had been mistakenly published after pressure from conservative members who accused him of “complicity” with the attacks on Bolsonaro. Alves said club rules meant he could not say whether he supported Bolsonaro or his leftist rival, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who looks poised to win this year’s election. However, he insisted Renascença was open to politicians of all stripes and opposed censorship. If concertgoers wanted to pillory the president at the next week’s show, that was their democratic right: “We’ll be there to hear the voice of the people.” Four days later, on Monday afternoon, security had been stepped up as the people poured on to the club’s rectangular patio to send a defiant message to Bolsonaro and the board. Their outfits suggested little affection for Brazil’s rightwing leader. One spectator wore a T-shirt carrying the initials of Mexico’s Zapatista Army of National Liberation; another a cap honouring Brazil’s Landless Workers Movement. A third sported a red jersey with the slogan “Make Brazil 2002 again” – a reference to the year of Lula’s historic first election. Band members also joined the demo, donning T-shirts featuring kaleidoscopic Lula portraits and the phrase: “They’ll never stop the arrival of spring.” As his group warmed up, Moacyr Luz, the celebrated sambista who leads the Samba do Trabalhador, said he wanted rid of a president who had wrecked Brazil’s international reputation and clobbered Black culture. “Brazil can’t take this any more,” Luz complained over a late-afternoon Aperol spritz. “Bolsonaro is humiliating Brazil.” Two hours later, after the band played a succession of politically charged sambas, the first cries of “Fora Bolsonaro!” erupted, followed by screams of support for Lula: “Olê, Olê, Olê, Olá, Lula, Lulaaaa!” A huddle of Bolsonarista counterprotesters tried to retaliate, bellowing anti-Lula insults, but were quickly drowned out. Night fell, cups emptied, bodies swirled and a white Fora Bolsonaro flag was unfurled before the show reached its climax: an emotionally charged rendition of Apesar De Você (In Spite of You) – a dictatorship-era anthem that foresees an explosion of public joy after the collapse of the military regime. “In spite of you, tomorrow will be another day,” the audience chanted as several disgruntled Bolsonaristas glared at the floor. More than 50 years after that song was written, Luz voiced optimism that Brazil was approaching a moment of similar euphoria. “We must not retreat,” the sambista said. “All this discomfort is because they know their days are numbered.”Every year in the Canadian town of Wiarton, devout followers of Wiarton Willie the albino groundhog learn from the rodent if the grip of winter is loosening. The annual celebration is part of Groundhog Day, a North American tradition (and movie of the same name) which holds that if a groundhog sees its shadow after emerging from hibernation, six weeks more of winter weather are expected. But the world of rodent-based meteorology has been shaken by revelations that Willie, a celebrity so beloved that he has statues built in his honor, died last year – and his demise was covered up by town officials. In a break from tradition, Willie did not appear during Wiarton’s 2021 groundhog festival, which was streamed online because of the coronavirus pandemic. As questions swirled over the missing animal, the town put out a news release, poking fun at his disappearance. “Is Willie dead or alive? Would you question the Easter Bunny or Santa Claus?” the town wrote. “This event is not about Willie (the groundhog) and truthfully it never has been.” Months later, however, officials admitted to the Canadian Press that the beloved rodent had died of a tooth abscess and that the news had been withheld from the public. (Festive woodchuck fatalities aren’t unique to Canada: on Sunday, officials in Milltown, New Jersey announced the town’s animal diviner – known as Milltown Mel – had died, only days before giving his annual prediction. And in 2014, the then New York City mayor, Bill de Blasio, dropped Staten Island Chuck during a Groundhog Day celebration. Chuck later died of internal injuries.) But the recent saga of Willie has exposed years of scrambling and deception by city officials in the event of untimely rodent deaths. Wiarton traces its annual festival back to the 1950s, when the early seasonal predictions were provided by a trio of groundhogs. In the 1980s, the first “Willie” appeared on the scene. He lived to 22 and was found dead only two days before Groundhog Day in 1999. A funeral was held, shocking a crowd of children, who had not known Wille was dead. But the body in the wood casket was an imposter – a previously stuffed groundhog was used instead. “The smell [of the dead groundhog] was something you wouldn’t have wanted to be near,” Sam Brouwer, Willie’s caretaker from 1987 to 2002, told the Canadian press in 1999. “It would have been a closed-casket funeral.” Four years later, two understudy animals, dubbed “Wee Willies”, were found dead. CBC reported at the time that Willie himself was implicated in the deaths. His caretaker Francesca Dobbyn did not immediately inform the town, fearing the news would generate bad press. Despite calls for her termination, Dobbyn kept her job. In the event of a Willie dying, the town often has to scramble to find a replacement because of the distinct appearance of the white rodents. “With [famous groundhogs like] Punxsutawney Phil and Shubenacadie Sam, I wouldn’t be surprised if they had a different groundhog every year – people don’t really notice the difference,” Wiarton’s mayor, Janice Jackson, told the Canadaland podcast in a recent interview. “But for albinos, because they are rare, and some of them are true albinos with red eyes and others have brown eyes, there is a slight difference between them.” When Willie died in November, the town realized all groundhogs were hibernating and a new white one couldn’t be swapped. Officials improvised, having the mayor toss her hat in the air and make the prediction instead of revealing his death. “I didn’t want our community to be stunned on the day,” said Jackson. Wiarton’s 2022 Groundhog Day festival will once again be a virtual event. This time, a brown groundhog will be used.The Manchester United player Mason Greenwood has been bailed following his arrest on suspicion of raping, assaulting and threatening to kill a woman. The 20-year-old, who is regarded as one of England’s most talented young footballers, remains under investigation. Greenwood, from Bradford in West Yorkshire, was arrested on suspicion of rape and assault on Sunday after police saw a woman reporting claims of physical violence and sexual threats on social media. On Tuesday, he was further arrested on suspicion of sexual assault and making threats to kill. The striker, who has played once for England, was suspended from playing for or training with Manchester United until further notice after the allegations. The sponsor Nike has also moved to distance itself from Greenwood. A statement on Monday read: “We have suspended our relationship with Mason Greenwood. We are deeply concerned by the disturbing allegations and will continue to closely monitor the situation.” Images and allegations were visible on the woman’s Instagram on Sunday morning but have since been deleted. A United spokesperson said: “Manchester United reiterates its strong condemnation of violence of any kind. As previously communicated, Mason Greenwood will not train with, or play for, the club until further notice.” The Manchester United Supporters’ Trust (MUST) posted on Twitter on Sunday: “The club has now confirmed that Mason Greenwood will not return to training or play matches until further notice. MUST fully support the decision of the club in this regard.” Greater Manchester police (GMP), who have not named Greenwood, put out a statement on Wednesday saying: “A 20-year-old man arrested (on Sunday 30 January 2022) on suspicion of the rape and assault of a woman has been released on bail pending further investigation.”Growing threats from wildfires loom large across the American west as blazes burn with greater ferocity and frequency. Alongside them, residents’ calls for on-demand information during disasters has only continued to grow. In California, just hours north of the tech hub in Silicon Valley, a new app called Watch Duty has jumped into the void. The budding platform promises to alert and warn users about encroaching wildfires in real time – and it’s free. State fire officials have concerns about the potential spread of unverified information, but the founders say they are just doing what the government can not, and that in an era when conflagrations can consume football fields of land in mere moments – each minute matters. Watch Duty launched last year, and now sends push notifications to more than 80,000 users in four California counties about new and spreading ignitions. Equipped with photo-sharing features, it also enables users to share their own reports with the administrators. The app sprouted out of a strong social media emergency information ecosystem that has for years communicated unofficial information. It relies on volunteers dubbed “reporters” who listen for emergency updates in the low hum of radio static, analyze data from the National Weather Service and other sources, and discuss findings with one another before sending push notifications to their active user-base. Often, their info gets out much faster than official emergency updates. “The government cannot provide all this information to us,” Watch Duty reporter Damian Bouné said. “The way they do things – the way they need to do things – they are restricted from being very nimble and the environment we are in requires us to be nimble.” The app was founded by John Mills, a Silicon Valley veteran who retired early after launching startups mostly in the business sector. Mills splits his time between San Francisco and a sprawling Sonoma county property, purchased in 2019. He said he’d planned to escape into the verdant hillsides to start a different kind of incubator, one where people who want to solve the world’s problems can come stay for free while they tinker and build. In August 2020, the Walbridge fire raged near his estate, and Mills found himself among the thousands of Californians who spend summer evenings scanning dozens of browser tabs to discern whether the danger had passed or if it was imminent. Posts on Facebook and Twitter provided the only solace, he recalled. “My goal was to find the most famous and influential people and tell them we are building a non-profit so they could scream into the biggest megaphone we could possibly build,” Mills said of the contributors independently providing emergency updates online. Now, dozens talk in Watch Duty Slack channels. There are 11 official “reporters” assigned to different districts. Soon, Mills said, the team will expand statewide and he expects their user base to grow exponentially. Only time will tell, but so far, the public seems appreciative. Watch Duty does not charge fees or post ads. The team will begin accepting donations in the future and may explore a subscription model for add-on features. That apps like Watch Duty have sprung up isn’t exactly surprising. Every year, more and more people living in the American west are confronted with fire risk. Right now, official updates get distributed through community conferences often held hours apart. Evacuation orders are issued online, by phone, or sometimes in person. But at-risk residents are desperate for more information that can help them either assuage anxiety or jump into action. Oftentimes, they turn to social media groups, pages, or trusted accounts to piece together the situation on the ground. Representatives at CalFire, the state fire agency, and the California Office of Emergency Services said they understood the demand for fast information. But they cautioned against relying on non-official sources of information during disasters. “The speed that we get the information to the public is paramount and we work diligently with our partners to do that,” said CalFire battalion chief Jon Heggie. “But it also needs to be accurate. Any and all information needs to be verified.” “I can order a burrito and see where it is on the road in arriving to me for lunch – but I can’t necessarily do that for the weather or for fire or for disasters,” said Brian Ferguson, deputy director of Crisis Communications at CalOES. “Validating the information takes time.” Ferguson added that the state is working to improve the way intel is gathered and distributed. “It is not crazy to say that in the future you might watch a fire burning on a satellite feed. The world is evolving very rapidly and there is absolutely a desire to make sure that our efforts to keep people safe evolve in that same way.” Mills is not willing to wait. He trusts his team of local experts to decide if information gathered is good enough to share with the public. “The stars and bars and top brass are not happy with what we are doing,” he said. “But when the fire is going 30-plus mph it doesn’t care if you aren’t ready. People need to know how to prepare.” Joe Stewart, a captain at northern Sonoma county fire agrees. He’s seen first-hand how it works in his community. “Everyone in California has been hit hard by wildfire but Sonoma county has had three fires that have been once-in-a-lifetime fires. ” As the dangers mount, “people are starved for information”, Stewart said. Stewart sees the value of clueing in the public early. Perhaps it will allow someone to fuel their car when they see that a fire might head their way. Or maybe it will give them vital extra time to gather essentials before an evacuation. “The more our community knows about what’s going on,” he said, “it helps us in the fire service and it helps the community as well.” Mills said he anticipates pushback from officials as Watch Duty starts to scale, but he’s confident that his budding platform will be impactful enough without official endorsements. “Our hope is to be so important, so loud, and so obnoxious that we can’t be ignored.” Damian Bouné, the “reporter”, is eager to see their service expand. They will continue to rely on locals like him who devote hours and stay-up nights to inform their neighbors, he said. He appreciates the comradery Watch Duty provides and the way it enables people like him to engage in a new way, but more than that, it’s about protecting the places and people he loves. Born and raised in Sonoma county, he’s lived with fire his entire life. But fires have changed. “It is clear that it has become imperative that we do this,” he said. “People are dying and without this we are blind.”World Cup qualification is getting into gear everywhere, with new Canadian heroes, potentially dramatic play-offs in Europe and Africa and a tight battle for the remaining South American slots. In Asia, however, qualification has been dull – again. Even at the halfway point of this final group stage, it was clear that the four automatic places were going to be shared among the same old names of Iran, South Korea, Australia, Japan and Saudi Arabia. Since Australia joined Asia in 2006, only North Korea in 2010 have broken into that magic circle. That it has been too easy for these regional powerhouses is not just an entertainment issue. It is unlikely that the road to Qatar has been tough enough to iron out rough spots. The second round of Asian qualification started long ago, featuring 40 nations. Japan, who ran into double figures against Mongolia and Myanmar, and Australia won all eight of their games with a combined goal difference of +70. The thrashings produce debates as to what they do for the minnows but little is said about what they don’t do for the giants. That wouldn’t be a huge issue if this final stage of qualification, in which two six-team groups battle for the four automatic places, was a nail-biting scrap. It hasn’t been. In Group A, Iran and South Korea have qualified together (as they did four years ago) with three and two games respectively to spare, with 11 points separating second from third. The other four teams in the group have been poor. That Iraq, yet to win any of their eight games, are still officially in the running to finish third and enter the play-offs highlights the quality problem. Lebanon continue to punch above their weight in impressive fashion but are limited. The United Arab Emirates have disappointed. In Group B, it’s a three-way fight between the Saudis, Japan and Australia (as it was four years ago), with Oman the standouts of the others but still cut adrift. There were hopes that south-east Asia, the continent’s most passionate football region with more than 650 million inhabitants, would find a team to bridge the gap to the rest of the continent. They were soon dashed, with Vietnam losing all seven games before beating China 3-1 on Tuesday. As welcome as that was in Hanoi, it was tempered by the fact that China have been dreadful. They seem to be going backwards despite a naturalisation policy that has led to a number of players born in Brazil and England being drafted in. There are few others knocking on the door in Asia. Some of the smaller football nations such as Tajikistan and the Philippines are improving but those closer to the top have not taken the final step. Uzbekistan were long seen as the best hope and nearly made 2006, 2014 and 2018. The central Asian teams may be shedding their tag of the continent’s chokers but only because they aren’t getting close these days. It means that the usual suspects, who tend to care more about getting to the World Cup than being successful there, are not stretched. Japan are full of technically excellent players but, led by a conservative coach in Hajime Moriyasu, have been mediocre. South Korea have ambled into a 10th successive appearance and although performances have been better of late, it has been underwhelming. Australia are willing but limited and although Saudi Arabia are much improved under Hervé Renard, they have yet to be really tested. Iran, the first qualifiers and first-ranked team, are the best hope but are always going to struggle at the World Cup if they stroll through Asia and are suddenly confronted by opponents such as Spain and Portugal. There’s also a question of style. It is not just that the competitive games the Big Five play between World Cups aren’t that competitive but also that they face teams who sit back and defend in numbers. There are few chances for sides such as Japan to deal with opponents who come at them as they tend to do at the World Cup. Flying over tired European and South American teams to east Asia for friendlies is not the same. All this helps to explain the widespread appeal of a biennial World Cup in Asia. The big boys want more competitive games against non-Asian teams, the second tier welcome more chances to qualify and the rest are so far removed from the reality of the World Cup that they don’t really care what happens but would gratefully accept more money. The expanded World Cup in 2026 will admit eight from Asia, giving genuine hope to a good 15 teams or so, and genuine hope that this will focus minds and investments. There may be concerns as to whether the new faces will be good enough but at least they will be new.Barcelona have confirmed the signing of Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and revealed his contract has a €100m (£83.5m) buyout clause and a break option. The forward’s deal runs to June 2025 but with an option to agree a departure in June 2023 – when his Arsenal contract that was terminated on Monday had been due to expire. Aubameyang will earn about £2.1m for his first five months at Barcelona. At Arsenal – who paid a settlement to end his contract – he would have received about £6m in the same period. His salary is due to rise from next season when Barcelona’s financial position should be more healthy. The 32-year-old trained with his new teammates for the first time on Tuesday as the squad prepare for Sunday’s game at home to Atlético Madrid. “I’m very proud, especially because my family is Spanish from my mother’s side,” he said. “I’m really proud and happy to be here.” Aubameyang said earlier that the manner of his departure from Arsenal hurts and that he was always “100% focused and committed” at the club. He wrote on Instagram: “To the Arsenal fans, Thank you for making London home for myself and my family for the past four years. We went through ups and downs together and your support meant everything to me. “Having the chance to win trophies and the honour of being the captain of this club is something I will forever keep in my heart. I have always been 100 per cent focused and committed on doing everything I can for this club which is why leaving without a real goodbye hurts – but that is football. “I’m sad I did not get the chance to help my teammates in the last few weeks, but I have nothing but respect for this club and truly wish all my guys and the fans all the best and many successful years in the future!” Aubameyang last played for Arsenal in early December after being stripped of the captaincy for disciplinary reasons. The manager, Mikel Arteta, said the Gabon international had failed to demonstrate the “commitment and passion” to play for the club.The midterm elections are just over nine months away. What will Democrats run on? What will Republicans run on? One hint came at a Houston-area Trump rally Saturday night. “If I run and if I win,” the former guy said, referring to 2024, “we will treat those people from January 6th fairly.” He then added, “and if it requires pardons, we will give them pardons, because they are being treated so unfairly.” Trump went on to demand “the biggest protest we have ever had” if federal prosecutors in Washington or in New York and Atlanta, where cases against him are moving forward, “do anything wrong or illegal”. He then called the federal prosecutors “vicious, horrible people” who are “not after me, they’re after you”. Trump’s hint of pardons for those who attacked the Capitol could affect the criminal prosecution of hundreds now facing conspiracy, obstruction and assault charges, which carry sentences that could put them away for years. If they think Trump will pardon them, they might be less willing to negotiate with prosecutors and accept plea deals. His comments could also be interpreted as a call for violence if various legal cases against him lead to indictments. But if Trump keeps at it – and of course he will – he’ll help the Democrats in the upcoming midterm elections by reminding the public of the attempted coup he and his Republican co-conspirators tried to pull off between the 2020 election and January 6. That would make the midterm election less of a referendum on Biden than on the Republican party. (Don’t get me wrong. I think Biden is doing a good job, given the hand he was dealt. But Republicans are doing an even better job battering him – as his sinking poll numbers show.) Last week, Newt Gingrich, who served as House speaker from 1995 to 1999, suggested that members of the House select committee investigating the January 6 attack on the Capitol should face jail time if the Republican party returns to power. “The wolves are gonna find out that they’re now sheep, and they’re the ones who – in fact, I think – face a real risk of jail for the kind of laws they’re breaking,” Gingrich said on Fox News. Gingrich’s remark prompted Representative Liz Cheney, Wyoming Republican and vice-chair of the select committee, to respond: “A former speaker of the House is threatening jail time for members of Congress who are investigating the violent January 6 attack on our Capitol and our constitution. This is what it looks like when the rule of law unravels.” Trump and Gingrich are complicating the midterm elections prospects for all Republicans running or seeking reelection nine months from now. Many Republican leaders believe they don’t need to offer the public any agenda for the midterms because of widespread frustration with Biden and the Democrats. Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell, recently asked what the Republican party’s agenda would be if it recaptured Congress, quipped “I’ll let you know when we take it back.” But if Republicans fail to offer an agenda, the Republican party’s midterm message is even more likely to be defined by Trump and Trumpers like Gingrich: the big lie that the 2020 election was stolen along with promises to pardon the January 6 defendants, jail members of the select committee investigating the attack on the Capitol, and other bonkers claims and promises. This would spell trouble for the GOP, because most Americans don’t believe the big lie and remain appalled by the attack on the Capitol. House minority leader Kevin McCarthy (who phoned Trump during the attack on the Capitol but refuses to cooperate with the House’s January 6 committee investigation) will have a central role in defining the Republican message for the midterms. And whom has McCarthy been consulting with? None other than Newt Gingrich. The two have been friends for years and McCarthy’s chief of staff in his leadership office, Dan Meyer, served in the same role for Gingrich when he was the speaker. McCarthy knows Gingrich is a master huckster. After all, in 1994 Gingrich delivered a House majority for the Republicans for the first time in 40 years by promising a “contract with America” that amounted to little more than trickle-down economics and state’s rights. But like most hucksters, Gingrich suffered a spectacular fall. In 1997 House members overwhelmingly voted to reprimand him for flouting federal tax laws and misleading congressional investigators about it – making him the first speaker panned for unethical behavior. The disgraced leader, who admitted to the ethical lapse as part of a deal to quash inquiries into other suspect activities, also had to pay a historic $300,000 penalty. Then, following a surprise loss of Republican House seats in the 1998 midterm election, Gingrich stepped down as speaker. He resigned from Congress in January 1999 and hasn’t held elected office since. I’ve talked with Gingrich several times since then. I always come away with the impression of a military general in an age where bombast and explosive ideas are more potent than bombs. Since he lost the House, Gingrich has spent most of his time and energy trying to persuade other Republicans that he alone possesses the strategy and the ideas entitling him to be the new general of the Republican right. Gingrich has no scruples, which is why he has allied himself with Trump and Trump’s big lie – appearing regularly on Fox News to say the 2020 election was rigged and mouth off other Trumpish absurdities (such as last week’s claim that members of the House select committee should be jailed). Gingrich likes to think of himself as a revolutionary force, but he behaves more like a naughty boy. When he was Speaker, his House office was adorned with figurines of dinosaurs, as you might find in the bedrooms of little boys who dream of becoming huge and powerful. Gingrich can be mean, but his meanness is that of a nasty kid rather than a tyrant. And like all nasty kids, inside is an insecure little fellow who desperately wants attention. Still, as of now, the best hope for Democrats in the midterms lies with Trump, Gingrich and others who loudly and repeatedly remind the public how utterly contemptible the Republican party has become. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comGood morning. Vladimir Putin has accused the US of ignoring Russia’s security proposals in his first public comments on the growing crisis over Ukraine since December. During a press conference at the Kremlin on Tuesday, the Russian president told journalists he was unsatisfied with the US response to Moscow’s demands that Nato remove troops and infrastructure from eastern Europe and agree never to accept Ukraine into the alliance. “It’s already clear … that Russia’s principal concerns were ignored,” Putin said after talks with the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán. Putin also said the west was using Ukraine as a “tool to hinder Russia” and hypothesised that Ukraine’s entrance into Nato could lead to a conflict over Crimea, the peninsula annexed by Russia in 2014. What happens next? Putin said he was ready to continue negotiations with the west, which has said it is ready for dialogue but views Moscow’s demands as a non-starter. But … Russia has also continued deploying thousands of troops and offensive weapons to the Ukrainian border, appearing to threaten a strike if the Kremlin does not get its way. Joe Biden has said that he believes Putin has not decided whether or not to launch an attack but that he expects that he will “move in”. Fury over early release of Chicago officer convicted of Black teenager’s murder The early release from prison of a white Chicago police officer who was sentenced to six years and nine months for the murder of a Black teenager in 2014 has sparked anger among relatives, community organizers and politicians who are questioning the decision to shave three years off his sentence for “good behavior”. Jason Van Dyke was convicted in 2018 of the murder of 17-year-old Laquan McDonald, after video showed Van Dyke shooting the teenager 16 times. Van Dyke is to be released on 3 February, almost three years ahead of schedule. He will remain on parole for at least two years. McDonald’s grandmother, Tracie Hunter, called Van Dyke’s punishment a “slap on the wrist”, according to the Chicago Tribune. Local activists have led several protests over the past week, including a rally outside Illinois governor JB Pritzker’s home last Friday. A number of other actions are planned for Thursday, when Van Dyke will be released. Republicans to field more than 100 far-right candidates this year More than 100 far-right candidates are running for political office across the country as Republicans this year, according to the Anti-Defamation League (ADL), a non-profit that monitors hate groups. Aside from those expressing extremist rhetoric and far-right views, the ADL has found at least a dozen of the candidates had explicit connections to “white supremacists, anti-government extremists and members of the far-right Proud Boys”. This includes primary challengers running on the right of some sitting Republicans. The wave of far-right candidates includes sitting legislators such as the Arizona state senator Wendy Rogers, who has admitted to being a member of the Oath Keepers, a far-right militia with 11 members under federal indictment for seditious conspiracy. Other militia groups have candidates running or already in local office. The Washington Three Percent militia claims members in dozens of elected offices throughout the Pacific north-west, the Washington Post found, “including a mayor, a county commissioner and at least five school board seats”. In other news … US talkshow host and actor Whoopi Goldberg has been suspended from The View for two weeks for saying the Holocaust “isn’t about race” on Monday’s episode. Her suspension from the The View was announced in a statement released by US network ABC News on Tuesday night, after Goldberg issued a public apology. Former Miami Dolphins head coach Brian Flores is suing three NFL teams and the league itself, which he claims “is racially segregated and is managed much like a plantation”. Flores, who is Black, was fired by the Dolphins last month despite leading the team to back-to-back winning seasons for the first time since 2003. The lawsuit, which was filed in Manhattan federal court on Tuesday, seeks unspecified damages. Some of the White House records turned over to the House committee investigating the January 6 attack were ripped up by Donald Trump, the National Archives said. Trump also directed Rudy Giuliani to ask the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) if it could seize voting machines in three key states six weeks after the 2020 election, the New York Times reported. Boris Johnson attended a prosecco-fuelled leaving party during the strict post-Christmas lockdown, which is now under police investigation, the Guardian has learned. The revelation places Johnson at another event under investigation by police as he fights to stay in office. Live coverage here. Don’t miss this: Why Generation Z is turning its back on sex-positive feminism The idea that nobody should be judged for their sexual desires lies at the heart of so-called “sex-positive feminism”, writes Gaby Hinsliff. From the gleeful exhibitionism of Love Island contestants to Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion’s exuberant sex-positive anthem Wet Ass Pussy, the idea that enjoying sex is nothing to be ashamed of – in theory at least, if not always in practice – has filtered into young women’s everyday lives. But if sex-positive feminism champions women pursuing their own desires without feeling judged, it also demands that they refrain from judging the way other people have sex – at least between consenting adults. Now, some are questioning who this free-for-all really serves and how consent is defined, in a society where women are still heavily conditioned to please men. Climate check: Extreme heat in oceans ‘passed point of no return’ in 2014 Extreme heat in the world’s oceans passed the “point of no return” in 2014 and has become the new normal, according to research. Scientists analysed sea surface temperatures over the last 150 years, which have risen because of global heating. They found that extreme temperatures occurring 2% of the time a century ago have occurred at least 50% of the time across the global ocean since 2014. In some hotspots, extreme temperatures occur 90% of the time, severely affecting wildlife. More than 90% of the heat trapped by greenhouse gases is absorbed by the ocean, which plays a critical role in maintaining a stable climate. Last Thing: Idaho library has wait list for story eight-year-old hid on a shelf When eight-year-old Dillon Helbig finished writing his book, The Adventures of Dillon Helbig’s Crismis, in mid-December, he wanted everyone to read it. So during a visit with his grandmother to the Lake Hazel branch of the Ada Community Library in Boise, Idaho, Dillon quietly deposited his book, signed “by Dillon His Self”, on to a nearby shelf. Manager Alex Hartman and his colleagues discovered Dillon’s book in the “stories” section and read it, including to Hartman’s six-year-old son. “Dillon’s book definitely fit all the criteria that we would look for to include a book in our collection,” Hartman said. And so, with Dillon’s permission, the library stickered and catalogued the book and placed it with its holdings of graphic novels for adults, teens and kids. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comOfwat must do more to make the water industry in England and Wales protect the environment, the government has said. Setting out the priorities for the regulator for the next five years the environment minister Rebecca Pow said water companies should significantly reduce the frequency and volume of sewage discharges from storm overflows. In a strategic policy statement laid before parliament on Wednesday, the government urged Ofwat to challenge water companies on how they would be more ambitious in protecting the environment, and deliver resilient and sustainable water supply. Pow said: “The priorities we are setting out today build on the work we have already undertaken to reduce harm from storm overflows, improve monitoring and reporting of pollution incidents, making this more transparent, to tackle runoff from agriculture, and protect the health of our rivers and seas.” Ofwat is responsible for setting out what water companies should focus their investment on during each five-year spending cycle, the next of which is 2025 to 2030. Martin Salter, the head of policy at the Angling Trust, said he feared the guidance given to Ofwat could fall well short of what was needed to end the scandal of untreated sewage polluting the nation’s rivers. He said the policy statement failed to ensure a step-change in investment by water companies in outdated waste water infrastructure, which has resulted in record levels of discharges in untreated sewage from facilities that can no longer meet demand. In 2020, water companies released raw sewage via storm overflows into rivers more than 400,000 times over a total of 3.1m hours. Salter: “We were hoping for more than warm words in this water policy statement and a bit of restating the pollution monitoring provisions that are already in the Environment Act. This is the government’s opportunity not just to will the end of pollution but to actually deliver the means by getting Ofwat to allow much needed investment to flow into England’s creaking and leaking waste water infrastructure.” The Rivers Trust said the regulator had for too long been too narrowly focused on keeping costs down in the short-term, with little regard for long-term impacts on the environment and the legacy for future generations. Amina Aboobakar, the commercial director for the Rivers Trust, said the statement needed to be more ambitious. She said: “It fails to specify the need for transformational change, provides no direct guidance around investment gaps in failing/ageing infrastructure and how this is to be addressed through the price review, and for the need for water companies to drive more environmental resilience.” Water UK, which represents the industry, said it had long stressed the need for regulation to take a long-term view of the sector and allow increased investment to help address the acute challenges posed by climate change and population growth. “Ofwat must now work with water companies to ensure that the next price review enables the sector to meet government targets by authorising investment in the right schemes such as net zero and improving river water quality,” it said.When Joe Biden publicly pledged to nominate a Black woman to the US supreme court, conservative politicians, activists, and intellectuals certainly didn’t try to hide their disdain. The announcement was “offensive,” Texas Senator Ted Cruz argued, proof that the President didn’t care about 94% of Americans (everyone who is not a Black woman); and even though it’s unclear who the candidate will be, Mississippi Senator Roger Wicker already knows he won’t support this affirmative action “beneficiary.” Tucker Carlson railed against Biden’s “casual racism,” and the conservative legal establishment also vowed to fight against this “lesser Black woman,” as Ilya Shapiro, the vice president of the Cato Institute, put it. Legal scholar Jonathan Turley, finally, bemoaned “exclusionary criteria of race and sex” – which apparently is a problem only if and when they result in the selection of someone who is *not* a white man. Let’s remember: 115 people have been appointed to the court in its 232-year existence – seven have not been white men. Seven. This rather alarmed response tells us a lot about how the right views the political conflict, precisely because it is seemingly at odds with the fact that the conservative majority on the court is not in jeopardy. Any assessment of these reactions must start by recognizing their racist and sexist nature. They are revealing precisely because they were so reflexive, so visceral. Misogynoir – anti-Black misogyny - forms the basis of this conservative scorn. But there is something else on display here too. A Black woman replacing Justice Breyer won’t change the court’s arithmetic. And yet, conservatives still feel threatened by Biden’s announcement because they understand it symbolizes the recognition that having white men dominate the powerful institutions of American life is a problem – and that rectifying this imbalance is an urgent task. They reject the notion that the country’s institutions should reflect the composition of the people; they know representation matters, and that a Black woman ascending to a position like this is also an acknowledgment of past injustice. Conservatives see Biden’s announcement as an indication of how powerful the forces of liberalism, “wokeism,” and multiculturalism – those radically “Un-American” ideas that are threatening “real” (read: white Christian patriarchal) America – have already become. In this way, Biden’s pledge is perceived as yet more evidence that the Right is on the retreat. It is impossible to understand conservative politics in general without grappling with this pervasive siege mentality. The fact that a reactionary majority will dominate the supreme court for a generation doesn’t do much to alleviate these fears. The Right doesn’t look at the Court in isolation, but considers the judiciary as part of an all-encompassing conflict over the fate of America. And conservatives understand clearly that this conflict isn’t confined to the political realm, but plays out in all areas of American life: it defines politics, society, culture – and in some of these spheres, conservatives are indeed losing. The Right is reacting to something real: due to political, cultural, and demographic changes, the country has indeed become less white, less conservative, less Christian. The balance of political power doesn’t (yet) reflect that, as the US system has many undemocratic distortions and is deliberately set up in a way that disconnects these changing demographic and cultural realities from political power. But conservatives realize that their vision for American society has come under pressure. Nothing symbolized this threat to white dominance like Barack Obama’s presidency - an outrageous subversion of what reactionaries understand as America’s natural order, made worse by the fact that the first Black president managed to get re-elected with less than 40% of the white vote. Republicans are attempting to undermine democracy because they are under no illusion about the lack of majority support for their preferred version of “real” America. The fact remains that conservatives have secured a stable majority on the supreme court, thereby guaranteeing that the court will support the reactionary political project. But it is not just political power they seek, but cultural domination and affirmation. In the cultural sphere, the shift in power away from white conservatives has been more pronounced, leading to the recurring rightwing moral panics of recent years. The freak-outs over #MeToo, “cancel culture” and “wokeism” are reactions to the fact that traditionally marginalized groups have indeed gained enough political and cultural influence to make their claims heard and demand a modicum of respect. It has traditionally been the prerogative of a white male elite to determine what is and what is not acceptable in US society. That prerogative has come under fire, and it’s not something the judiciary can fully restore. It’s important to note that it’s really more the potential of losing privilege that is animating these reactionary panics. In practice, the traditional power structures have held up mostly fine. But still, the privileged status of white men has never been under more scrutiny. Put simply, being a member of the white male elite is slightly less comfortable today than it used to be. Against this broader background, conservatives understand Biden’s announcement as evidence that the dreaded forces responsible for the general assault on white male rule keep ascending within America’s institutions. Whether or not it has any immediate effect on the supreme court’s decisions, for a movement centered around the idea that America is a white Christian patriarchal nation, a place where white Christian men have a Right to dominate, a Black woman rising remains a threat. President Biden’s public pledge to nominate a Black woman to the supreme court represents an affirmation of multiracial pluralism. That’s why it matters. It’s an acknowledgment that the traditional dominance of white men was never the result of meritocratic structures, but of a discriminatory system, and that it’s time to dismantle that system. It will help redefine what the American political, social, and cultural elite looks like – reshaping ideas in the collective imaginary of the nation of who gets to be at the top. As multiracial, pluralistic democracy is under assault, that matters a lot. Thomas Zimmer is a visiting professor at Georgetown University, focused on the history of democracy and its discontents in the United States, and a Guardian US contributing opinion writerMy mother, Elizabeth Varughese, who has died aged 73, was a fine art and English teacher. She was known to most people as Prema, which means love and affection – love permeated everything she did. Born in Kerala, India, Prema was the youngest daughter of Curumthodathil Perumarathinkal Philipose and Mary (nee Kurian), who was a homemaker while the children were growing up, then taught at a women’s college. Prema was sister to Molly and Mon, and went to All Saints girls’ boarding school in Nainital, in the foothills of the Himalayas, where she was taught by missionaries. The family moved to Mombasa, Kenya, in 1956 when her father became regional manager, eastern Africa, at the Cotton Textiles Export Promotion Council. Prema then attended Kenya high school for girls in Nairobi when the family moved to the capital, later gaining a degree in fine art from University College, Nairobi. In 1966, her beloved father was killed in a car accident. The whole family was in the car. This had a lasting impact on Prema’s outlook on life, causing an underlying anxiety that a similar fate would befall those she loved. Despite this, and with the help of my father, she never let it hold her children back. She would remind us of our culture, but also encourage us to assimilate to life in the UK while we were growing up. In the 70s, Prema taught fine art and English in Nairobi to boys many of whom ran over long distances to get to school. In later years, she would comment while watching the Olympics that she had taught grammar to some of the Kenyan athletes. She met Thomas Varughese in Nairobi in 1972, and they married that year. Perhaps it was destiny as there was only one character difference in their Morris Minor number plates. In 1979, when my sister, Mohini, was five and I was three, we moved to Croydon in south London. Prema stepped off the aeroplane in a sari and thin cardigan to be greeted by cold, rainy April weather. From around 1980 until 1987, she started working at a heraldry company where she researched, created and illustrated family coats of arms. Her love of art pervaded all parts of her life. She excelled in still life and botanical painting and drawing, as well as painting landscapes inspired by her travels abroad. Family was everything to Mum. She treated my sister’s husband, Jason, and my husband, Justin, like her own sons. Her cooking was at the centre of every family feast and was one of the ways she showed her love. For her last birthday, the grandchildren secretly collated and illustrated all of Mum’s famous recipes as a printed book: Ammi’s Yummy Recipes, Made With Love. Her artistic talent was also realised in the beauty of her garden – she would spend hours each day tending to it, carefully considering the planting, colour palette and textures. Prema is survived by Thomas, Mohini and me, and her grandchildren, Sachin, Ashwin, Anjali and Mani.My father, Ian Robertson, who has died aged 85, was a passionate educator, family man and raconteur. Eleven years after qualifying as a teacher he became principal lecturer in chemistry at Jordanhill College of Education in Glasgow and soon after that a Scottish schools inspector, becoming the national specialist for chemistry. Widely published, he worked tirelessly to improve primary and secondary education in Scotland. Bombing, dogfights and V1 bombs marked his early years in Sheerness on the Isle of Sheppey in Kent. The son of Donald, a glass factory manager and veteran of both world wars, and Vera (nee Neame), a nurse and housewife, Ian moved with his family to Fife in 1945, where he pestered the local fishermen to teach him what they knew. In his wee boat, the MYOB (Mind Your Own Business), he caught mackerel; while at school at George Watson’s college in Edinburgh, he started fly-fishing. From the Tweed, he went on to summers as a gillie on the Oykel, earning enough to run his first car. The passion for fishing almost derailed his academic career, though, surprising many, he gained a degree in chemistry at Edinburgh University in 1958. University led to teaching, radical politics, and Phyl Cameron, a fellow student, whom he married in April 1959. A week later Ian began his first job, at Ross High in the mining town of Tranent, east of Edinburgh. His teaching style, white rat on shoulder, was highly successful; he absolutely refused to use corporal punishment and believed anyone could learn. They did. Four years later he became principal teacher in chemistry at Madras college in St Andrews. There, he piloted a new approach to teaching the subject; the endless hours paid off, with his pupils coming 1st, 2nd and 4th out of 600 entrants in that year’s O-Grade chemistry. He worked for the Scottish Examination Board, delivered in-service chemistry courses for teachers, was the Scottish representative on the council of the Association for Science Education, chair of the Education Research Committee, and sat on the British Committee in Chemical Education. In 1967 he won a year-long Shell fellowship to University College London, decamping with the family to London. In 1970 he was appointed to Jordanhill College of Education (now part of the University of Strathclyde); then joined HM Scottish Schools Inspectorate in 1974, becoming district inspector for Glasgow in 1980 and eventually staff inspector for the Borders, Dumfries and Galloway in 1990. Alongside his work, he built a dinghy, walked and talked with Phyl and their German shepherd dogs, bred Siamese cats, puppy-walked for Guide Dogs, laboured on refugee housing in Austria, and took his entire family camping to Russia. After a brush with cancer in 1996, he retired. A lifetime blood donor, passionate gardener, art enthusiast and family historian, he persecuted his children with the Guardian quick crossword, doing it every day until his death, and was fiendishly good at sudoku puzzles. He tirelessly cared for Phyl until her death from dementia in 2020. He is survived by his children, Kate, Peter and me, and by eight grandchildren and two great-grandchildren.My friend Min Marks, who has died aged 100, was a communist activist and wartime Bletchley Park associate. She and her husband, Jack, were associated with virtually every peace movement, anti-racism and anti-fascist campaign in Leeds for more than 70 years. Despite her sturdy communist affiliations, Min was ecumenical in her attitude to political campaigns, happily working with all who shared the objective in view. She and Jack were essentially secular Jews and their support of the Palestinian cause inevitably brought difficulties with some members of the Leeds Jewish community. Min also cultivated a wide array of friends and was a convivial host. She was born in Leeds, to Isaac Druyan, a presser, and his second wife, Rachel (nee Israel), and attended Allerton high school in the city. During the second world war Min volunteered for the ATS (Auxiliary Territorial Service) and became an intercept operator, taking down encrypted German morse code messages that were then sent to Bletchley Park to be decoded. She is included on the roll of honour there, and is also commemorated on its “codebreakers’ wall”. She became highly skilled at morse code and retained the ability to read it until late in life. Min married Jack in Leeds in 1946 and thereafter they were both active in the city’s Young Communist League. Unlike a number of Leeds party colleagues, they remained in the Communist Party of Great Britain following the Soviet regime’s crushing of the Hungarian party’s revolt against the rigidity of Stalinist control, saying that the communist cause was more important than any individual’s deviation from it. Min deplored the UK party’s 1991 decision to disband, and she and Jack then put their efforts into supporting the Communist party’s daily newspaper, the Morning Star, which had been able to continue independently. Min worked for many years for the social and market research company RSL as an interviewer, trainer and area supervisor, only retiring when she was well into her 70s. She was also a fundraiser for a number of charities, particularly the Yorkshire PHAB (Physically Handicapped and Able Bodied), who put her and Jack’s names on one of their PHAB minibuses. Jack died in 2017. Min is survived by by their three children, Ruth, Estelle and Anthony, five grandchildren and 12 great-grandchildren.Ofgem has announced it will reveal the full scale of the energy price cap hike earlier than expected, as it emerged that the government may introduce a measure to slash £200 from household energy bills in order to soften the blow. The energy regulator will announce at 11am on Thursday what is expected to be the steepest ever increase in household bills, amid growing speculation that the Treasury is considering a multibillion-pound move to protect households from the full brunt of the increase. Ofgem is understood to have brought forward its planned announcement on rising energy bills, originally set for this coming Monday, to help ease growing concern and speculation over the maximum energy tariff. The price cap is expected to climb by more than 50% to reach almost £2,000 a year, up from an average of £1,277 this winter, to reflect the record high gas energy market prices caused by the global crisis in supply. The surprise decision to move forward the energy cap announcement comes after it emerged that the government is looking at underwriting loans to energy suppliers in order to protect households from rocketing bills. The Guardian understands the Treasury is considering the “broad-brush financial support” as well as extra payments for vulnerable customers who will be hit hardest by the price cap increase. The multibillion-pound plan to “top slice” bills would allow suppliers to borrow government money and soften the financial impact on their customers by paying the loans back through higher tariffs over the coming years, according to senior industry sources. The scheme is one of a number of measures put forward by energy industry bosses to help protect customers against the steepest increase in billls on record. If the scheme is funded by the industry it could lead to bigger monthly energy payments for a longer period while suppliers repay the loan, but could help to spread the burden on hard-pressed families and avoid a spike in costs. However, suppliers have told the government that bigger payments for vulnerable families, via the existing Warm Homes Discount, should be funded with public money rather than via the existing levy on energy bills, in order to avoid raising costs for millions of households. One senior executive told the Guardian the “crude, simple” plan to cut £200 from the average annual dual fuel energy bill, first reported in the Times, would likely be “the only workable” solution to rocketing home energy bills before they reach new record highs from April. A spokesperson for the Treasury declined to comment on “speculation”. The government faces rising pressure to agree a set of measures to protect households after months of talks between officials across Whitehall, the Treasury and the industry regulator since gas market prices reached fever pitch in September last year. A source said the industry was increasingly concerned about the strained working relationship between the business department and the Treasury, as well as the limited role played by Ofgem. If the cap is increased to £2,000 a year, as expected, it would be the biggest jump since it was introduced in 2019. Ofgem had already raised it by 12% in August for the period from October 2021 to March 2022 to reflect higher wholesale prices. There are no available energy deals in the UK that are below the price cap, according to Money Saving Expert, a consumer advice website.Gabriel Byrne’s 2020 book Walking With Ghosts covers common territory for an actor’s memoir, recalling entranced first trips to the cinema, personal encounters with heavyweight movie stars and waiting in the wings on Broadway. Its arc, too, is familiar: rags to riches to ruinous addiction – in this case to alcohol at the height of his 90s fame. What sets the book apart is Byrne’s evocative and elegiac, often sensuous prose, particularly when detailing his childhood and what his father called the “theatre of the street” unfolding daily in his Dublin neighbourhood. This theatrical performance based on the memoir brings Byrne back to the Dublin stage for the first time since 1978, when he appeared at the Gaiety in Brendan Behan’s Borstal Boy. Behan himself passes through – seen on a bus by four-year-old Byrne – and Byrne also imitates his idol, Richard Burton, who he starred alongside in a TV miniseries about Wagner. But Byrne’s aim is not to share trivia about The Usual Suspects or Miller’s Crossing or any of the Hollywood thrillers that boasted his glowering but crumpled presence, with the glint in his eye often as sharp as his suits. It’s not that he’s short of colour – this is a guy who played Satan on a millennium’s eve rampage in New York opposite Arnold Schwarzenegger in End of Days. Instead Byrne is here to offer thumbnail sketches of the ghosts – whether family, friends or the long-gone film icons of his childhood – who have stayed with the actor into his eighth decade. The book interweaves episodes from across Byrne’s life, many lines using the familiar “I remember” creative-writing prompt. If the memoir reinforces the notion that we never shake off our childhood self, and that memories can be unresolvable, that impressionistic approach has been ironed out for this show, directed by Lonny Price and presented by Landmark Productions and Lovano. The result never quite captivates like the book. It has a more chronological timeline, and there is a rather straightforward sound design by Sinéad Diskin typified by waves and gulls for Byrne’s journey across the Irish sea to enter an English seminary aged 11. Against the gilded concentric frames of Sinéad McKenna’s elegant set, Byrne moves from desk to bench to bar stool to recount and enact episodes. The humour is often gentle but sometimes overegged: a neighbour with “new teeth like a row of fridges” is glimpsed memorably on the page but that simile is less vivid when the woman is also imitated. Byrne is a beautiful writer and some of the other details he conjures need space to linger. But he is also a wonderful physical comedian, evoking another neighbour whose gait resembled treading on mattresses. Most powerfully, Byrne affectionately adopts the voices of his mother and father, who provide the show with its best one-liners. He was the eldest of six children: how did they ever fit into the ramshackle home, he wonders, and later recalls the sensation of stepping for the first time on to carpet when he visits a fancy hotel with his mum. He is adept at capturing the constant bewilderments of childhood, artfully blurring it into a befuddlement of older age. The puzzles of a religious youth are particularly well drawn. (On the sacrament: how does God get into the wafer? And does he come out in your number two?) That blend of curiosity and confusion is a constant. Was this really me, Byrne seems to ask. Are these memories mine? There are other constants throughout his life: shame, isolation, worthlessness but also a benevolence that even sees him pity, while not forgive, the priest who abused him as a child when he tracks him down in later life. Byrne finds a sense of belonging – after stints as a plumber and a dishwasher – through the theatre, depicting the warmth while also puncturing the pomposity he encounters in his first forays into am-dram. The memoir recounted his first romances but the grand passion in this stage version is, fittingly, for acting itself. As he recreates his first cinema trip with his grandmother, we see laughter, fear and above all bliss spread across his face and he is a child again. At the Gaiety theatre, Dublin, until 6 February. Available to watch online from 26 February until 4 March.Do you tend to ditch the chocolate and flowers for a romantic journey on Valentine’s day instead? Whether it’s a trip to a beautiful wellness retreat, a city break in Venice or Paris, or something more adventurous, we would like to hear about your favourite places for a romantic break. If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. The competition closes on 8 February at 9am Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy hereMy friend Robin Le Mesurier, who has died aged 68 from cancer, was a rock guitarist best known for his work with Sir Rod Stewart and the French actor and singer Johnny Hallyday. The son of two of Britain’s most well-known actors, John Le Mesurier and Hattie Jacques, Robin described his 1960s childhood in his birthplace of Earl’s Court, London, as “charmed, bohemian but also chaotic”. Woken up in the middle of the night by the likes of Spike Milligan and Peter Sellers, as well as various jazz musicians jamming loudly in the house, didn’t seem out of the ordinary. “To me, visitors such as Kenneth Williams, Joan Sims and Harry Secombe were just friends and colleagues of Mum and Dad,” he said. Schooldays were not his happiest: he attended Sussex House prep school in London, where he described himself as being “completely out of place”, and then Westminster City grammar school, where he was bullied for having a famous mother. Given his first guitar at the age of nine, he cut his first single for EMI at the age of 16, and was then offered a place at the Royal College of Music. But the lure of rock’n’roll won out over classical music. His first band, Reign, opened for bands such as Genesis and the Kinks, and for a year in the 70s he became a Womble – until a drugs bust ended his career as the furry Wellington. Robin’s next band, Air Supply, was booked as support for Rod Stewart’s US tour in 1977, and his guitar-playing made such an impression on Stewart that in 1981 he was asked to join his band – a move that led him to settle permanently in Los Angeles. “I’ve had many wonderful and creative guitarists in my band, but Robin was always just a cut above,” said Stewart. “He was a beautiful, soulful lead, driving rhythms like a locomotive, and an unforgettable stage presence.” From 1994 Robin worked with Hallyday, becoming his musical director until Hallyday’s death in 2017. Robin was also a founder member, with Bernie Taupin and the guitarist Jim Cregan, of the band Farm Dogs. I got to know Robin while working with him on his autobiography, and despite a history of rock’n’roll antics in which hotel rooms were trashed and copious amounts of drugs and drink were taken, he possessed a gentle, dry wit, and remained the sweetest and politest of men. His good manners were instilled in him from an early age by his parents, and were there with him always. I was with Robin one day when we went to see Hallyday in Los Angeles. They had known each other for 20 years and described themselves as “brothers”. Yet when we arrived ten minutes before our appointed time, Robin insisted that we stay in the car as “it would be impolite to arrive early”. Robin is survived by his wife, Jules, whom he married in 1999.Cookies are one of the many questionable pacts we have made online, where privacy is exchanged for convenience without being entirely sure about the consequences. As with so many arrangements involving our data, this deal is being rewritten under the gaze of regulators. Last week Google issued an update on how it is replacing cookies on its Chrome browser, which is important because two-thirds of web browsing around the world is on Chrome. Put simply, a cookie is a text file that is dropped into your browser by a website when you visit it. In the UK and EU, you are asked to consent to multiple cookies when you click on a site (and yes it’s worth checking just how many cookies you agree to take on when you give your consent). The new head of the UK’s data watchdog, John Edwards, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme last week – on international data privacy day – that he is no fan of the consent-clicking process. “That’s not a very effective way of rebalancing the power relationship between consumers and companies that profit from consumers’ data,” he said. Cookie monsters Cookies identify individual users so the website can record all kinds of things about your activity. Some of this info is helpful, like whether you have logged in to the site before, so you don’t have to constantly enter your user name and password every time you visit in the future. This sort of thing is known as a first party cookie. However, there are types of this technology known as third party cookies that facilitate the storing of information (like your browsing history and your location) by commercial partners – often marketing or advertising businesses – that might make you slightly more uncomfortable. If you check the cookie consent box on any website, you will be surprised at the number of advertising and marketing-related cookies. Third party cookies, through agreements with multiple publishers and websites, are able to create a profile of individual users and serve targeted adverts to you while you browse across multiple websites. Like other news publishers, the Guardian asks readers if it can use cookies, for purposes such as measuring how often readers visit and use our site, and showing readers personalised ads. In what appears to be a win for privacy advocates and a blow to publishers, advertisers and the intermediaries that facilitate personalised ads across the web, third party cookies are being phased out across the board. This is in part due to pressure from regulators and pro-privacy laws like GDPR. Apple and Mozilla have blocked third party cookies on their Safari and Firefox browsers and Google is doing the same on Chrome by 2023. Leaving the FLoC behind Google is replacing third party cookies with a set of technologies called a privacy sandbox and last week it announced it was changing one of the key proposals. The initial plan was to bundle people into groups (cohorts) with similar interests based on their browsing habits and allow advertisers to serve ads to those groups. This was called FLoC, for Federated Learning of Cohorts. After feedback from the industry, which included warnings that individuals could still be identified as they browsed across the web under the FLoC system, Google is now proposing a different system. It is called Topics, in which the Chrome browser notes your top interests for that week based on your browsing history and registers them in the browser (like a cookie would) under broad categories like “fitness” or “travel”, which are limited in number. Advertisers and publishers are able to access this data via a browser API, which is a feed of information that they can tap into. Then when users visit a site that has signed up to the system, three of the user’s “topics” of interest are shared with the site and its advertisers, allowing the site to serve ads that reflect the user’s interest in, for instance, rock music or cars. Google said the topics will not include sensitive categories such as gender or race and the system will allow users to see the topics, remove any they don’t like or disable the feature completely. The topics are deleted every three weeks. In the UK the Competition and Markets Authority and the Information Commissioner’s Office are looking at the proposals, from a competition and privacy perspective (ie are there disadvantages for Google’s rivals in provision of online adverts and will users’ data be abused). Rivals are also concerned that Google, which has said other parts of its business like YouTube will adhere to these changes, still has a basic advantage through the sheer amount of existing data it has on users. Vinay Goel, the Google product director in charge of the sandbox project, says: “We have developed these new proposals in the open, seeking feedback at every step to ensure that they work for everyone, without preferential treatment or advantage to Google’s advertising products or to Google’s own sites.” According to the Open Rights Group, which campaigns for people’s digital rights, Google’s new proposals signal an end to the data gold rush under third party cookies. “Conducting behavioural profiling in the browser could constitute an alternative to the existing data-free-for-all model, where your browsing activities are broadcasted to thousands of unknown intermediaries,” says Mariano delli Santi, legal and policy officer at ORG. However, the ORG remains concerned over several issues including the lack of a default opt-in stance, which would see a browser omitted from the scheme unless they chose to be included. This is still behavioural profiling, says the ORG. Goel adds: “We started the Privacy Sandbox initiative to improve web privacy for users, and Topics will allow for users to have greater control over relevant ads without sharing sensitive details such as gender or race.” Nobody’s happy – so everybody wins It is a big change for the digital advertising industry. Farhad Divecha, managing director of UK digital marketing agency Accuracast, wonders if the shift will satisfy anyone. “Privacy advocates are going to feel that this is still not quite enough, because there’s reasons why this is still tracking behaviour. And on the flip side, advertisers are going to say you’re taking away stuff from me. And you’re taking away my ability to target specifically whom I want to be reaching.” Paul Bannister, chief strategy officer at US digital ad management firm CafeMedia, says the momentum nonetheless is with privacy. “I think the pendulum has swung pretty far towards privacy here.” But he adds: “because it’s easier to understand the topics system, hopefully it will be more something that users feel good about. And if users are happier with the outcome that is better for advertisers, because it makes people more supportive of what their data is being used for.” This could be just the beginning – as internet users become more aware of that trade off between privacy and convenience, and regulators continue to challenge the marketing industry upon which much of big tech profits rely, the pendulum could swing further. If you want to read the complete version of the newsletter please subscribe to receive TechScape in your inbox every Wednesday.Vodafone’s chief executive has confirmed he is in talks with rivals in its biggest markets to strike deals with “speed and resolve”, as the telecoms company seeks to respond to calls for a business shake-up from the new activist investor Cevian. Nick Read, who has argued that the European telecoms industry must consolidate to create more profitable businesses that are more attractive to investors, confirmed the mobile operator was speaking to rivals in the UK, Germany, Italy and Spain. The chief executive has struck 19 deals since being appointed chief executive three years ago, a tempo that he said he intended to keep up, in his first comments since Europe’s largest activist shareholder was revealed to have taken a stake in Vodafone. “There has been media speculation about merger and acquisition activity in specific European markets,” said Read. “We feel the UK needs to consolidate to give [us] industrial scale so we can improve returns. “We are active on a number of fronts and seeing good engagement from our counterparties, which confirms that we have a series of potential opportunities to shape the business with stronger assets in healthier markets and unlock value for our shareholders. We are approaching consolidation with speed and resolve.” Vodafone has been linked with a string of potential deals including a takeover or merger with Three UK as well as counterparts in Germany, Spain and Italy. “I look at markets where I see a strong case for consolidation without the need for punitive remedies, Those markets [are] Spain, Italy, the UK and now Portugal. Those four markets are the largest opportunity with a good and solid rationale,” he said. “We are engaged with multiple parties in multiple markets. We will remain open-minded and pragmatic to work through the opportunities at pace.” Vodafone also controls 82% of Vantage Towers, its European mobile tower network floated last year, which Read confirmed was in talks with similar businesses owned by Germany’s Deutsche Telekom and France’s Orange. “Bringing that combination together would make a European champion in towers. That would underpin infrastructure for the digital decade Europe wants to achieve,” he said. Swedish-headquartered Cevian, known for taking longer-term positions to turn around businesses without taking aggressive action, is seeking a consolidation of the sprawling £34bn Vodafone empire to focus on its most profitable markets and inject more telecoms experience at board level. “We do not comment on who is on our share register if it is not at a disclosable level,” he said. “But we have a regular dialogue with our large and small shareholders. I have looked at speculation [about what Cevian wants], to me everyone is confirming we are doing the right things.” Vodafone’s shares rose almost 3% in early trading on Wednesday as investors warmed to the company’s mostly positive results, during which the company added 152,000 customers in the UK and reached almost 1 million fixed broadband customers, as its business benefited from Black Friday and strong iPhone sales. The company will receive a revenue boost this year from the return of roaming charges for British travellers heading to Europe.Larb, also transcribed as larp, lap, laap, laarp and laab, is a dish that doesn’t fit easily into western boxes. A highly seasoned mixture of chopped meat, fish, tofu or mushrooms – Thai food writer Leela Punyaratabandhu clarifies that laab “is a verb denoting the mincing of meat” – that, as fellow Thai food writer Kay Plunkett-Hogge observes, can “also be referred to as a salad by virtue of its being served frequently in lettuce leaves”. It’s not even strictly Thai, though the travel hub of south-east Asia is where most Brits are likely to have come across it; a speciality of the north, it’s said to have originated with the Tai people, and variations on the dish are also found in Laos, Myanmar and south-western China. The one you’re most likely to be familiar with, though, is laarp isaan, from the north-eastern Thai region of the same name: as Punyaratabandhu explains, “the way lap is made varies from province to province, and it is hard to nail down a normative version – if there is one. But this version is the most common in Bangkok and at Thai restaurants outside Thailand. It also happens to be one of the simplest.” The meat (or not) Almost all the recipes I try make it clear that almost any meat will do; as Plunkett-Hogge says in her book Baan, “feel free to substitute the duck with pork, chicken or rabbit … firm tofu can also be used, as can mushrooms for non-meat eaters”. I try pork (lean is generally specified), chicken, duck and tofu, and can confirm they’re all great blank canvasses for the seasonings. But my testers and I found the chicken breast I used in Punyaratabandhu’s recipe a bit dry, so although the meat should ideally be fairly lean (it’s not cooked long enough for the fat to melt), I suspect thigh, or a mixture of the two, might be a better choice if you opt for chicken. Most recipes call for ground or minced meat, with only David Thompson specifying that it should be hand-chopped – the celebrated Australian-born chef tells Marina O’Loughlin that one should do this “just before cooking, so it doesn’t get a chance to oxidise, and you don’t get a bloody, messy mix”. Plunkett-Hogge, who sends me a video of a Karen elephant mahout chopping buffalo meat with an impressive-looking blade, says she likes to “hand-chop when I can – the meat should have a nice mouth-feel and a bit of texture. But my attitude is that the dish is so good that you can use what you can get. Most of my pals buy mince from the local supermarket or butcher. I don’t like a lot of gristle or lumps, but some do.” I also prefer the slightly larger pieces you get when you chop rather than grind meat, but if you’d prefer to buy mince, go for it. The cooking If you use tofu, I’d recommend frying it in neutral oil on a medium-high heat until golden, rather than deploying the “ruan” technique “of cooking ground meat in some water”, which Pailin Chongchitnant of the Hot Thai Kitchen blog and channel suggests came about because Isaan is a “very poor part of Thailand, and … water is cheaper than oil, so if you can make something cook in water instead of oil, then why not?” Happily, this also leaves the meat juicy, instead of greasy, as Serious Eats’ J Kenji López-Alt found the fried variety, while poaching, he says, robs the meat of some of its flavour. He describes ruan, which fries the meat in a small volume of liquid, as “the best of both worlds”. My testers and I like the way he adds a little fish sauce to the pan, so the meat absorbs some of the intensely savoury flavour that’s a key note of the dish as a whole. The veg Often described as a salad, as Plunkett-Hogge makes clear, this is more down to the accompaniments than to the core ingredients, though she does tell me she likes her larb heavy on the shallots. These are perhaps the most common addition, usually finely sliced and raw, but I like the way Chongchitnant adds them to the hot pan to wilt. López-Alt fries his until crisp, while Thompson also mashes charred shallots into the mixture to give his version a slightly smoky back note. We find that the punchy heat of the raw variety (little red shallots are fierier than pink ones, but both will do) works best with the other pungent flavours at play here, but if you’d like a little more sweetness, you could go off piste and add crisp shallots as a garnish. Chongchitnant, López-Alt and Thompson all add spring onions, too, and the latter fried garlic as well, but I’m going to keep things simple and stick with just the one allium, because I’d like to taste the meat. Punyaratabandhu starts her dish with toasted galangal, which has a peppery, slightly bitter, aromatic flavour, while Plunkett-Hogge adds the more delicately perfumed lemongrass. Both are fine additions, if you have them, but neither feels as if they make or break the dish, unlike the sharp shallots or fresh herbs, which, as López-Alt notes, “play a major role” here. Mint and coriander are most usual, with López-Alt also suggesting basil. A recipe from the Rosa’s Thai Cafe chain includes dill, which is a little left-field, perhaps, but easier to get hold of than the sawtooth coriander or Vietnamese mint called for by Thompson, which prove elusive even after a tour of London’s south-east Asian specialists. If soapy coriander and sweet mint are good enough for Punyaratabandhu, however, they’re good enough for me. The seasonings Punyaratabandhu informs readers of her book Simple Thai Food that larb should be “predominantly sour, then salty” – something echoed by Plunkett-Hogge, who describes its flavour profile as “sharp, hot and salty”. This means lots of fish sauce and lime juice, but not sugar – or at least not more than a pinch. The two tablespoons of palm sugar in the Serious Eats version reminds me of Plunkett-Hogge’s plea that the dish “should not be sweet. This is a huge bugbear of mine with Thai food – sugar has crept in where in should not be. Isaan food is sharp, hot, sour, salty – it’s a super-hot climate and you want those flavours.” That heat comes from ground dried bird’s eye chillies. López-Alt cautions that the quality of the chillies is of utmost importance: “I’ve seen recipes that call for simply using dried red chilli flakes, but they lack the dusky, smoky and sweet-hot flavour of Thai-style dried ground chilli.” Fortunately, they’re fairly readily available in their whole form, and can be ground and added to taste. Finally, we come to khao khua, or glutinous rice powder, an ingredient that sounds intimidating, but is literally sticky rice toasted in a dry pan and then smashed to smithereens in a mortar – in Chongchitnant’s opinion, “without this, it’s not a laap”. The ground rice adds a nutty, faintly bitter flavour and an interesting grittiness and, though it’s available readymade, it is much better prepared at home: as Chongchitnant notes, the aroma is “very fleeting”, so it’s worth making only as much as you need. Serving Larb should be served warm or at room temperature with a mixture of crunchy fresh vegetables (lettuce leaves, cucumber sticks, raw beans or cabbage) and steamed sticky rice. You could top it with fresh chillies and crunchy crumbled pork scratchings, as López-Alt recommends, but I think you’d be wasting time you could be spending eating. Perfect pork (or chicken, duck or tofu) larb Prep 20 min Cook 2 min Serves 2 with rice and vegetables, or 4 as part of a larger meal 3 tbsp glutinous/sticky rice, plus extra to serve 200g fairly lean pork, chicken thighs, duck breast or tofu (if using the latter, see note re frying above), coarsely minced or finely chopped by hand 1 tbsp fish sauce (vegan if necessary) 4 red shallots, or 2 round shallots, peeled and finely sliced ½-2 tsp Thai red chilli powder (made from ground dried bird’s eye chillies), to taste – I used 1 tsp, which made the finished dish quite spicy 1½ tbsp lime juice 1 large handful fresh coriander, roughly chopped 1 large handful fresh mint leaves, roughly chopped Steamed sticky rice, lettuce leaves, cucumber slices, raw green beans etc, to serve To make the rice powder, toast the raw rice in a dry frying pan over a medium-low heat, stirring or shaking the pan very regularly, until it turns a deep golden colour, then use a pestle and mortar or a spice grinder to grind it to a powder. Put two tablespoons of water in a small pan and bring to a simmer over a medium-high heat. Add the meat and a dash of fish sauce, and cook, stirring, until just done (even if you want it cooked through, be careful not to overdo it or the end result will be rubbery). Take the pan off the heat and stir in the sliced shallots. Leave for a few seconds to wilt, then add the chilli, the rest of the fish sauce and the lime juice. Taste and add more of any of these to taste, then stir through the herbs and a tablespoon and half of the rice powder. Serve warm with sticky rice and crunchy vegetables. • Laab, lap, laap, larb: it comes to us transcribed in many different ways, but which is your favourite version (I’m intrigued by spicy, offal-rich laab kua), and what do you like to serve it with? UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoAs the lights dim and the noise booms around her Caroline Dubois will walk to the professional ring for the first time with her trainer, Shane McGuigan, on Saturday night in Cardiff. Her debut in front of a packed and fevered crowd will continue one of the most intriguing collaborations in British boxing. Dubois, who has just turned 21, is the most promising young female fighter in the country while the 33-year-old McGuigan has established himself among the world’s best trainers. Her fight against Vaida Masiokaite, a Lithuanian journeywoman who has had 20 pro bouts, is third on a bill headlined by athe grudge match between Liam Williams and Chris Eubank Jr. It is yet another significant boost for women’s boxing that the chief support features Claressa Shields, the formidable American, and will be preceded by Dubois’s highly anticipated entry into the professional ranks. Boxing is finally back in Britain, after the sport has been in lockdown since Christmas, and female fighters will play a more prominent role than ever. On 30 April, Katie Taylor and Amanda Serrano will headline the first promotion that is likely to make both boxers more than $1m each when they meet at Madison Square Garden. Today we are a long way from New York in an engagingly stark boxing club that adjoins Leyton cricket ground in east London. All nine of McGuigan’s stable of fighters – including the world champion cruiserweight, Lawrence Okolie, and Caroline’s brother, the heavyweight Daniel Dubois – are here. It is a cold and murky Tuesday but, inside, the gym hums with purpose and resolve. As other fighters stretch, skip or hit the heavy bags dangling from the high ceiling, McGuigan wraps Dubois’s hands with care. She will soon spar with Hannah Rankin, an experienced 31-year-old who recently won the vacant WBA super-welterweight world title. But there is little doubt that the coming star is the prodigiously talented Dubois. When he worked at the BBC, Mike Costello, the renowned boxing commentator, said: “I’m tempted to call Caroline Dubois the best female boxer I’ve ever seen.” Dubois was 17 then and, four years on, her confidence is obvious. “Hannah is well known,” she says of her sparring partner. “I’ve sparred with her twice before and I did very well against her. It’s important because I’ve been sparring boys and now we do the fine-tuning with girls like Hannah.” Dubois’s first senior amateur competition was last year when she beat the venerable Mira Potkonen who had defeated Taylor at the 2016 Olympic Games. Dubois sealed her own Olympic qualification and travelled to Tokyo last August with high hopes of winning the gold medal. After two convincing victories, she narrowly missed out on a medal when losing a tight decision in the quarter-finals. “I was very upset and angry with myself and I wanted to avenge it [at the Paris Olympics],” Dubois says. “The GB coaches said: ‘Stay with us. It’s not long until 2024.’ But when I came home my dad was like: ‘You won the Youth Olympics and you’ve got a European silver medal and boxed at the Olympics. You’ve done enough as an amateur. Now do your learning as a pro.’ “It took some thinking but it was the right choice to turn pro and learn with Shane.” McGuigan helped build the careers of outstanding world champions in Carl Frampton and Josh Taylor, and has a deep and profound knowledge of boxing. He stresses the sheer talent of Dubois while explaining how much she has improved since she joined his gym. “She is super-super-talented but we’ve had to make Caroline aware that this is a high-tempo sport. She’s got all the skill in the world and loves to pick her shots but at the top level you have to work super-hard to draw the lead and the counter. “But I’ve seen a huge improvement since she began training here because they don’t teach technique up there [at the GB National base in Sheffield]. They don’t tell you how to punch properly. Caroline’s right-footed and right-handed. Her base was all wrong and she was spending all the time on the right side. That sets her up for a jab on the right hook, but she had no backhand. Since we’ve changed her stance, she’s getting hit less and she’s hitting a lot harder. I’m super-excited. “The one thing that worried me in the Olympics was that girls were able to push her back and bully her a little. She has done lots of sparring with boys and she needs that pressure. She’s so talented that if she’s not being matched in terms of skill, she feels she can do anything. But it’s different when a physically strong young lad is pushing you back. He’s making it horrible because you’re hitting him with good shots and he is not backing away. “But in sparring they’re using big 14-ounce gloves and he’s wearing a head guard. When she is in the pro ring she will be boxing with eight‑ounce gloves and she will hurt her opponents. So it’s important she doesn’t get discouraged because we’re conditioning her to meet the elite in women’s boxing. We’ll start with her challenging for a lightweight title but if we do it properly and she keeps working hard I believe she will become a multi-weight world champion.” McGuigan used to train Chantelle Cameron, who is now the WBC and IBF light-welterweight champion. He makes a striking comparison with Dubois. “I worked with Chantelle and she became the IBO lightweight world champion and then we parted ways. But the difference in their skill level is remarkable because Caroline has so much more ability. Chantelle is very tough, durable and determined and she can punch. So can Caroline, but Chantelle joined me as a fully fledged woman. She had been in the GB squad a long time and was in her mid-20s. Caroline’s still only a baby. You don’t usually get that strength until you’ve filled into your physique. “I’m much more excited about training Caroline because I knew every fight Chantelle had was going to be quite hard-fought. Caroline has the skill set to make things easier at the top. Katie Taylor can also make fights easy because she is so skilled. She doesn’t sometimes because Katie loves a tear-up. But, like Katie, Caroline has that X factor, that wow factor. You watch her sparring sometimes and go: ‘Hang on a sec!’ It’s amazing because she’s got so much skill.” Does he expect Dubois to be fighting for a world title in the next two years? “Probably sooner. She genuinely can whack so she’ll get quite a few girls out there early. But it’s about saying: ‘What happens when you’re matched for skill? How do you hold up after six rounds?’ Those four rounds are the ones that win or lose championship fights. If she can get comfortable during the hard fights she will be very special. It’s about conditioning and experience but she’s a clever girl and gets boxing. We’ll know for certain after three or four fights how fast we move.” Dubois says: “I’m learning new stuff every day from Shane and I’m getting fitter and stronger and sharper. For this fight I’ll be pretty good but for the next one I want to get better. And for the one after that I’ll be even better.” On Saturday night she will be boxing before Shields. “It’s going to be crazy and interesting. I’ve never met Claressa so it would be good to see her and have a little chat because she’s a great fighter. You watch so many world champions in female boxing and you’re like: ‘No, they’re not that great.’ But then you get Claressa Shields, Amanda Serrano and Katie Taylor. Those two, Amanda and Katie, will give us a great fight.” Does Dubois also believe that, in a few years, she will fight at this exalted level: “Definitely,” she exclaims, her face lighting up with a dazzling smile. She and McGuigan come from two large and well-known boxing families. Shane’s father, Barry, is the former world champion featherweight who united warring factions in Northern Ireland at the height of the Troubles in the 1980s. Thirty years later Barry and his three sons set up their own promotional company with Shane, still in his 20s, training Frampton and Taylor to multiple world titles. An acrimonious fallout with those fighters was dwarfed by the death of Shane’s sister, Danika, who was lost to cancer in 2019. “I’m still processing it,” McGuigan says, “because such a loss doesn’t sink in instantly. But you’ve got to enjoy life in the moment. I always used to look ahead and think: ‘In five years I’ll be here, in 10 years I’ll be there.’ I’ve now been in this game 11 years. I’ve had world champions but it’s been a very tough couple of years. If I hadn’t had boxing I’d be in a very bad way.” McGuigan sinks his head against the wall in an empty changing room at the back of the gym. “I just wish I’d had more time with Danika at the end but I had big fights then – like preparing Luke Campbell for Vasyl Lomachenko. I didn’t understand the severity of it all because we lost Danika just five weeks after the diagnosis. I remember coming from the gym and she’d already lapsed into a coma. That’s my only resentment. “Danika had leukaemia when she was a little girl and we all went up and said goodbye to her. Can you imagine saying goodbye to your sister at the age of nine? But she just made an unbelievable turnaround and got better. Since then everything else is a blessing. Losing her at 33, which is now my age, was terrible. But you need to reflect on those amazing memories we had together.”An unconventional background distinguishes the Dubois family because Caroline’s father, Dave, has brought up his seven youngest children largely on his own and often opted for home schooling. Caroline and three of her brothers, most notably Daniel, attracted interest for their considerable boxing potential only for painful defeats to offer reminders that nothing in life ever runs totally smoothly. After his loss to Joe Joyce in November 2020, when he suffered a worrying eye injury, Daniel is thriving again under McGuigan. Caroline’s enthusiasm, meanwhile, burns inside her just days from her debut. She laughs when I ask her if she has already sorted out the lighthearted stuff like her nickname and ring walk. “I’m probably going for the generic Sweet Caroline.” Is she actually going to walk out to the old Neil Diamond chestnut that is played at every British boxing promotion? “Oh, I don’t know. I suppose it’s a good song for what it represents. It’s just not on my playlist. My dad is saying I should use it for my debut.” Dubois looks up excitedly when I mention Pernell “Sweet Pea” Whitaker, the master boxer from the 1980s and 90s. “People who have got good boxing ability are real sweet. But all that matters is going in there and fighting. That’s what I am going to do.”The Six Nations is not just about the rugby. For some the pilgrimages to Europe’s great capitals alongside old friends are the biggest draw, with the match itself a mere bonus. For others it is just as special in their local pub or at home with their extended family. It is this annual wave of communal joy that distinguishes the championship from all the other televisual wallpaper out there. Every now and again, though, the planets align and the quality of the actual games overtakes all else. This year could be one of those classic examples. Consider the runners and riders. Weather permitting, France, Ireland, Scotland and England are all hoping to pose a sharper attacking threat than 12 months ago with Wales, as defending champions, unlikely to retreat into their shells either. A tournament for the ages, consequently, is a possibility. France have their deepest, most exciting squad in years. Ireland have also just come off an autumn triumph over New Zealand and have some impressive new talent. Scotland, it is generally agreed, have not been better placed in the professional era. England are short of some familiar names but retain mighty ambitions. And last season Wales registered more tries than they have ever scored in a Six Nations campaign. Even Italy are perking up at age-group level, with happier days hopefully ahead. Hence why the 2022 Six Nations is the subject of even greater anticipation than usual. Memories of last year’s fizzing edition remain fresh and, unlike 12 months ago, supporters are back to reboot the tournament’s soul. Even more crucially, the game is changing, with less emphasis on attrition and more on proactive intent. Ruck speed is now the buzz tactical phrase on everyone’s lips. With referees likely to be hotter than ever on teams looking to slow the ball down illegally, it explains why every side has been recalibrating their approach. There was a time, for example, when Ireland simply preferred vice-like efficiency, squeezing and pressurising their opponents and giving them nothing. Increasingly – and credit to Andy Farrell for encouraging it – they want to up the tempo and create more themselves. If Leinster are any guide, they will also be fit enough to make it happen. Will it be Johnny Sexton’s last stand? You suspect the 36-year-old will be desperate to make it count either way. The evocative documentary about Ireland’s great out-halves which aired on Sunday night was a timely reminder of the fine traditions of the green No 10 shirt, from Jackie Kyle and Ollie Campbell to Tony Ward and Ronan O’Gara, and Sexton’s desire still runs as deep as any of them. Along with the most seasoned tactician, the Irish also have the best scrum in the competition. They still, even so, have to go to Paris and London and win. Tick those boxes and a grand slam would surely follow. Slightly more likely is a see-sawing scramble and a three-way title race entering the final straight. Luck will play some part but so will old-fashioned endeavour. Yes, Wales scored plenty of tries but despite finishing bottom of the class for metres made, carries and defenders beaten they still became champions courtesy of a solid scrum and lineout and making more tackles than anyone else. Which is why, above and beyond the specific names on the team sheet, this season’s winners will be the team able to strike the best balance between ambition and the accuracy of their basics. There is now an even greater onus on teams to threaten off first phase and no shortage of magicians – Finn Russell, Marcus Smith, Romain Ntamack – to conjure something gloriously unexpected. Remember Ntamack’s break out from behind his own line against the All Blacks in the autumn? Expect more of it, because teams are realising that striking hard and fast against flat-footed opponents can yield more reward than plodding through 25-plus phases. The 50:22 rule also helps and getting held up over the try line also no longer means an attacking five-metre scrum. It makes smart cross-kicks or quick-witted taps ever more valuable. In that regard, France have the best scrum-half in the world and some of the most lethal finishers. All that is now stopping Les Bleus from becoming an absolute global powerhouse is themselves: inner confidence is very often the difference between a decent side and a great one. Between them, though, Shaun Edwards, Raphaël Ibañez and Fabien Galthié know what a winning culture looks like. France will finish in the top two at least. Poor old injury-hit England? In the end it is less about who plays as how they play. When he axed several of his Saracens stalwarts, Eddie Jones was not only distancing himself from them as individuals but as a collective philosophy. Now the aim is to take the game to the opposition more urgently, with attack coach Martin Gleeson having made a visible difference. If Smith is going to start at 10 – and he surely must – it makes sense to embrace some of Harlequins’ joie de vivre as well. Then again, when did any Six Nations ever unfold precisely to order? It is relatively easy, for instance, to imagine Scotland reaching the last weekend unbeaten, only to fall agonisingly short in Dublin. Ireland’s title prospects would then hinge on the grand finale in Paris between France and England and, potentially, a narrow points difference calculation. Super Saturday? Brace yourself for a succession of them.Creating a fictional cook in prose is challenging: using plain, monochrome text the writer must bring to life the richly flavoured and perfumed world in which her cook resides. But when successful, the fictional cook is a force to be reckoned with, often springing off the page in a delicious, seductive frenzy of tastebud-tickling drama. When I began researching my novel, I was lucky enough to have original source material. The Language of Food tells the story of food writer, Eliza Acton, who left two beautifully written cookery books and a poetry collection. I also had shelves of cookery books and foodie memoirs. But, while often crammed with mouth-watering descriptions of meals, these books were less about plot and character. And so, finally, I turned to fiction, scouring libraries and bookshops for fictional cooks and chefs. Here are some of the lesser-known fictional cooks that I fell in love with: 1. Kitty Allen in The Good Plain Cook by Bethan Roberts Bethan Roberts’ second novel is set in rural Sussex and tells the story of the flamboyant socialist, Ellen Steinberg (inspired by Peggy Guggenheim), who places an advert for a “good plain cook to perform domestic duties for artistic household”. Local girl Kitty Allen replies. In response to Ellen’s demands for glamorous dishes such as quiche and artichokes, Kitty cooks “patched up egg and bacon pie”, “incinerated fish” and “flat” omelettes. But then Ellen asks Kitty to teach her to cook. Kitty proposes mutton cutlets, but Ellen wants French food. Against this backdrop, Kitty begins to find her own voice. 2. Manuela in The Elegance of the Hedgehog by Muriel Barbery In this bestselling 2006 novel, Manuela is a Portuguese cleaner, and the “only friend” of concierge and co-narrator, Renée. However, Manuela is also a talented baker. She visits Renée every Tuesday and Thursday afternoon, bringing a home-baked delicacy that is presented as artfully as it’s been prepared. Almond tuiles are “nestled among curls of carmine tissue paper”, almond sponge fingers are “set in frilly white paper”, dark chocolate florentines are wrapped in “ivory tissue paper” tied with a blue velvet ribbon. With her kindness, Manuela transforms Renée’s lonely life “into a warm and joyful epic”. 3. Anatole in the Jeeves series by PG Wodehouse Anatole is a “peerless”, moustachioed chef “of the most extraordinary vim and skill”, who first appeared in Wodehouse’s 1925 story, Clustering Round Young Bingo. He went on to feature in 11 Jeeves novels and short stories. Employed by Aunt Dahlia at her country house, Anatole is lauded as “God’s gift to the gastric juices” whose cooking includes dishes such as velouté aux fleurs de courgette, consommé aux pommes d’amour, Nomais de la Mediterranée au fenouil as well as a “masterly” English steak and kidney pie. Unsurprisingly, he is in great demand, and several plots pivot on the unscrupulous poaching of Anatole, or the threatened barring of Bertie from his aunt’s dinners. 4. Tarquin Winot in The Debt to Pleasure by John Lanchester Lanchester’s 1996 debut novel features the sinister and chilling self-taught cook, Tarquin Winot. Although this darkly humorous book is described on its cover as “a cunning commentary on art, appetite, jealousy and failure”, it’s also a hunger-inducing hymn to the joys of eating. The deluded Tarquin devotes pages to his cooking tips, his knowledge of culinary history and his menus (omelette, roast lamb with beans, peaches in red wine, or egg curry, prawn curry, condiments and mango sorbet). Horror, hunger and humour combine as Tarquin forages, cooks and kills. 5. Monsieur Escoffier in White Truffles in Winter by NM Kelby The legendary French chef, Auguste Escoffier, is reimagined in his last year, as he returns to his wife, Delphine. She asks him to make her a dish, just as he did for the other love of his life, actor Sarah Bernhardt (a creamy strawberry dessert he named Fraises Sarah Bernhardt and a chocolate-dipped macaroon still known as a Sarah Bernhardt). We follow Escoffier as he ponders and then prepares a final menu for his wife: scrambled eggs served in their shells with wild caviar; a casserole of pigeon and peas; and wild strawberries served with brie that has been “drizzled with candied lavender and honey”. 6. Monsieur Armand in The Greengage Summer by Rumer Godden Godden’s much-loved 1958 novel includes a chef – Monsieur Armand. Set in the Champagne region of France, where a mother and five children are holed up for the summer, Armand runs a vast kitchen with “always a good smell of cooking onions, new bread, coffee and wine”. His cooking (“poulet a l’estragon, veals and steaks, salads and snails in garlic butter”) and narrator Cecil’s discovery of French food form an evocative setting, ineluctably shaping this story of love and deceit. Meanwhile, Armand drinks a bottle of wine between lunch and dinner, and fattens up Cecil’s sister with “slivers of chicken and spoonfuls of cream”. 7. Tilo in The Mistress of Spices by Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni Tilo is an immigrant from India who runs a spice shop in California. As she roasts, grinds and blends spices, she also serves up wisdom and advice to her local community. Until, that is, a lonely American turns up, threatening to destroy her magical powers forever. Sumptuous descriptions of spice are woven through this story of magic and myth – “fried garbanzos, yellow sticks of sev, spicy peanuts in their red skin … whole mung beans green as moss … tea spiced with clove”. Like Eliza Acton, Divakaruni was a poet first – and it shows in her artful prose. 8. Rosa in La Cucina by Lily Prior Rosa Fiore is a solitary librarian with a deep passion for cooking the food of her Sicilian homeland. When Randolph Hunt (Rosa knows him only as L’Inglese) comes to research the local cuisine, Rosa’s life changes. After a summer of fervent cooking, eating and sex, he disappears, leaving Rosa to seek solace – once again – in cooking. Caponata, pasta, soup, pies, marzipan, cakes, roast pork, mountain spinach, potatoes with rosemary, apple tart with quince … but how can Rosa ever forget the man who ate oysters from her naked body and wove spaghetti bolognaise through her hair? 9. Gabrielle in The Cook’s Tale by Elizabeth Ayrton Ayrton wrote several cookery books and her understanding of food radiates from this first novel (published in the US as Sauce and Sensuality). Gabrielle has transformed her parents’ roadside cafe into a highly regarded hotel, serving classical French dishes. When she falls in love with Erasmus Delacroix, Gabrielle must choose between being a wife or a professional chef. As she ponders, she tells stories of the many talented cooks in her family, from great-great grandmother Marthe to Aunt Solange. Ayrton includes the favourite dishes of each cook (chicken with white grapes, apricot tart, fondue), so that the recipes, “all practical and tested”, may be followed by readers. 10. Gerald Samper in Cooking With Fernet Branca by James Hamilton-Paterson Gerald is a ghostwriter for C-list celebrities who likes inventing recipes. From his Tuscan hilltop he cooks with great gusto, using copious amounts of an Italian digestif called Fernet Branca. The plot is fast-paced but daft, the characters ludicrous but hilarious, and the recipes imaginative but ridiculous. Mussels in chocolate, garlic ice cream, a pie made from cat and kerosene, all doused in Fernet Branca, and described by one reviewer “lingering in the mind like poems”. This farce of a novel is a perfect reminder that no cook should take themselves too seriously. The Language of Food by Annabel Abbs is published by Simon &amp; Schuster. To help the Guardian and Observer, order your copy from guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Beleaguered leftwing politicians across Europe will doubtlessly be looking at last weekend’s general elections in Portugal and taking notes. In a surprise outcome, the centre-left Socialist party (PS) won a historic absolute majority, taking 117 of the 230 seats in parliament. Despite polls on the eve of the election suggesting that there would be a possible tie, the centre-right opposition party, the PSD, was routed. The political map in Portugal is now painted almost entirely red. Portugal is something of a European outlier. Its economic recovery from the crises of the early 2010s was praised worldwide, with growth at one point exceeding the eurozone average. While most countries in Europe struggled to keep their coronavirus infections under control, it was becoming a world leader in terms of vaccinations – almost 90% of the population is double-jabbed. And, unlike other countries that elected leftwing governments in 2015, Portugal has enjoyed political stability, with the Socialists at the helm ever since. So what did last weekend’s results tell us? On the right, there has been a splintering of affiliations between the weakened veteran PSD; the far-right Chega (meaning: Enough); and the freshly minted, pro-business Liberal Initiative (IL). For the first time in Portugal’s modern democratic history, the rightwing Christian Democrats, once the third largest party in parliament, did not return a single MP. On the left the house won big, with António Costa, the prime minister, cannibalising much of the usually more radical electorate, leaving only morsels for the likes of the Communist party and the anticapitalist Left Bloc. One lesson from these results is that the painful austerity years after the 2008 banking crisis have not been forgotten. For the centre-right PSD, in government at the time, this is still a cross to bear. Its attempt to tactically appeal to the left at times did not work. Portugal is a country where the left still has strong roots in ordinary people’s lives, where trade unions rally behind the Communist party and millennials rally behind eco-socialist forces, meaning “working-class conservatism” doesn’t have much traction. For social democrats and soft socialists such as Costa, this was a particularly sweet victory, given the circumstances. The PS had been in power since 2015, but it was hampered by the politicking that comes with minority government – depending officially or in practice on an agreement with the far left. So when the Communists and the Left Bloc started grumbling last year over levels of public investment at a time of social crisis, Costa knew this was his chance to go for broke. He could lose it all, but he could also win big and ditch his radical hangers-on. After six years of yearning, the prime minister got his wish. There may indeed be a lesson there for sister parties across Europe. The Labour party under Keir Starmer, for instance, could learn something from Costa about cooperating with the far left, at least until electoral victory is assured. For the communists and radicals, the election was a harsh learning experience. They discovered that you can cooperate with the centre to gain power, but once there, you need to carve out a distinct identity, which they failed to do – and ended up paying the price. But the gravest lesson from these elections concerns the creeping success of the far right. The third largest political force in Portugal – a country with a proud antifascist history, where the dictatorship was toppled in a bloodless socialist revolution in 1974 – is now the Chega. It returned one loudmouthed and churlish MP in 2019. When parliament returns in mid-February, it will have a group of 12. That’s a dozen lawmakers representing a party whose leader has repeatedly sought to demonise the Roma minority and whose representatives have been associated with nostalgia for the Salazar dictatorship and have a record of making inflammatory comments relating to race. It’s an age-old lesson, really. Any oxygen given to the far right is dangerous. The normalisation of a far-right discourse through national television, daily newspapers and by the commentariat, even if for the sake of contradicting talking points, often only serves to lend momentum. In a country that nearly 50 years ago stamped the far right out of power, it is particularly chastening and disturbing to see its modern-day equivalents return to the São Bento palace, where parliament sits. For all the sweet relief that the Socialist party may be feeling, the rise of Chega is a reminder that complacency is never an option. Joana Ramiro is a freelance journalist based in London and a contributor to the Portuguese news platform Setenta e QuatroA Rastafarian woman who sat naked in a police cell for three hours has been given £45,000 damages after she successfully sued a police force for wrongful arrest. Yvonne Farrell told BBC Newsnight she was humiliated following her arrest by Hertfordshire police. The force has admitted it “didn’t get everything right on this occasion”. The compensation award comes after an official report revealed shocking details of Metropolitan police officers sharing messages about hitting and raping women, as well as the deaths of black babies and the Holocaust. The Independent Office for Police Conduct said the hateful and offensive remarks were part of a Met culture that needed to be rooted out. Last week, it emerged the Met had apologised and paid compensation to an academic for “sexist, derogatory and unacceptable language” used by officers about her when she was strip-searched. Farrell was arrested after she sat on her partner’s car in Stevenage when a tow truck arrived to take it away in August 2018, the BBC reported. She refused to give her name at the police station and was taken to a cell, where she was asked to remove her clothing and was provided with a replacement “crop top and hot pants”. “I’m a 50-plus-year-old woman and a Rastafarian. Where are they going, giving me those items of clothing? I called them back and I said: ‘Listen, this is not suitable clothing. I need something long to cover,’” she told the BBC in an interview from her new home in the Caribbean. Farrell said officers said they were taking her clothes because she would not tell them who she was. “[They said] ‘We don’t know anything about you, so you can harm yourself. So with that, we’re going to take your clothes.’ That was the excuse that they gave. It’s not good enough.” Farrell said the officers should have respected her religion, which states that Rasta women should dress modestly, and given her appropriate clothing. Hertfordshire police’s professional standards department initially rejected Farrell’s complaint. She then enlisted the help of solicitor Iain Gould, who specialises in claims against the police. The force apologised for the way Farrell was treated and agreed to pay her £45,000 damages. But it did not address her claim that she had been forced to take her clothes off. In a letter, Michelle Dunn, the deputy chief constable of Hertfordshire police, said: “I accept that you should not have been arrested. I am extremely sorry for any injuries that you suffered as a result of the actions of Hertfordshire police. On this occasion we got it wrong. I apologise unreservedly.” Hertfordshire police told the BBC in a statement: “The fair treatment of people detained in custody in Hertfordshire is very important. Following a review of the circumstances we accepted that, regrettably, we didn’t get everything right on this occasion four years ago. We were in regular contact with the complainant’s legal team throughout and the force agreed to settle the matter in recognition of the distress caused. The matter was settled amicably.”Employers must do more to tackle the flexible-working “stigma” faced by men if they are to avoid a two-tiered workforce as people return to offices, academics and business leaders have said. “If you have a lot more women working from home while men come back into the office, it could not only be a squandered opportunity but actually exacerbate problems of gender equality,” said Holly Birkett, a co-director of the Equal Parenting Project at the University of Birmingham. Sarah Forbes, who co-runs the project, said: “Organisations that simply say flexible working is for all ignore the perceived barriers preventing men from applying and the flexibility stigma they face. Messages need to be developed to actually target men.” David*, who works in financial services, has struggled to work flexibily enough to also look after his three children every other week. “It’s a challenge to have the conversation at work around part-time working as a dad. The return to the office and commute times are an added worry,” he said. Recent research from the Chartered Management Institute found that 90% of men and 87% of women wanted to continue to work remotely at least one day a week post-pandemic. “It’s by far the most popular benefit used to attract and retain employees, no matter what their sex, even topping above-market salaries,” said the CMI chief executive, Ann Francke. “Employers who encourage greater flexibility will have an edge in gaining greater access to talent in a tight labour market.” Last year research from the Fatherhood Institute found that 76% of partnered fathers hoped to work more flexibly in the future, with 63% hoping to work more from home. But research from the Fawcett Society in 2016 found fathers’ requests for flexible working were refused at almost twice the rate of mothers’, while Working Families found that fathers were twice as likely as mothers to think asking for flexible working would damage their careers. Dr Jasmine Kelland, a lecturer in human resource studies at the Plymouth Business School, said her research showed men face a “father forfeit” – and were less likely to gain part-time work and more likely to be judged negatively for requesting it. In her research, managers were asked to assess four fictitious candidates for “workplace commitment”, “hireability” “promotability” and “perceived competence”. Care-giving fathers were rated lower than care-giving mothers in every category, in part-time and full-time roles. “I found fathers who changed their working hours for caregiving faced mockery, were viewed as idle, faced social exclusion and were viewed with suspicion,” Kelland said. One senior manager stated that requests would be met with “piss-taking”, including the idea the man was “a bit of a wuss, she rules the roost, wears the trousers”. “It’s not a joke, it’s not funny and we have to call it out,” she said. “We also need senior men role-modelling, perhaps saying they are going to pick up their kids then go back to work – we need to make that socially acceptable.” Some discrimination may be less obvious. Conrad*, who works in marketing, recalled that when he asked about going part-time after his second child, he was told he was “doing so well” and it would damage his career, while the request of a female colleague was supported. “I was left thinking that if I’d been a mother I would have been treated differently,” he said. Michael Lewkowicz, of Families Need Fathers, said divorced fathers with rigid care schedules were desperate for more flexibility. “Employers need to make clear that they value and respect their employees’ family lives – and that applies to mothers and fathers,” he said. Adrienne Burgess, a joint CEO at the Fatherhood Institute, said: “If employers continue to discriminate against fathers, they will vote with their feet and look for better, more flexible roles.” Iain Wilson is one of them: a foster carer to a girl with disabilities, he moved to work at Independent Living Fund Scotland because of its flexible working policies. “When I asked for flexible work at the local authority I worked at, I was made to feel like an alien, but now I work for a truly flexible employer. I work extremely hard but I can work around my family. I don’t know what I would have done without it.” *Names have been changed.If you’ve seen the 1997 crime drama LA Confidential, you’re already familiar with the cryptic words Rolo Tomassi. It’s the name that the film’s protagonist – idealistic policeman Ed Exley, played by Guy Pearce – gives to the faceless criminal that murdered his father. “No one even knew who he was,” the detective divulges to his stoic sergeant. “I just made the name up to give him some personality.” A similar mystery hangs like noirish fog around the band of the same name. On a musical level, they’re unclassifiable; arguably the most inventive heavy band currently working in the UK, who have made a masterpiece nearly two decades into their career. New album Where Myth Becomes Memory flits between seemingly incompatible genres: opening track Almost Always commences with shoegaze guitars, framing the silken singing of lead vocalist Eva Korman, then follow-up Cloaked plummets into a twisted metal riff as Korman snarls and screams. Post-rock, hardcore punk, piano pop and synth music all ensue before the LP has struck its final chord. It turns out the band themselves are equally hard to pin down. Korman – speaking over Zoom from her home in New Jersey, where she migrated to from Brighton in 2018 – describes the defining themes of her band’s sixth album as being “rebirth, exploration and finding your way”. However, that’s the most you’ll get out of her. “The beauty of the lyrics and even the title [of the album] itself – they’re things that you can draw your own meaning from,” she deflects when asked what it is, specifically, that the five-piece are exploring. Lyrics such as “On the worst days I slip, as deceitful as hope is / Walking on a knife-edge, I traced the line and I leapt”, heard during groove metal powerhouse Drip, connote an arduous escape from trauma, but the inspiration remains wilfully unclear. By her own admission, Korman finds interviews nerve-racking, and her shy, delicate demeanour juxtaposes the screeching, contorting frontwoman that you’d see leading Rolo live. More outspoken is big brother and keyboardist James Spence, one year her elder, who joins the call from his home in East Sussex: 4,000 miles and five time zones away from his sister. While, for Korman, Rolo’s lyrics haul a burden that she won’t share, in Spence’s mind, the band’s music is devoid of any purpose bar sounding good. “Where Myth Becomes Memory is a good album because it’s honest,” he gleams with pride. “It’s a record that was written by people who wanted to listen to music that sounded like that. I think the aim, certainly for me, is always to be in the band that would be your favourite band.” Even Rolo’s name, despite being stolen from 90s neo-noir, doesn’t mean anything to him; it just has a nice ring to it. “I remember watching the film when I was younger and going, ‘That’d be a great band name,’ but people think we’re an Italian singer-songwriter.” There’s an endearing simplicity to Spence’s worldview, unencumbered by commercial expectations or fears of backlash by fans that have hindered countless other artists. Preserving that innocence is the fact that, even though they played the band’s first show in their mid-teens, Korman and Spence have never pursued music full-time. To help pay the bills, she manages a boutique in New Jersey and he freelances for a booking agency. “I’ve never expected the music that I make to offer me a living,” Spence replies when asked if he’s happy with or frustrated by Rolo’s part-time status. “If that was the goal, we’d be a really different-sounding band.” Rolo have at least achieved what Spence wanted them to when he started the band: escape the place he grew up in. He and his sister were raised in Stocksbridge, a small town 25 minutes north-west of Sheffield in rural South Yorkshire. “It was somewhere I wanted to leave quickly,” the now-Brighton-based Spence says, “and music seemed like a really good vehicle to get us away. It was the kind of place where, if you got to 16 and didn’t have a car, you couldn’t go anywhere.” As well as being only one year apart, Korman and Spence shared the same social circles at school and were both multi-instrumentalists at an early age (they’d had piano lessons, Spence played guitar and Korman learned bass). In hindsight, starting a band together was inevitable. “At the beginning, it was hard to be taken seriously,” Korman recalls. “We fought for a long time not to be treated like a novelty. There was either a big focus on our age or the fact that I was a woman.” Sexism in heavy metal is, sadly, not surprising. Male-dominated ever since its formulation more than 50 years ago, the genre is awash with accusations of everything from casual prejudice against women to long-running abuse, even in 2022 (witness the sexual assault allegations against Marilyn Manson). Korman doesn’t want to discuss the topic beyond that brief allusion, though: “I think the focus is really promoting our new record, rather than going too deeply into that.” Similarly, a question about the band’s headspace after leaving their former label Holy Roar – which ceased activity in 2020, following allegations of sexual misconduct against its founder – is met with platitudes from Spence about “a great working relationship” with their new label. On top of gender prejudice, Rolo’s eclectic yet unrefined debut album, 2008’s Hysterics, threatened to sideline them as a gimmick. It incorporated everything from punk to jazz – an exuberant mishmash that, although promising, led to their saddling with ridiculous genre tags. “I wasn’t a fan of being labelled ‘Nintendocore’ just because we’ve got keyboards,” Spence remembers. Fortunately, it reached the ears of American DJ Diplo, whose collaborations with rapper MIA had made him one of the most eagerly watched producers on the planet. “He mentioned us in an interview with Pitchfork,” says Spence. “I didn’t even know who he was! It was an ex-girlfriend of mine that was like, ‘It’s a really huge deal.’” The Diplo-produced lunacy of Cosmology was followed by Astraea, then the heartbroken hardcore of Grievances; the trilogy gradually anchored Rolo’s quirks into angular yet forlorn heaviness and pushed them higher in the metal consciousness. Then came Time Will Die and Love Will Bury It. The progressive hardcore behemoth was a critical darling and, on streaming services, is far and away the band’s most-heard outing, amassing hundreds of thousands of listeners. “I think everyone’s reaction to Time Will Die caught us by surprise,” recalls Spence. “I didn’t come away from [recording] it thinking, this is gonna be something people are really, really going to like.” In late 2018, only months after Time Will Die came out, Korman settled in the US to be with her husband Jesse, the lead singer of mathcore outfit The Number Twelve Looks Like You. The move, combined with the Covid-19 pandemic, led to Where Myth Becomes Memory being recorded separately; as Korman clocked out in New Jersey, her bandmates were starting their day in Southampton. Questions about the pandemic’s effect on Rolo as a band are answered in pragmatic terms, and the emotional throes of isolation – the potential conflict of Korman being with her new husband yet kept apart by the virus from everybody back home for two years – aren’t explored in any depth. “I didn’t know when I was going to see the band again, when I was going to see my family or friends again,” Korman remembers, “so it just didn’t seem helpful to me at that time to really dig deeply into that feeling.” Even as they release the most engaging music of their career, they remain as enigmatic as their namesake. • Where Myth Becomes Memory is out on 4 February on MNRK.The north of England risks being left with “second-best” trains for 200 years under the government’s £96bn rail plan, the mayor of Greater Manchester has told MPs. Andy Burnham said that while his city would do better than most in the north, the plan would not “maximise the levelling-up benefits” that ministers claimed it would bring. The integrated rail plan, published in November, axed the north-eastern leg of HS2 and angered leaders in the region by failing to include a new promised high-speed line linking cities across the north of England. Appearing before the transport select committee, Burnham said that while the investment would bring benefits, the north was being asked to settle for second best again. He said: “These are once-in-200-years decisions for the country and particularly for the north of England. If we get second best then the north will have second best for 200 years or more.” He added: “If we accept second best again, it’s our great-great-grandchildren who will grow up … with inferior transport and a smaller economy.” The chair of the committee, Huw Merriman, suggested that Manchester was the beneficiary of most of the £96bn investment, but Burnham said a large proportion of the HS2 spending included in that total was in the route south of Birmingham, to London. The redesigned plans for Manchester Piccadilly station, with HS2 trains now arriving overground, would cost a vast amount of city centre space as well as affecting how rail services could run to Leeds, he said. “More economic benefit could be achieved if the station was designed as an underground station with full connectivity,” the mayor said, adding that planners were “risking the mistakes of the past by bringing in HS2 on the surface”. He said an underground Piccadilly would allow regeneration for the centre to “be like the Canary Wharf of the north, a major success story”. Burnham said the Treasury had not done a levelling-up analysis of the economic benefits that would come from the rail plan. The question about the spending, he said, should be “does it maximise the levelling-up benefits – and I don’t believe it does”. Martin Tugwell, the chief executive of Transport for the North, said its own studies showed that building the promised line across the Pennines, linking Manchester, Bradford and Leeds, would bring an additional £14.4bn a year in gross value added, and 130,000 jobs across the country. He told the committee: “You make the economic potential of the north real, you contribute from the north to the rest of the UK, rather than it needing support from the rest of the UK to the north.” The testimony on Wednesday came after the secretary of state for levelling up, Michael Gove, unveiled long-awaited plans to close the gap between rich and poor parts of England. Gove dismissed claims there was no new money for the programme as a “bogus argument”.The Kremlin moved to belittle Boris Johnson on Wednesday, describing him as “utterly confused” and calling British diplomacy a waste of time. The concerted effort to ridicule Britain’s efforts to put itself at the helm of the fight to protect Ukraine came the day after the UK prime minister flew to Kyiv to warn that a Russian invasion would be a humanitarian, political and military disaster for Moscow. British efforts to arrange a phone call between Johnson and Vladimir Putin were put in flux after a previously scheduled call on Monday had to be cancelled by the British because Johnson had to answer questions from MPs about alleged Covid rule-breaking parties in Downing Street. The Kremlin said on Wednesday it would provide details if and when Putin spoke to Johnson by phone, and Putin was ready to talk to anyone, including the “utterly confused”. Kremlin aide Yuri Ushakov later added that the pair would speak on Wednesday evening. Russia has said it has no plans to stage a new invasion of Ukraine, and has ridiculed Johnson’s claims that an invasion is imminent. The Russian deputy ambassador to the UN, Dmitry Polyanskiy, told Sky News: “There is always room for diplomacy, but franklywe don’t trust British diplomacy. I think in recent years British diplomacy has shown that it is absolutely worthless in such issues, I am sorry to say. “I really don’t want to offend anybody, especially my good friends, British diplomats, but really, the results are nothing to boast about.” He added: “The hysteria just does not stop. What was happening is only in the heads of western politicians and not on the ground.” The UK has just taken over the chair of the UN security council, and Britain has had a number of run-ins with Polyanskiy, one of the more quotable Russian diplomats in recent years, on matters ranging from Syria, Libya, Ukraine and chemical weapons. Russian media is full of British media reports that Johnson attended prosecco-fuelled parties. Regarding the phone call, the Russian ambassador to London, Andrei Kelin, said in an interview with the Solovyov Live YouTube channel on Tuesday: “There is principled understanding that the conversation will take place. I hope it will be held because we really need to speak … but what about? Indeed, it should be understood that if Great Britain speaks from the positions it is looking at now – solidarity, intimidation, speculations about consequences – such a conversation will be not be long, I should say.” Johnson’s difficulties in securing a call with Putin contrasts with the two recent calls between the Russian president and France’s Emmanuel Macron, as well as a call between Putin and the Italian prime minister, Mario Draghi. The Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, supposedly a close ally of Johnson, was afforded a rare five-hour face-to-face discussion with Putin in what looked like an attempt to help Orbán secure his re-election in April. Johnson, given Britain’s forward stance on Ukraine, was never going to receive the red carpet treatment. The UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, is still due to travel to Moscow for talks this week with his opposite number. The friction in the British-Russian relations came as papers were leaked detailing the offer Nato had put to Russia on possible detailed future disarmament talks. Putin has not yet formally replied to the proposals but said they did not meet his central call for a reversal of Nato expansion and the removal of offensive weapons close to Russia’s border. The papers show Nato demanding de-escalation by Russia around Ukraine but also displaying a willingness to hold discussions within the Nato-Russia council on arms controls, including intermediate missiles, greater transparency and discussions about the concept of the indivisibility of security, a potential way in which Russia could open up a dialogue on Nato troop deployments that leave Russia threatened. Russia has yet to decide if the Nato offer presents a lever into wider talks. Russia will be disappointed by Ukraine’s refusal to open talks on a special status for the Donbas, the Russian-supporting eastern part of Ukraine. The Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmitro Kuleba, said: “No Ukrainian region will have a right power for national state decisions. This is set in stone. There will be no special status, as Russia imagines it, no voting power. “We are carrying out a very deep decentralisation reform, and we are ready to work on the implementation of the Minsk agreements. But the Minsk agreements begin with security issues. The political part is in second place. So everyone must first focus on security.” The Minsk agreements negotiated in 2015 set out a roadmap for greater autonomy for the region, but there is a dispute over sequencing.A new gender-neutral pronoun is likely to enter the official Norwegian language within a year, the Language Council of Norway has confirmed. “Hen” would become an alternative to the existing singular third-person pronouns, the feminine “hun” and the masculine “han”. “Over time, we have seen that the actual use of hen has increased and stabilised,” Daniel Ims, a representative of the council, told Norwegian media. Ims said that while gender-neutral pronouns had been discussed in Norway’s linguistic and grammar community for some time, the arguments for their use were not initially mirrored by Norwegian speech patterns. Similar debates have been taking place around the world. Most recently, the French education minister, Jean-Michel Blanquer, accused a reference dictionary of “US-inspired wokeism” for including an entry for the word “iel”, used by some in France as a gender-neutral pronoun. In the US, the Merriam-Webster dictionary included a singular gender-neutral definition of the pronoun “they” in 2019. “They” first entered English language in its plural form via Old Norse. In turn, the English singular use of the pronoun has caught on with some non-binary Norwegians in recent years, with many using the Norwegian equivalent “de” in the same way. “A hundred years ago it was normal to use singular de to address people of a higher rank,” said Carl-Oscar Vik, 18, from Skien in south-east Norway. Vik, who is non-binary, has been experimenting with pronouns over the past year. Although they do not mind using hen, they feel most at home with de, which they feel sounds more natural in Norwegian. “Ultimately it’s just a question of preference,” they said. For Vik, the debate sparked by the plans to recognise hen has been a positive way to increase the visibility of non-binary people in public life. “I think that a normal person on the street doesn’t know anyone who identifies as non-binary,” they said. “But I hope that by getting hen into the dictionary we can get the idea out there, because there are many people who don’t feel at home in certain pronouns but don’t have the words to describe it.” Vik also hopes that the official recognition of gender-neutral pronouns could be a first step to legal recognition of a third gender. Hen could enter Norwegian dictionaries as early as spring or early autumn, Ims said, after a consultation phase open to “all in the [Norwegian] language community”.Roland Emmerich does disasters better than anyone else alive. This is a man who thrives on outrageous worst-case scenarios. The world being attacked by aliens. The world being attacked by giant lizards. The world being destroyed by climate change. The world being destroyed by climate change but in a slightly different way and with John Cusack inexplicably as the action hero. If you want a disaster to be bigger and more elaborate than anything you could possibly imagine, you need Emmerich in your corner. However, some disasters are worse than others. And this is why Emmerich just had to have the premiere party for his new film at his house. Moonfall – in which the moon falls out of the sky and Halle Berry has to blow it up before it bangs into Earth – is out this week. Its studio, Lionsgate, had elaborate plans to celebrate its release. More that 1,000 people were due to be invited, and entire streets shut down to accommodate all the red carpets necessary to celebrate a film about life as we know it being extinguished by the moon. But, in predictable fashion, Omicron raised its ugly head and plans had to be scaled back dramatically. In the end, the premiere was held at Grauman’s Chinese Theatre in Hollywood, with a quarter of the anticipated guests, and then everyone bundled back to Roland’s for the after-party where they were served pigs in blankets and mini cupcakes. Which does rather sound as if Emmerich panicked and did a trolley dash around the nearest M&amp;S with a couple of hours to go. However, from all evidence it looks as though Emmerich pulled it off. Upon first hearing the Moonfall premiere had turned into a house party, I had images of warm cans of lager, people fighting over the Spotify playlist, and everyone leaving at 9pm because some idiot decided to get his acoustic guitar out. But according to a video posted by Variety columnist Marc Malkin, it was a swanky event indeed. The video shows all manner of beautiful people milling around a pool while a band plays and spotlights shoot celebratory beams into the sky, presumably to make sure the moon hadn’t pivoted off its axis and embarked on an apocalyptic collision course with Earth. It looked perfect. It looked like something from La La Land, if La La Land parties had gigantic artificial moons dangling above the swimming pool to remind all the guests that certain death constantly lurks above, and all our lives could be obliterated in a second if anything in the universe fluctuates even slightly. The whole thing is highly impressive. A bad situation presented itself and, without so much as breaking a sweat, Emmerich adapted and downscaled and, by the look of it, had a lovely time. Perhaps, in fact, this is the future of the premiere party. Compared to the actual Moonfall party, the original plans reek of waste and hubris. Why spend all that money putting on a show of might to hundreds of people who don’t really want to be there when you could just grab the people who mean the most to you and put the show on at home? Honestly, it doesn’t really matter. Am I less likely to go and see Moonfall because I know it was commemorated with a small party instead of a big party? No. My commitment to Moonfall remains unchanged, in that I still plan to watch it for free on a streamer six months from now when I am drunk. And, really, that’s the important thing here.Several of the participants in The Tinder Swindler (Netflix) describe the extraordinary events relayed in the documentary as like being in a film. One woman talks about being romanced by a man she met on the dating app. He called himself Simon Leviev. Their first date started at a five-star hotel and extended to a spontaneous trip on a private jet. Another woman (and there are many women), further down the line, says she feels as if she is in “a horror movie”. Given the show’s title, it isn’t too much of a giveaway to reveal that Leviev, who claimed to be the son of a billionaire diamond dealer, was not the wealthy, suave suitor he made himself out to be online, but a convicted conman named Shimon Hayut. Audiences love nothing more than a scam, from the podcast Sweet Bobby to the fascinating case of the “fake heiress” Anna Delvey. This slots neatly into the pantheon. It is a pacy, gripping feature-length film that lays everything out with precision and offers plenty of compassion for the victims. We begin with Cecilie, a serial dater who describes herself as “a bit of a Tinder expert”. She becomes caught up in the whirlwind of Simon’s world. He sends her extravagant bouquets of roses, flies to visit her in Oslo and asks her to move in with him. Then, one night, he sends her photos and videos of himself and his bodyguard, bloodied, in trouble, under threat from enemies and suddenly unable to access the great reserve of finances he claims to possess. Then there is Pernilla, a Swedish woman who seems a little more worldly than Cecilie. “I’m just thinking: oh my God, another diamond guy,” she tells the director, drily, about matching with him. The director responds off-camera: “Another diamond guy?” Pernilla doesn’t fall for Simon’s charms, at least not romantically, but they become friends. She spends a wild summer travelling around the billionaire-friendly parts of Europe with him and his then-girlfriend, a Russian model. Until threats from his enemies mean he can’t access his money and, well, you understand the drill. There are many fascinating facets to this ugly story, most of them documented here. This is what happens when lives are lived online. Cecilie Googled Simon, she says, because that is what you are supposed to do with a match. She found him to be out there, in public, as the man he said he was. His Instagram seemed to confirm his identity. We hear voice notes from Simon, pulled from women’s messaging archives, and see romantic videos he sent from private jets. There are Cecilie’s videos of her looking around luxury flats that Simon told her to rent for them to live in together. This lends it a particular intimacy. When the story finally became public, after an in-depth report by the Norwegian newspaper VG, the women had to face the social-media verdicts of strangers, who called them gold-diggers and worse. If this were fiction, it would be too far-fetched to be believable; with every jaw-dropping twist, you wonder how he got away with it. This gets to the heart of the horrifying emotional and financial damage these women endured and sustained. It also goes some way towards explaining how he got so many of them to fall for it. When the moving parts of Simon’s schemes come into focus, the scale of them is truly amazing. The Tinder Swindler picks away at each layer of the story. It is about looking for love online, and internet cons, and the magnetism of con artists who say just the right thing. It takes a turn into thriller territory, when the Norwegian press and then Interpol start to look for Simon. Finally, it becomes a story of resilience, even revenge, as another of Simon’s victims starts to work out how she can get at least some of her money and her pride back. It hints at issues with policing online activity that takes place across many countries, and at crimes that are considered “small”, despite their devastating effects on the victims. Netflix’s true-crime documentaries can be a mixed bunch. They tend to be sensationalist, overly long and undersatisfying. The Tinder Swindler is snappy and smart and leaves you wanting more, rather than scraping the barrel for every possible angle. It leaves plenty of questions unanswered – it lacks the neat resolution that might have made for a perfect ending. But that is life, which turns out to be not much like the movies at all.Police have said 27 people aged 15 to 44 have been charged with offences after widespread disorder in the Mayhill area of Swansea in the spring of 2021. The 27 are charged with the offence of riot and two of them are also accused of arson with intent to endanger life or being reckless as to whether a life of another would be endangered. They are due to appear in Swansea magistrates court between 2 and 4 March. Cars were set on fire and bricks were hurled at houses, leaving people fearing for their lives. Ch Supt Trudi Meyrick, policing commander for Swansea and Neath Port Talbot, said: “Following a thorough investigation by local detectives, the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) received files of evidence against these individuals. After detailed consideration by the CPS they have authorised the charges of riot and arson with intent to endanger life be brought. “The investigation team were resolute in their commitment to fully investigate the disorder that happened that night; residents of Mayhill were subjected to terrible scenes of disorder which caused serious harm and distress to the community. “The judicial process will now run its course and we await the outcome of that process. In the meantime our local neighbourhood policing team continues to work in partnership with agencies and the local community to tackle the issues that matter most to the residents of Mayhill and surrounding areas.” The chief crown prosecutor, Jenny Hopkins, added: “Criminal proceedings are active and all the defendants have a right to a fair trial. It is extremely important that there should be no reporting, commentary or sharing of information online which could in any way prejudice these proceedings.” An independent report published last week found that the police left residents “in danger, at risk and unprotected” for a “protracted period” during the disturbance. Jeremy Vaughan, the chief constable of South Wales police, apologised for his force failing to act quickly enough. The review highlighted that scores of officers were in the area but stood by. It also said that one officer in charge that night twice asked for extra police as backup but was refused. It highlighted one example of a vulnerable person whose life was thought to be in danger. Officers with shields were deployed but withdrew for their own safety, leaving the person and others like him “lost”, the report said. It concluded: “Significant failings are evident. Currently, available evidence strongly suggests failings in command structures and decisions, operational decisions and tactics, and communications.”‘They’ve taken your cells,” says a father to his son in a near-future dystopia where the latter has been cloned in an apparently unauthorised “batch”. So begins Caryl Churchill’s 2002 play, using the concept of cloning to explore identity, inheritance and what makes us uniquely ourselves, written at a time when ethical debates on Dolly the sheep raged. Like Polly Findlay’s 2020 revival at the Bridge theatre, it presents the story of a father (Lennie James) and three versions of his son (Paapa Essiedu) as a noirish thriller with shifting realities. Es Devlin’s set is a Scandi style living space soaked in blood-red light. There are stark bursts of white lighting, too, (designed by Tim Lutkin), flashing as if to blind us, while unnervingly quick costume changes by Essiedu really do create the illusion of more than one version of him. But Lyndsey Turner’s production surpasses Findlay’s and turns this strange, elliptical play from a thought experiment into a flesh and blood tragedy of family reckoning, revenge and yearning for redemption, with drama as ancient and eternal, as it is futuristic. Much of this is down to the powerhouse duo of James and Essiedu. There is a realism and emotional honesty to their performances that creates alchemy and turns every last sentence – and stutter – into a meaningful matter between them. Despite the halting, somewhat gnomic dialogue, their characters come fully to life and the play’s subtler intentions are realised. Essiedu is astonishing to watch, performing love and blame with equal power. In his hands, this is the story of a son’s identity crisis. But James wrestles it back to make it one of toxic fatherhood, too. He is unassuming at first, smoothly evading culpability, then pleading and apologetic once he is cornered. Even when he reveals the violence of his past he, discomfortingly, retains our sympathies in his effort to start afresh – the clean slate of his new cloned son which gives him the chance to be a “good” father this time. Despite the darkness, James and Essiedu bring a surprising but genuine humour to their deliveries and sound as if they are in a Beckettian sitcom at times. They are simply scintillating to watch, effortless in their chemistry, syncopated in their dialogue, energising the action so it feels alive with anger, mystery and tragedy. This is a masterclass on how a revival can come blazing to new life in the right hands. • At the Old Vic, London, until 19 MarchChildren under five, the last group of Americans still ineligible for vaccines against Covid-19, may soon receive emergency authorization for the shots, but getting all children vaccinated remains a serious challenge in the US. Pfizer and its German pharmaceutical partner BioNTech announced on Tuesday that they were requesting emergency-use authorization of their vaccine for children aged six months to four years. The application was submitted at the request of the US Food and Drug Administration, the companies said in a statement – an unusual move by the regulator. The FDA’s independent advisers will meet on 15 February to discuss the application and the shots, containing just one-tenth of the dose given to adults, could be available to this population of 19 million in the US by the end of the month. The agency’s decision could come within weeks, but that isn’t the only hurdle. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) also has to sign off, and many parents then have to be persuaded to get their young children vaccinated. The Biden administration has been trying to speed the authorization of Covid-19 shots for children, contending vaccinations are critical for opening schools and daycare centers and keeping them open, and for freeing parents from childcare duties so they can go back to work. Many parents have been pushing for an expansion of shots to toddlers and preschoolers. While children are much less likely to be hospitalized and die from Covid than adults, children’s hospitals have seen record-high admissions during the surge of the Omicron variant, especially in children who are not yet vaccinated. Infants under a year old are the most vulnerable of all children to severe illness. Families, and even children themselves, say they have been eagerly awaiting this news. So do caregivers, teachers and others who work with young kids – as well as those who employ parents, who have struggled to find steady childcare. “As a mom of two kids under five, I’m extremely excited. But as an epidemiologist and public health member, I have a ton of questions,” said Katelyn Jetelina, an infectious disease epidemiologist with UTHealth School of Public Health in Dallas. Chief among them: “Did they move the goalposts?” She noted that researchers could change what they are examining in the trial — looking at T cell responses or cases and hospitalizations, for instance, instead of neutralizing antibodies. If regulators are looking at real-world numbers on cases and hospitalizations among the vaccinated and unvaccinated children, she asked, “Do they have enough data?” The clinical trial wasn’t designed to examine these questions, she noted, and there might not be enough participants in the trial to understand the vaccines’ efficacy in those settings. Parents and experts mostly remain cautiously optimistic, but many say they want to see the results of the trial first. “Everybody is really excited about the news,” said Katherine Matthias, a pediatrician in South Carolina and the parent of two children under five. “We’re moving the needle on things, but we still need to see the data.” The press release from the companies on Tuesday did not release any new data or updates to its study design. In mid-December, Pfizer/BioNTech announced that two shots of a low dose created strong antibody responses in children between the ages of six months and two years. But the doses produced disappointing results in children between the ages of two and four, prompting the addition of a third dose for all children under five in the trial. Data on the third shot is not expected until March at the earliest. Regulators could now authorize the two-dose regimen for younger children, who saw effective responses to two shots. They might also allow slightly older children to receive the same doses in preparation for the third shot, should the data show an additional shot helps create a protective immune response. “If two doses are authorized, parents will have the opportunity to begin a Covid-19 vaccination series for their children while awaiting potential authorization of a third dose,” Albert Bourla, chairman and CEO of Pfizer, said in the statement. “Getting that series started now, instead of three to four months down the road after so many children inevitably contract Omicron, is a huge win,” Matthias said. Getting kids vaccinated has been a major challenge, even for those already eligible. Vaccinations among children have lagged even as cases soared. Shots for children aged five to 11 were authorized in October 2021. But only 22% of US children in that age group are fully vaccinated, and only three in 10 children who are eligible have received their first shot, according to the CDC. “What we’re seeing right now is still a lot of hospitalizations and unfortunately some deaths in this age group,” said Dr Sean O’Leary of the University of Colorado, who is on the American Academy of Pediatrics’ infectious disease committee. If the FDA clears vaccinations for these youngsters, he added, “that’s going to be really important because all of those hospitalizations and deaths essentially are preventable”. A new report from the Kaiser Family Foundation found that 31% of parents would vaccinate their children under five right away – similar to what parents of over-fives said. Even parents who are fully vaccinated against Covid and who usually immunize their kids have been slower to sign up for pediatric Covid shots, doctors say. Moving too quickly on the under-five vaccines, before the science is clear, could cause even greater delays in getting this age group vaccinated. “We just need really great communication, and then a lot of transparency with this data and this decision-making,” Jetelina said. “If we aren’t transparent in this process, it’ll continue to drive hesitancy in the United States.” Many parents worry most about long-term effects of the vaccines. Two-thirds say they are concerned about the Covid vaccines affecting the future fertility of their children, according to an October 2021 survey. In response, a new campaign aims to talk about fertility fears, including a video in Spanish from pediatrician and parent Ilan Shapiro, the chief health correspondent and medical affairs officer at AltaMed Health Services. There is “zero” evidence of the vaccines having any effect on fertility, Shapiro said. “In reality, we have not seen any decline of fertility in people that are vaccinated. There are still teenager pregnancies, there are still adult pregnancies.” In fact, having Covid itself can temporarily affect men’s reproductive health; it’s unclear whether it has any short- or long-term effect on children. “If you get Covid, the sperm count actually goes down. If you get Covid, you can actually have erectile dysfunction,” Shapiro said. “If you’re actually worried about fertility and protecting your kids, I would be more worried about the infection,” Shapiro said. But he understands why some parents have been hesitant. For nearly two years, parents heard that Covid infections in children aren’t as severe as in adults. “After the bombardment of almost 20 months of information that kids will be fine, a lot of parents were like, ‘Well, OK, you’re telling me this now?’” Shapiro said. Kids were safer earlier in the pandemic in part because many schools were virtual or hybrid, and precautions like masks were in place, he said. Many of those precautions were subsequently lifted across the country at the same time new variants arose – including Delta, which is particularly virulent, and Omicron, which is comparatively more transmissible. “The probability of actually getting bad outcomes from the infection is higher than before, because we’re seeing more kids ending up in hospitals and more cases and more prolonged Covid,” Shapiro said. Authorizing the vaccines for all ages will help protect more children. But many families still have unanswered questions about the vaccine, he said – and that doesn’t make them all anti-vax. “For our kids, you think twice,” Shapiro said. Misinformation about the vaccines can compound those worries. “We can start that conversation and talk about how many teenagers have already had this vaccine and how many kids have had this vaccine,” he said. In children 12 and up, vaccines reduced the risk of developing multi-system inflammatory syndrome by 91%. Vaccines also cut the chances of getting Covid at all, which means children would be less likely to develop potential complications such as type 1 diabetes, long Covid or “outcomes that we don’t know about yet from getting a Covid infection as a child”, Matthias said. “These vaccines might not prevent all of our kids from getting infected, but they should prevent bad outcomes,” she said. Matthias is among a group of physicians and scientists who are advocating for the FDA and the CDC to allow off-label use of the vaccine among younger children at high risk, before it’s authorized in this age group. “This is not the answer for every kid under five, but it should at least be a conversation that we can have with parents,” she said. “This seems like an option that providers and parents should have on the table.” Many parents are eager to see the results from this trial, and to hear the discussions with FDA and CDC independent advisers, Jetelina said. “Once we get those answers, if the scientific committees all agree this is the right step – absolutely, I’ll be first in line.”Keir Starmer has accused Boris Johnson of “parroting the conspiracy theories of violent fascists” for political gain after the prime minister doubled down on false claims about the Labour leader’s blame for the failure to prosecute Jimmy Savile. Johnson has been condemned by victims of the disgraced broadcaster, as well by as some MPs and the Commons Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle, for making the claim in parliament on Monday. Michael Gove, the levelling-up and communities secretary, dismissed the concerns earlier on Wednesday, saying there was no need for the prime minister to apologise or withdraw the claim, which is strongly associated with far-right conspiracies. Beginning this week’s prime minister’s questions, Starmer appealed directly to Conservative MPs over Johnson’s tactics. “I just want to say to the members opposite: theirs is the party of Winston Churchill. Our parties stood together as we defeated fascism in Europe,” Starmer said. “Now their leader stands in the House of Commons parroting the conspiracy theories of violent fascists to try and score cheap political points. He knows exactly what he is doing. It’s time to restore some dignity.” Johnson, however, declined to apologise, saying: “On his first point, I don’t want to make heavy weather of this, but I am informed that in 2013 the right honourable gentleman apologised and took full responsibility for what had happened on his watch. I think that was the right thing to do.” It is correct that as director of public prosecutions Starmer apologised on behalf of the service for the fact that Savile, a prolific sexual offender for decades, was not prosecuted when he was alive. However, the idea, as raised by Johnson on Monday, that this was due to Starmer’s actions has been debunked, and has largely been propagated on far-right Facebook pages. In the exchange on Monday, Johnson claimed Starmer “used his time prosecuting journalists and failing to prosecute Jimmy Savile”. On Tuesday Hoyle rebuked Johnson, saying he was “far from satisfied that the comments in question were appropriate on this occasion”. Earlier that day, Julian Smith, the Conservative former Northern Ireland secretary and chief whip, said Johnson’s comments had been unacceptable. He said: “The smear made against Keir Starmer relating to Jimmy Savile yesterday is wrong and cannot be defended. It should be withdrawn.” Despite the criticism, Gove said Johnson had nothing to apologise for. He told Sky News: “I think this is a uniquely sensitive issue and it does need to be handled with care, and I listen with enormous respect to those who act for victims of the actions of a terrible, terrible criminal. “But – and it’s not a subject that I want to dwell on because it is uniquely sensitive – it is the case that the CPS apologised for the handling of this case and what happened in 2009, and I think we should acknowledge that an apology was given at the time and respect that.” He added: “Keir Starmer acknowledged that mistakes had been made by the organisation of which he was head, to his credit. He was very clear about those mistakes.” Richard Scorer, the head of abuse and public inquiries at the law firm Slater and Gordon, said: “Victims of Savile I have spoken with today have told me that they want Johnson to withdraw these comments and apologise, and I call upon him to do that right away.”My brother, Michael McColgan, who has died aged 83, was a lifelong socialist and political activist. He gave up his career as a German university lecturer to retrain as a lawyer so that he could represent people fighting for justice, and was involved in the cases of the Orgreave miners in the 1980s and in the fight for truth and justice following the Hillsborough disaster. Mike was born in Islington, north London, the son of Lilian (nee Martin), a librarian, and Patrick McColgan, a local government officer – both leftwing activists. He grew up in Chingford, Essex, and attended the Monoux grammar school, Walthamstow (now Sir George Monoux college). Mike studied languages at Reading University, graduating in 1961. Here he met Hope Hanlan, and they married in 1963. They later divorced but remained lifelong friends. In 1964 Michael started work as a lecturer in German literature at Sheffield University, where he translated George Lukacs’s Tactics and Ethics: Political Essays, 1919–1929 (1974). He settled in Pitsmoor, a deprived area of Sheffield, where he became active in campaigns highlighting police harassment of black youths. In the mid-1970s his political commitments increasingly drew him away from academia. The US civil rights and the anti-apartheid movements influenced Mike and he was drawn to solidarity work with struggles in Palestine and Northern Ireland. Around the same time, he met and fell in love with Olive Morris, a community activist in Brixton and member of the British Black Panthers. He became dedicated to anti-racist campaigning, believing that racism was largely driven by the state. Mike and Olive were devoted partners until Olive died of cancer in 1979. In the 1980s, Mike retrained as a solicitor and worked with Gareth Peirce in the defence of 95 miners charged with riot and unlawful assembly at the picket at Orgreave in 1984. The case against them was exposed as resting on fabricated evidence and collapsed. Mike continued to be active in the Orgreave Truth and Justice campaign to secure compensation for the miners and for the release of official records on the government’s role in the police’s tactics. Mike later contributed to the work that led to the families of the 97 football supporters killed in the 1989 Hillsborough disaster securing a fresh inquest verdict clearing the victims and Liverpool fans of responsibility for the deaths. He also worked for two solicitors’ firms in Sheffield, retiring in 2011, but continuing with his Hillsborough work with Birnberg Peirce. Mike also made numerous visits abroad reporting for human rights organisations on the treatment of prisoners in the US, France, India, Mauritania and Ethiopia. Gregarious and family-loving, Mike loved walking, cycling and touring the landscapes of Epping Forest, the Peak District and especially his father’s homeland, County Donegal. He organised several fundraising cycle rides for Liberty for which he was a director for two spells, 1996-98 and 2001-08. He is survived by his daughter, Rachel, from his first marriage, his granddaughter, Maddie, and his son, Owen, from his second marriage, to Pam Grindey.On the same day as Tom Brady’s official retirement, it was another former New England Patriot who stopped the league in its tracks. Brian Flores, former defensive coordinator for the Patriots and now former head coach of the Miami Dolphins, had enough. Enough with the sham interviews for Black candidates after NFL owners had already privately anointed white coaches. Enough with the impossible-to-reach targets for Black head coaches on the rare occasion they are hired. Enough with a Rooney Rule that 20 years since its birth and despite its intentions to give more opportunities to minority candidates has left us with exactly one Black NFL head coach in the NFL in 2022. Flores was fired in January after leading the Dolphins to an 8-1 record to close out the season and had compiled back-to-back winning campaigns in Miami, the first coach to do so since 2003. He should have been scooped up by another team five seconds after his ousting. But instead he sat and watched as candidates with no head coaching experience filled the vacancies at the Denver Broncos and New York Giants. Understandably, he couldn’t take it anymore. The 40-year-old filed an explosive class action complaint against the NFL and each of the league’s 32 franchises in federal court on Tuesday, alleging racial discrimination in their hiring practices of head coaches, coordinators, and general managers. Flores made a litany of disturbing allegations in the lawsuit, starting with the claim that Dolphins owner Stephen Ross offered him $100,000 for every loss in 2019 so the team could earn a higher draft pick. Miami instead finished with five wins, exceeding expectations. As the complaint details, there was no good option for Flores as a Black head coach. Had the Dolphins actually tanked, they would have been the league’s laughingstock and Flores would have been the easy sacrifice. Ignoring the request, which he did, made Ross “mad” and Flores was seen as “an angry Black man” who refused to comply with team policy, ushering in the end of his time in Miami. Flores also shared a maddening text string from Bill Belichick congratulating him on the New York Giants head coaching job, which Belichick claimed was Flores’s. It turns out Belichick thought he was texting ex-Bills defensive coordinator Brian Daboll, who would be named the new Giants coach three days later. In the meantime, Flores went on another extensive interview with the Giants, who have not had a Black head coach in their nearly 100-year history, knowing the job was not his. Flores also alleges the Broncos used him to fulfill the Rooney Rule during their hiring cycle in 2019. According to Flores, then-general manager John Elway and team president Joe Ellis arrived at the interview an hour late and hungover. (The Giants, Dolphins and Broncos deny all the allegations leveled against them in the lawsuit and say they are committed to racial equality). This series of demoralizing events led Flores to do the unthinkable and set the NFL afire. “God has gifted me with a special talent to coach the game of football, but the need for change is bigger than my personal goals. In making the decision to file the class action complaint today, I understand that I may be risking coaching the game that I love and that has done so much for my family and me. My sincere hope is that by standing up against systemic racism in the NFL, others will join me to ensure that positive change is made for generations to come,” he said in a statement. Two hours after the Flores complaint dropped, the NFL released a statement of its own calling Flores’s claims, “without merit.” The league took months to investigate Deflategate. It took two hours to reach a decision on Flores’s accusations. Flores’ compelling 58-page lawsuit, which details the history of racism in the league, likens the NFL to a “plantation.” As the document says: “The owners watch the games from atop NFL stadiums in their luxury boxes, while their majority-Black workforce put their bodies on the line every Sunday, taking vicious hits and suffering debilitating injuries to their bodies and their brains while the NFL and its owners reap billions of dollars.” Then come the slew of examples, each one more devastating than the last. The NFL building its product on the backs of Black players only to ban them in 1934 once the league was financially viable. Colin Kaepernick’s ousting. The revelation that the league was trying to minimize payouts to former Black players involved in the $1bn concussion settlement through race-norming, a racist practice that claims Black people begin with a lower cognitive function than their white counterpoints. It’s hard to argue with the complaint’s depiction of the league as a quasi-plantation – of rich white men making money off the bodies of young Black men. Yet the cycle continues. Flores, a man of conviction, knows he is following in the footsteps of Kaepernick and risking his career by making public what has been so obvious. This is a pivotal moment for the league. Flores is not the only one with stories. Players across the league publicly expressed their support for Flores, along with their lack of surprise. The current President of the Unites States isn’t going to use Flores as a political pawn to attract racists. With Flores teeming with support, the spotlight turns to the owners. And it’s always been the owners. It’s not NFL commissioner Roger Goodell who, to his credit, has been vocal on the league’s lack of progress when it comes to minority candidates. It’s the collection of millionaire and billionaire team owners, who pay Goodell and decide who to hire. White men – and in all but two cases the owners are white – who are so rich that they know public opinion doesn’t affect them one way or another. After all, they’ve seen men of their class, race and wealth degrade the environment, damage the fabric of society, exploit college athletes and devalue democracy and still get away with it. They may not be representative of the NFL or the United States, but they control them. In a just world, Flores’s bravery would inspire change, like actual change, not just words painted in an end zone for show. If the Ross allegations are true, he would be ousted. The hiring and firing process would come with more accountability, as the complaint recommends. And while the first four head coaching hires this cycle have been white men, perhaps some of the remaining five slots will be filled by the droves of qualified Black candidates. But sadly, we shouldn’t hold our breath because the system has proven time and time again that it’s as unjust as they come.The FBI has confirmed that it obtained NSO Group’s powerful Pegasus spyware, suggesting that it bought access to the Israeli surveillance tool to “stay abreast of emerging technologies and tradecraft”. In a statement released to the Guardian, the bureau said it had procured a “limited licence” to access Pegasus for “product testing and evaluation only”, and suggested that its evaluation of the tool partly related to security concerns if the spyware fell into the “wrong hands”. The bureau also claimed it had never used Pegasus in support of any FBI investigation. “There was no operational use in support of any investigation, the FBI procured a limited licence for product testing and evaluation only,” it said. The statement marks a direct acknowledgment by the FBI that it acquired Pegasus, one of the world’s most sophisticated hacking tools. The FBI’s procurement of Pegasus, which occurred in 2019 under the Trump administration, was first reported by the New York Times. It was a stunning revelation in part because the Biden administration has recently placed NSO on a commerce department blacklist, saying it had evidence that the company’s hacking tools had enabled governments around the world to conduct “transnational repression”, targeting dissidents and journalists. The Guardian and other media organisations have reported multiple cases in which security researchers say governments have used NSO’s tools to target American citizens around the world, including Carine Kanimba, the daughter of the jailed Rwandan dissident Paul Rusesabagina, and Lama Fakih, a senior staff member of Human Rights Watch in Beirut. Once deployed, the user of Pegasus spyware can take complete control of a person’s phone, accessing messages, intercepting phone calls and using the phone as a remote listening device. A person with close knowledge of the FBI deal, who spoke to the Guardian on the condition of anonymity, claimed that it occurred after a “long process” of negotiations between US officials and NSO. It is claimed one disagreement centred on how much control NSO would retain over its software. The source claimed that NSO usually kept sensors on its technology so that the company could be alerted in Israel if the technology was moved by a government client. But the source claimed the FBI did not want the technology to be fitted with sensors that would have allowed NSO to track its physical location. The source also claimed that the FBI did not want NSO’s own engineers to install the technology and did not want to integrate the spyware into its own systems. Ultimately, it is understood that NSO and the FBI agreed to keep the technology in a large container. NSO did not respond to a request for comment on these claims. The FBI was also concerned about possible “leakage” of any data to another foreign intelligence service, the source said. The source claimed the Pegasus licence was acquired by the FBI using a financial “vehicle” that was not easily identified as being linked to the bureau. The FBI did not respond to specific questions about its alleged concerns, the financial vehicle it used to procure the Pegasus licence, or other details. In the end, the source claimed, the FBI did not actually use Pegasus. “They weren’t using it at all. Like, not even switching it on. But they kept paying for it, and they wanted to renew. It was a one-year test project and it cost about $5m [£3.7m], and they renewed for another $4m,” the source claimed. “But they didn’t use it.” In an emailed statement in response to claims about the bureau’s acquisition of Pegasus, the FBI said: “The FBI works diligently to stay abreast of emerging technologies and tradecraft – not just to explore a potential legal use but also to combat crime and to protect both the American people and our civil liberties. “That means we routinely identify, evaluate, and test technical solutions and problems for a variety of reasons, including possible operational and security concerns they might pose in the wrong hands. There was no operational use in support of any investigation, the FBI procured a limited licence for product testing and evaluation only.” NSO has categorically denied that its Pegasus spyware can be used against US mobile phones. Ron Wyden, a Democratic senator from Oregon, the chair of the finance committee and a staunch privacy advocate, said: “The public deserves far more transparency from the executive branch, including the FBI and justice department, about any US government relationships with NSO and other cyber-mercenaries. The public has a particular interest in whether the government believes the use of these tools against Americans is legal.” The New York Times reported that NSO brought a version of Pegasus to New Jersey in June 2019, after the FBI had reportedly been offered a workaround by NSO that allowed a product called Phantom to “hack any number in the United States”. Without naming sources, the New York Times reported that NSO conducted demonstrations of Phantom to the FBI, which the newspaper said resulted in an alleged “attack” against a US phone number. In a lawsuit it filed in 2019, WhatsApp accused NSO of sending malware to 1,400 of its users. The company has said about 100 of the individuals who were targeted were members of civil society, including journalists and activists. NSO has said in legal filings that even if WhatsApp’s allegations were true, it was acting as a “foreign agent” when its spyware was deployed against WhatsApp users, because its software is used by foreign governments who are meant to use its spyware to fight crime. NSO has also said it does not have information about how its clients use its spyware or who its clients target. WhatsApp has also alleged in court filings that a US phone number was targeted by Pegasus on 9 May 2019. Without providing evidence or sourcing, the New York Times reported that the alleged intrusion on a US number, as described in WhatsApp’s legal case, was in fact a demonstration of NSO’s technology to the FBI. The FBI declined to comment on the allegation. NSO did not respond to a request for comment. WhatsApp said: “In all circumstances our priority is to defend our services from threats that would harm people’s ability to safely communicate with one another. We will continue our efforts to hold NSO accountable for their attacks against journalists, human rights activists and government officials in violation of US law. The spyware industry must be prevented from undermining the privacy and security of people in the US and across the world.”“BBC Three gets going at 7pm.” I don’t know about you, but seeing those words back on the screen last night – as the channel returned to TV again after six years of being digital-only – provided waves of nostalgia. When I was a teenager, turning on BBC Three just before 7pm and seeing those words was a daily ritual. Snog Marry Avoid? Celebdaq? The time S Club 7 walked out of Liquid News as their PR interrupted Claudia Winkleman’s line of questioning? I was there. A good part of my youth was spent in front of BBC Three. But does it still work to watch it in the traditional way? After all, we are now in the age of streaming, when half the shows are already available to watch on iPlayer. Only one way to find out: watch the entire evening of their launch night programming. Oh, and full disclosure: this article nearly didn’t happen because I couldn’t work out how to re-tune my television first. BBC Three x Radio 1: The Launch Party (7pm) After a short skit involving Bimini Bon-Boulash as a continuity announcer (joking “are we on?”), the first show to appear on BBC Three is a show by BBC Radio 1, promoting the upcoming slate of programmes on BBC Three. This is next-level corporate synergy that would make W1A blush. The whole launch show is a pre-record, which sucks a bit of the energy out. Then again, the last television channel that had a launch show was GBTV, and that involved Andrew Neil sat in a poorly lit bunker with his face and voice out of sync. So being live doesn’t always give you on-screen energy. There are constant trailers. From Love in the Flesh, a show where people cop off in a hot location (Love Island, who is she?) to The Fast and the Farmer(ish), a tractor racing competition. If you’re wondering, I spoke to BBC Three’s boss the other day and they joked that they were taken by the name of the show before they had heard what it actually involves. At least, I think it was a joke. The Catch Up (7.55pm) RIP 60 Seconds. BBC Three’s old bulletins were someone reading the headlines as if their lives depended on it, while a lit stick of dynamite on screen flashed from left to right. The new bulletin, tonight hosted by Levi Jouavel, is longer (180 seconds!) and thankfully more informative. No more news reports that were essentially: “Happy happy sad sad terrible tragedy sad hot celebrity bye!” Eating With My Ex (8pm and 8.30pm) A show I didn’t realise was a celebrity special until the words “CELEBRITY SPECIAL” were printed all over the screen, Eating With My Ex has been on iPlayer since 2017. But for those of you who haven’t seen it, it is just as awkward as you might imagine. Two exes go on a date to work out whether there’s still a spark, with the rest of the restaurant seemingly full of extras getting a free meal if they talk in the background really quietly. A few weird things stand out. One is that some of the first people to appear on BBC Three’s much-hyped launch night are two celebrities from Too Hot To Handle, a Netflix show. The second is that, according to this programme, Geordie Shore is still going, too. The third is that there is a genre of celebrity who solely go on other reality shows to talk about their relationships, which you can only make sense of if you had watched the other reality show first. Perhaps a sign that I am falling out of BBC Three’s target demographic, the only thing I could think of while each couple was at loggerheads was “your food is getting cold”. RuPaul’s Drag Race UK Vs the World (9pm) My flatmate and I watch Drag Race every Saturday. Over the course of the pandemic we have watched the US original, Canada’s Drag Race (two series), RuPaul’s Drag Race All Stars (two series), Drag Race Holland, Drag Race Thailand, RuPaul’s Secret Celebrity Drag Race (terrible) and RuPaul’s Drag Race Down Under. Oh and three series of Drag Race UK. And, thanks to Drag Race US returning and Drag Race Vs the World debuting so close to each other, we’ve had three talent show challenges in just over three weeks. Being gay is exhausting. The best thing about the various Drag Race franchises now being on television, rather than on streaming, is that you can tweet about exits without being murdered. But to enjoy them properly, you have to watch live. You also have to watch with others, so, for this new series, which pits Drag Race contestants from across the globe against each other, I ended up having to watch online: swinging by my local neighbourhood gay bar to enjoy the collective agony of watching the iPlayer livestream collapse three times due to poor wifi. At one point a punter attempted to tether the bar’s projector to someone’s phone. “Good luck, and don’t fuck it up,” narrated the bar’s drag queen. Perhaps we should have tuned in on terrestrial. Lazy Susan (10.15pm) Back home to watch Celeste Dring and Freya Parker in this completely surreal and rather compelling sketch show. It opens with their faces superimposed on snails to a tune by Annie Lennox. It ends with a Lana Del Rey spoof song so accurate that, if it was released as a single, I probably wouldn’t be able to tell the difference. There’s also a sketch hotline. “If you don’t like our material … or us … or both, or you think we’re ugly and need to know – don’t tweet us. Don’t email us. And don’t DM us on Instagram. Call our hotline and tell us personally.” One to look out for. Cherry Valentine: Gypsy Queen and Proud (10.30pm) A key reason I think this BBC Three relaunch is going to work is the fact that you’ll end up watching documentaries you wouldn’t have got around to watching if it was just available as a rectangle on a website. This is one of them: a heartfelt and sensitive series by Cherry Valentine on the complexities of growing up as a queer person in the Traveller community, and the difference you feel when you’re in drag compared with when you’re not. Also by now I’ve realised that this is the longest time I have watched the same channel continuously since the Olympics (look, the horse dancing was engrossing). Fleabag (11.30pm) The first official BBC Three repeat (in fact, it’s repeats all night from here), but it’s Fleabag and I’m not the Daily Mail, so who cares? Worth staying up for Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s “massive arsehole” joke alone. Eating With My Ex (00.25am) Do I have to keep going? Eating With My Ex (00.55am) I don’t keep going.‘How many times have you broken your back?” A concerned-looking doctor is asking a jockey. It takes him a few seconds to count. “Three … I think.” The doctor, it turns out, is a vet; the jockey, who’s in his 40s, hasn’t got the cash for medical treatment so slips the racetrack vet a few dollars for an X-ray. It’s a scene typical of this macho-sentimental feature debut from Clint Bentley, which trots a well-trod narrative: the past-his-peak athlete clutching at one last chance of glory before the knacker’s yard. It’s a movie that gets by (and then some) on an intense and focused performance by character actor Clifton Collins Jr, and a truthful-feeling sense of place. Collins plays the jockey: Jackson Silva is solid and decent, a man of few words and well-respected on the circuit. Racing has taken its toll on his body: he’s numb down one side and has got the shakes in his crop holding hand. Still, Jackson is convinced he’s got a couple of years left in him. He’s worked for some time with trainer Ruth (a warm and generous performance by Molly Parker), who has just bought an exceptional young thoroughbred. Another movie would have required a romance between Jackson and Ruth; but here the pair only have eyes for their horse. (“She’s like a swan with teeth,” Jackson marvels). Director Bentley is the son of a jockey and shot the movie at a scruffy racetrack in Phoenix, casting real-life jockeys alongside professional actors. And he really gets under the skin of this world, its way of life, rhythms and textures – though I found the subplot involving a young jockey (Moises Arias) sniffing around asking questions about Jackson a bit predictable. However, there’s a brilliant scene where jockeys sit around at the end of the day trading tales of past injuries like army veterans. It says something about Collins’ lived-in performance that his lined, creased face fits right in. He is surely entitled to put his years as a character actor behind him. • Jockey is released on 4 February in cinemas.The star of Woody Allen’s latest film has defended the director against a persistent accusation he molested his adopted daughter, Dylan Farrow, in 1992. Allen has always denied the allegation and two investigations into the case resulted in no charges being brought. Wallace Shawn, who has featured in The Princess Bride, Clueless and six films by Allen, has written an open letter explaining his reasoning for believing that Allen was innocent, and admonishing other actors who have “distanced themselves” from him. “I was very upset that some of my fellow actors leapt to the conclusion that Woody was guilty of a serious crime that you can go to prison for without really knowing that much about it,” Shawn told Yahoo Movies. “Of course, if someone like [Dylan] says ‘This happened to me,’ I don’t fault people for thinking: ‘That might be true.’ But on the other hand, Woody said, ‘That didn’t happen,’ and I didn’t care for the fact that so many of my fellow actors didn’t look into it any farther, and just assumed he was guilty. “I’ve followed the case: I’ve read quite a bit about it, I saw the documentary trying to substantiate Dylan’s story and I don’t believe that this happened.” Farrow restated her accusation in an open letter to the New York Times in 2014, in the wake of the acclaim for Allen’s Oscar-winning drama Blue Jasmine. Her brother, Ronan, resurfaced the claims in 2016, coinciding with the Cannes premiere of Allen’s comedy Café Society. A documentary on HBO last year presented the case from the points of view of Dylan, Ronan and their mother, Mia Farrow. A number of stars with whom Allen, 86, has worked have expressed regret for their collaborations. In 2016, Selena Gomez and Timothée Chalamet donated their fees from romantic comedy A Rainy Day in New York to #MeToo. Kate Winslet, Rebecca Hall, Colin Firth, Rachel Brosnahan and Michael Caine are among those who have said they would no longer work with Allen. However, stars including Scarlett Johansson, Javier Bardem, Larry David, Alec Baldwin, Diane Keaton, Blake Lively, Jesse Eisenberg and Kristen Stewart have defended the director. Shawn said he felt the prevailing assumption that Allen was guilty was “a miscarriage of justice”. “I hope that the more of us who stick our neck out and say, ‘You must not jump to that conclusion,’ it will become easier for more people to say that,” said Shawn. “At the moment, people’s agents tell them to denounce Woody and to not work with him. If more people – like Scarlett Johansson and Dianne Wiest – say, ‘We’re delighted to work with him,’ then maybe eventually the tide will turn.” Shawn stars alongside Gina Gershon, Christoph Waltz and Louis Garrel in Rifkin’s Festival, which opened to muted domestic box office last weekend. The film made $24,000 from 26 cinemas across the US. Allen’s previous film, A Rainy Day in New York, was a surprise commercial hit, despite the negative publicity surrounding Chalamet’s and Gomez’s statements, and Amazon dropping the film and their multi-picture deal with Allen, who later filed a $68m suit for breach of contract. That film made $22m worldwide in cinemas despite its mid-pandemic release, and broke streaming records. Allen remains one of the few directors who makes one film a year in their 80s. Details of a 50th film are still to be confirmed.Every time I glance at the news, there seems to be another shocking revelation about the Metropolitan police service and the behaviour – or more accurately, misbehaviour – of its officers. Since the tragic killing of Sarah Everard by a serving police officer, the situation has become unbearable for women who are supposed to be able to rely on the police to protect them. In recent months, a concerning number of Met officers have been exposed as domestic abusers; two have been jailed for sharing sick photos of the scene where two women had been murdered; and many more have been dismissed for sexual misconduct and using the power of their warrant card for sexual gratification. Despite all of this, I am actually pro-police. I’m desperate for the Met to regain its reputation as one of the most trustworthy forces in the world. I was proud to join the force back in 2004, spending 11 years as a police constable. I worked with many excellent officers who amazed and inspired me every day with their kindness, determination and courage. As a woman, however, I also experienced the other side of my male colleagues. I had hardcore pornography shoved in my face on a carrier full of uniformed riot police. I was forced to listen as male colleagues listed the women on our team in order of attractiveness. I heard female colleagues described as “prick teases”, “sluts” and, of course, “the team bike”. Did these things make me uncomfortable? Yes. Did I speak out? No. There was, and still is, a culture of silence in the Met. The Independent Office for Police Conduct report published yesterday not only revealed the full extent of abusive, discriminatory and harmful attitudes within the Met, but also the very real fear among those who wish to speak out. I felt that same fear when I was a serving constable, the fear of being ostracised for speaking up, of being labelled as “weary”, of not being seen as “one of the team”. Yesterday evening, I discussed the recent press with a former colleague, one who still serves in the Met. Around 15 years ago he reported a senior officer for using a racist slur. No action was taken against the accused and my colleague has lived with the stigma of “reporting your own” ever since. He now wishes he’d stayed quiet. This is the message whistleblowers were being given more than a decade ago. I despair that nothing has changed. One thing that hit me as I read the many messages exchanged between serving officers that were detailed in the IOPC report is how they referred to women in a derogatory manner. For a force that has been slated repeatedly in the last year for its treatment of women, and constantly struggles to achieve justice for the victims of domestic abuse and sexual assault (who are overwhelmingly women), this was yet another fracture in the confidence I once held in the Met. One of the officers is reported to have threatened to “smack” his partner. Another reportedly said that slapping your partner “makes them love you more. Seriously, since I did that she won’t leave me alone.” How can we trust these officers to attend and report a domestic assault? How can a scared victim open up to men like these? Police officers deal with domestic abuse every day. They should know how serious it is. They are exactly the people who should treat it with the urgency and respect it deserves, instead of using it for a cheap laugh. Another male officer told a female colleague that he’d “happily chloroform” her. Imagine how you would feel, already working in a male-dominated environment, being told by a colleague that they would “happily rape you”. Imagine not one male officer speaking up in your defence. Because that’s one of the things that needs to change if the Met, and society in general, is going to tackle misogyny. Officers need to stand up and challenge their mates. Though the Met has denied it – preferring to blame “a few bad apples” (this apple tree must be getting lots of sunlight) – in my opinion the problem is clear. There is a culture of misogyny in the Metropolitan police. And yes, this is reflective of society, but the police are supposed to be unimpeachable. The police have powers that ordinary citizens do not have. These powers are dependent on the police having the trust of the communities they are policing. Only three things will change this culture: men standing with women to stamp it out, officers being actively encouraged to report (and supported for reporting) unacceptable behaviour, and zero tolerance on sexual misconduct or discriminatory behaviour in the force. Without these, there is no hope of the Met ever regaining women’s trust. Alice Vinten was a constable in the Metropolitan police for 11 yearsWashington’s NFL team has ended its 18-month search for a new name with the announcement that the franchise will now be known as the Commanders. The team dropped its old nickname in July 2020 amid pressure from sponsors. The franchise had faced decades of complaints that its former name was racist towards Native American. For the last two seasons, the franchise had been known simply as the Washington Football Team. The team had also considered Admirals, Armada, Brigade, Sentinels, Defenders, Red Hogs and Presidents as new names. One option popular with fans, RedWolves, was dropped because the trademark was owned by another organization. Team president Jason Wright and coach Ron Rivera had said they wanted to incorporate a military theme to the team’s new name because of the armed forces’ links to the capital. The name is also a reference to the US President, also known as the commander-in-chief. “This new identity embodies the most powerful aspects of Washington’s story by paying tribute to the team’s rich history and championship culture, personified by mission-driven players who take command, forge success and break barriers on and off the field,” the team said in a statement. Ray Halbritter, the nation representative and CEO of Oneida Nation Enterprises, said the new name would benefit Native Americans. “They’ll no longer be subjected to such an offensive and harmful slur every Sunday during the football season,” Halbritter said. “It’s a great moment for Washington fans. They want to support a team, to love a team, and now they won’t be put in position having to do that with a dictionary-defined slur as a name.” Washington was the first team in the four major North American professional sports leagues to move away from Native American imagery amid a national reckoning on race. Cleveland in Major League Baseball followed suit, adopting the new name Guardians that is now in effect after settling a lawsuit with a roller derby team by the same name. MLB’s Atlanta Braves, the NFL’s Kansas City Chiefs and the NHL’s Chicago Blackhawks have defended keeping their names. Washington has not had success on or off the field in recent years. The league fined the team $10m after an investigation into workplace conduct, owner Dan Snyder squabbled with minority partners before buying out their shares, the front office took criticism last year for botching late safety Sean Taylor’s jersey retirement and over the past 15 years the team has not won a playoff game. Rivera alluded to the team’s recent history on Wednesday. “To me it really is about renaming the team,” he told NBC’s Today show. “But I also think it’s about turning the page to a new chapter. We’ve had a lot of unfortunate things that have happened. But as we go forward what I’m trying to do is, hey, buy into judging us now and where we’re headed as opposed to where we’ve been.” The team will continue to play in its famous burgundy and gold uniforms. The president, Joe Biden, tweeted in favour of the new name, which is the same as one of his dogs. “I suppose there’s room for two Commanders in this town,” Biden wrote above a picture of Commander outside the White House.A man who led police on a 24-hour manhunt after killing his ex-partner and her son has been jailed for life with a minimum term of 40 years. Daniel Boulton, 30, stabbed and killed Bethany Vincent, 26, and her nine-year-old son Darren Henson, known as DJ, at their home in Louth, Lincolnshire, in May last year. At the sentencing hearing at Lincoln crown court on Wednesday, the judge, Mr Justice Pepperall, said: “I’m sure that you targeted DJ because of your hatred and you were motivated by his autism. I’m sure that you are a violent and very dangerous man, and you present an ongoing risk of further violence, and possibly even homicide. “You killed with ruthless efficiency very soon after breaking into the house. You acted calmly, callously and efficiently … you intended to kill, you knew precisely what you were doing.” Boulton pleaded guilty to manslaughter midtrial at Lincoln crown court but denied murder, claiming he had a mental health condition at the time. Jurors took less than 60 minutes to convict him of both murders, and there were shouts of “yes” from the public gallery as the verdicts were read out. During the three-week trial, the court heard how Boulton walked 28 miles from his hostel in Skegness to Vincent’s house, where he stabbed her nine times. He then went up to DJ’s bedroom and stabbed the boy 14 times. A nine-month-old baby was found at the house when emergency services arrived at the scene Boulton went on the run and the following day he assaulted an off-duty officer, PC Stephen Dennis, who tried to detain him while walking his dog near Hubbard’s Hills. Boulton was eventually cornered on a farm and armed officers used stun guns on him. Jurors were told that Boulton had developed a hatred for DJ, who was severely autistic, and he had spoken of how he wanted to wipe out Vincent’s “whole bloodline”. He was prevented from seeing Vincent by a restraining order issued after a previous incident in which he “threw her around the house”, the court heard. However, he continued to contact her and sent her more than 900 messages the weekend before the stabbings, jurors were told. The defence claimed Boulton was on “autopilot” at the time of the murders and had a “loss of control”. Experts said the defendant had a dissocial personality disorder, but the prosecutor, Kath Goddard QC, said Boulton had been “fully in control” of his actions. Lincolnshire county council said a joint child safeguarding practice and domestic homicide review was under way.When your teen hits puberty, their brain changes dramatically. The ‘teenage brain’ is unique, it is a time of dramatic brain growth and unparalleled learning opportunity. Precisely because the brain is acutely responsive to the environment, it is also a time of potential vulnerability. As the parent of a teen, it means you have to shift gear so that you can make the most of this extraordinary time. Rather than take a step back, parents of teens need to stay close, but your strategy needs to change according to their stage in life. Think of it as tracking them at a respectful distance. Here we outline 4 practical science-based tips that if used consistently through the teenage years, will improve your teen’s life trajectory and well-being. 1. Hitch a ride on the unique and powerful drives of the teenage brain The teenage brain shifts gear in puberty, to ensure adolescents explore, engage and notice the world in a unique way. These priorities are an evolutionary masterstroke, because they allow the young person to prepare for adulthood and independence. For example, teens need to find their future tribe, and so their brain zeros in on their peer group and is highly attuned to acceptance and integration because that same peer group is their future community. Teen brains are wired to look out for novel experiences and take risks and this means that they learn about their environment, its costs and benefits. Their brain is driven to independence and so they often reject parents’ ideals and philosophy as part of separating from the family. One aspect of the adolescent years that is often misunderstood is the intense emotions that young people feel and express. Neuroscience considers emotions as a way of learning about the world and teens need to learn efficiently in preparation for adulthood, so accordingly the intensity of their emotions is heightened. Use this framework, and you can work with biology rather than against it. For example, capitalize on the pull towards peers and set up study groups, reframe rejection of familiar family ideas as a step towards healthy separation. Knowing the science helps parents and can shift perception to see these behaviours as necessary and adaptive rather than rejecting and disrespectful, enabling greater compassion and understanding. 2. Use a consultation model with your teen Teens need experiences that provide choice and where they can exercise autonomy. This means relationships with parents need to change, in particular the way you deliver your parenting. Young people have an intense need to feel respected so a consultation model works best. So, listen more and talk less and develop a problem-solving strategy together. Part of the strategy includes consciously supporting them towards independence. It’s hard to watch our kids struggle but saving them from the natural consequences of life does not work long-term. Instead of finishing their homework for them when they are tired, you may need to allow them to explore the consequences of that so that they learn key life skills. That way they experience and develop resilience, self-confidence and a sense of autonomy. 3. When emotions run high – stay calm, be warm but hold your boundary Teens will challenge authority and test boundaries as they are figuring out who they are and how they want to live. Good communication and deep curiosity are the key to managing this. Boundary testing is usually a highly emotional time for everyone involved. When their behaviour has gone haywire and they have a meltdown, your job is to try to find out what’s really going on. Shouting at them simply escalates things and is never a good idea, but neither changing your approach nor caving in the face of their intense emotions is helpful either. Stay with them during the intense emotion (it will help them calm down) but don’t try and negotiate while emotions are running high, they won’t be able to hear you while their brain is in an intensely emotional state. Stay strong and talk it through at a calm time. This might be hours or even days later. Listen to them, be genuinely curious about their perspective, potential triggers for the meltdown, make time for conversation where emotions can be discussed, and difficulties worked through. Finding a resolution and working through these tough times is where the magic of teenage parenting happens. Doing this will help teens learn how to manage their own emotions and boundaries appropriately. Both are essential life skills. 4. Keep connected, especially during the hard times Teens need their parents, even if they push you away in the moment. These years are bewildering times for them, with many practical and emotional hurdles to overcome. They need a stable, predictable and nurturing environment at home, even though it is precisely the same period of life when confrontations at home are frequent. Parents need to give them space and hold them tight at the same time (no one said it was easy). The linchpin here is a strong relationship. Studies show that a strong, warm and nurturing parental relationship can impact brain function so that teens can negotiate the challenging times of life while protecting them from potential mental health problems further down the line. The teenage years can be challenging for everyone in the family, but neuroscience has lifted the lid on adolescence to help you understand and connect with your teen, and with that comes the key to unlocking the potential of the incredible teenage brain. Learn more about the teenage brain at the upcoming masterclass, taking place on Tuesday 1 March 2022. Tickets available to book now.Joe Biden has committed to reduce the cancer death rate by 50% – a new goal for the “moonshot” initiative against the deadly disease that was first announced in 2016 when he was vice-president. The president has set a 25-year timeline for achieving that goal, part of a broader effort to eradicate cancers, according to senior administration officials who previewed Wednesday’s announcement on the condition of anonymity. Biden delivered remarks on Wednesday from the East Room of the White House, along with his wife, Jill, and Vice-President Kamala Harris. Others who attended the speeches included members of Congress and the administration and about 100 members of the cancer community including patients, survivors, caregivers, families, advocacy groups and research organizations. “We can end cancer as we know it. I committed to this fight when I was vice- president. It’s one of the reasons why, quite frankly, I ran for president. Let there be no doubt, now that I am president, this is a presidential White House priority,” Biden said on Wednesday. “The [cancer] death rate has fallen by more than 25%, but … cancer is still the number two cause of death in America, second only to heart disease,” he added. “In the last two years of the Covid-19 pandemic, the pandemic has taken more than 800,000 American lives. But [in] that same period of time, cancer has claimed 1.2 million American lives.” The issue is deeply personal for the president: he lost his eldest son, Beau, to brain cancer in 2015. “It’s not just patients, cancer changes everyone it touches … For Joe and I, it has stolen our joy, it left us broken in our grief, but through that pain, we found purpose, strengthening our fortitude for this fight to end cancer as we know it,” Jill Biden said, in reference to Beau’s battle with cancer. The American Cancer Society estimates that there will be 1,918,030 new cancer cases and 609,360 cancer deaths this year. What Biden is aiming to do is essentially save more than 300,000 lives annually from the disease, something the administration believes is possible because the age-adjusted death rate has already fallen by roughly 25% over the past two decades. As part of the moonshot, Biden will assemble a “cancer cabinet” that includes 18 federal departments, agencies and offices, including leaders from the Departments of Health and Human Services, Veterans Affairs, Defense, Energy and Agriculture. Biden called on Congress to fund his newly proposed Arpah, or the Advanced Research Project Agency for Health, which will be a new entity within the National Institute of Health with “autonomy and authorities to drive unprecedented progress in biomedicine”. He also called on the private sector to make drugs more affordable and further share data and knowledge to better inform the public and “benefit every company’s research”. Moreover, Biden urged the public and healthcare officials to “get cancer screenings back on track and make sure they’re accessible”. “Americans missed more than 9m cancer screenings in the last two years because of Covid-19,” the president said on Wednesday. “If you’re putting off screening because you’re afraid of what they’ll find, let me say this … I know cancer is scary. Going to the doctors can be scary but screening is how you catch it early before it’s too late.” The White House will also host a cancer moonshot summit and continue a roundtable discussion series on the subject. The goal is to improve the quality of treatment and people’s lives, something with deep economic resonance as well. The National Cancer Institute reported in October that the economic burden of treatment was more than $21bn in 2019, including $16.22bn in patient out-of-pocket costs. President Barack Obama announced the moonshot program during his final full year in office and secured $1.8bn over seven years to fund research to “accelerate our efforts to progress towards a cure”. Obama designated Biden, then his vice-president, as “mission control”, a recognition of Biden’s grief as a parent and desire to do something about it. Biden wrote in his memoir Promise Me, Dad that he chose not to run for president in 2016 primarily because of Beau’s death. When Biden announced he wasn’t seeking the Democratic nomination in 2016, he said he regretted not being president because “I would have wanted to have been the president who ended cancer, because it’s possible”. The moonshot fell somewhat out of the public focus when Donald Trump became president, though Trump, a Republican, proposed $500m over 10 years for pediatric cancer research in his 2019 State of the Union address. Biden continued the work as a private citizen by establishing the Biden Cancer Initiative to help organize resources to improve cancer care. When Biden did seek the presidency in 2020, he had tears in his eyes as he said in an interview on MSNBC’s Morning Joe that “Beau should be running for president, not me”. Associated Press contributed to this reportSecurity guards, cleaners and hospitality staff at Dubai’s Expo 2020 in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) are allegedly working in highly abusive conditions that may amount to forced labour, according to a human rights group. Migrant workers employed at the international fair in the UAE – taking place now after being delayed by Covid – allege they have been forced to pay illegal recruitment fees, suffered racial discrimination and had wages withheld and passports confiscated, said the report by Equidem. Dubbed the “world’s greatest show”, Expo 2020 hosts 192 national pavilions, showcasing the latest ideas in technology and sustainability. Organisers hope to see 25 million visitors during the course of the fair, which opened in October 2021 and runs to March 2022. The event has attracted big corporate sponsors, global stars such as will.i.am and social media influencers, with visitors promised the “next wave of human brilliance”. But Equidem’s report highlighted the, “significant disconnect between the Emirate’s stated ambition of being a modern, international state and the reality of racial discrimination and forced labour practices that migrant workers are facing”. It said the UAE’s alleged failure to protect migrant workers damages the reputation of countries and companies taking part in the event. Equidem’s director, Mustafa Qadri, said: “The entire international community is complicit in the exploitation at the Expo. It’s a scandal.” Migrant workers, predominantly from the Indian subcontinent and parts of Africa, make up more than 90% of workers in the UAE’s private sector. More than half the 69 workers interviewed for the report said they had paid recruitment fees in their own countries to secure their jobs. Many claimed their employers were aware of this practice but failed to intervene or reimburse the fees. The practice, which is illegal in the UAE, often leaves workers deep in debt. Two-thirds of the migrant workers interviewed said their wages or other benefits were not always paid on time or in full, leaving some struggling to pay for food or send money home to their families. “They promised me an increment in salary after probation – something I have not seen to date … Never have I received overtime payment from my employer … The way they treat the staff is like slaves, I mean modern-day slavery,” said one hospitality worker. Virtually all workers said their passports were held by their employer. While most said they could get them back on request, the practice is illegal and can be used by some companies to control their workforce. One worker said his employer kept his passport, despite instructions from Expo’s management to return workers’ passports. He said: “The company made us sign a paper saying we have received our passport. In reality, it is still in the office of our accommodation camp.” While there was some evidence that working conditions at the Expo were generally better than elsewhere in the UAE, the findings allegedly revealed multiple breaches of the Emirate’s labour laws, as well as the more stringent worker welfare standards introduced to protect the rights of workers employed in constructing the event and providing security and hospitality services. The UAE authorities and participating nations have been repeatedly warned of the risks of labour abuse at the Expo. On the eve of its official opening, in September 2021, the European parliament passed a resolution calling on international companies sponsoring the event to withdraw and a boycott by member states, citing human rights abuses in the UAE, including the detention of activist Ahmed Mansoor and the “pervasive” abuse of migrant workers. The Arab parliament dismissed the claims. In a statement, it said: “The UAE is one of the leading countries with regards to human rights.” In October, Human Rights Watch described the Expo as an opportunity, “for the UAE to falsely present itself on the world stage as open, tolerant, and rights-respecting while shutting down the space for politics, public discourse, and activism”. The rights group urged governments and businesses, “to avoid contributing to UAE authorities’ efforts to whitewash its abuses”. The UAE authorities and Expo 2020 did not respond to multiple requests for comment. A statement on the Expo 2020 website reads: “We are committed to the health, safety, welfare and dignity of all workers.” It claims workers’ welfare standards are monitored through regular inspections of working and living conditions.A gynaecologist in the Netherlands conceived 21 children and potentially dozens more using his own sperm after prospective parents turned to him for fertility treatment, an investigation has discovered. Jos Beek worked at Elisabeth hospital in Leiderdorp, now part of Alrijne hospital, between 1973 and 1998. He died in 2019. The couples being treated by Beek had expected to be the beneficiaries of samples from anonymous sperm donors. Alrijne hospital said it did not believe Beek had told anyone the truth. The scandal emerged after an organisation that traces biological parents for those born using anonymous donations found a match between Beek’s DNA and 21 children whose mothers had received treatment at his clinic between 1973 and 1986. The group, Fiom, contacted Alrijne hospital in June last year. The hospital then commissioned an independent committee to investigate at the beginning of January. Peter Jue, a member of the board of directors at Alrijne hospital, said he could not discount the possibility that Beek was the biological father of many more children after treating their mothers. Jue said: “We are very shocked by this. This, of course, has a significant impact on the parents and children involved. “We immediately entered into a conversation with the children and parents who wanted to, to listen and to promise our cooperation. We recognise the situation they have found themselves in and want to do as much as possible to get information on the table. The way this doctor acted at the time is unacceptable.” Hospital records from the period no longer exist, so a general appeal has been made for people to come forward. Beek is the third fertility doctor in the Netherlands found to have used their own sperm during fertility treatment. In October 2020, DNA tests revealed that gynaecologist Jan Wildschut, who died in 2009, was the biological father of 17 children. The previous year it was discovered that doctor Jan Karbaat had used his own sperm in the conception of 49 children with unknowing patients. Jue said the protocols of the 1970s and 80s, when fertility treatment was in its infancy, did not bear any relation to those of today. In a statement, the hospital said: “It seems that this doctor donated his own sperm and used it to inseminate intended mothers who were expecting sperm anonymously. “In the years that this doctor was working, there were hardly any regulations regarding fertility programmes. The field was still developing. “We would like to emphasise that the situation is now completely different. We use national protocols and work in a consistent and careful manner. Our working method is regularly checked through audits.” Under a law that came into force in 2004, people in the Netherlands have the right to know the identity of their biological parents once they reach the age of 16.The landlord run by the billionaire Guy Hands’ private equity firm has issued the government a two-week ultimatum to drop legal action to take over 38,000 homes for military families and instead accept a one-off refurbishment payment of £105m. The Ministry of Defence revealed last week it planned to bring the properties back under government control, 25 years after a privatisation deal that has been criticised by the National Audit Office, the government’s spending watchdog, as a waste of taxpayers’ money. The landlord Annington’s offer would represent less than £2,800 per property, a figure that is thought to be unlikely to cover the costs of extensive repairs in some of the more dilapidated homes – and is lower than the MoD’s £140m spending on maintenance for a single year. It would also represent just over an eighth of what Annington paid out in a dividend to its parent company last year. Lady Liddell, the Labour peer who chairs Annington, blamed the government’s Defence Infrastructure Organisation for failing to maintain the homes. She said her company, which owns 200-year leases on the properties, was “generously offering to put this right”. In a letter sent on Tuesday evening to the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, and the defence procurement minister Jeremy Quin, Annington described the government’s attitude as “decidedly anti-business” and demanded the government accepted the deal and withdraw its legal action, or face a protracted court fight. “It would be a shame to see money that could go to improving the houses being wasted on costly and lengthy legal action,” Liddell wrote. In 1996, the Conservative government sold 57,400 properties in the so-called “married quarters estate” to Annington Homes, which was then bought for £1.7bn by Nomura, a Japanese investment bank that employed Hands. He later left Nomura to found the Terra Firma private equity firm, and bought Annington for £3.2bn in 2012. The MoD then rented back the homes on a 200-year lease at a discount, but also agreed to pay for their maintenance and refurbishment. The value of the properties has since surged to an estimated £7.6bn last year, leaving its private equity owners with an enormous paper profit. Yet the MoD is still paying about £180m a year in rent plus £140m in repairs and upgrades, despite taking back ownership of part of the portfolio. Annington insists it has offered to take on the maintenance, although it has not shared the financial terms of any offer. The valuable income stream backed by the portfolio has helped Annington to raise billions of pounds from investors in bond issues. That included an £800m debt issue in October that allowed it to pay a dividend of £794m to its parent company. The government is seeking to exercise “statutory leasehold enfranchisement rights”, Quin told parliament last week. The MoD has sought to take back only two houses at first as test cases to see whether Annington can be forced out. Annington claims the government has no right to do so. “I think the approach the government is taking is very interesting and clever,” said David Burns, a senior litigation partner at Ronald Fletcher Baker, a law firm. “By serving just two claims in the first instance, it has limited the cost and risks to a certain extent as it seeks to exercise rights of enfranchisement and gain control of a large stock of housing at a good price.” Liddell said: “We believe this significant pot of money would go a long way towards bringing service family accommodation into the 21st century. “The money that the government intends to spend on misguided attempts to enfranchise Annington properties is far better spent on desperately needed improvements to these service homes.” An MoD spokesperson said: “We believe our approach offers a significant opportunity to deliver value for money for the taxpayer and increase our flexibility in meeting the need of service families and wider government objectives. “We will of course study whatever Annington puts to us.”It was hard not to be charmed by Dave Ryding’s slalom victory at Kitzbühel. His story has a little of everything the British want in their favourite winter Olympians; an unlikely beginning on a dry ski slope in Pendle, a homespun background, training in a shed his father built in the back garden and a mulish stubborn streak that meant he graduated on to the elite skiing circuit when he was 28. That’s the sort of age when most people would be thinking about quitting already, and that, at 35, made him the country’s first World Cup race winner. “Ein Brite? Ein Brite!” was the headline in the next day’s Süddeutsche Zeitung. Ryding is 50-1 to win the slalom gold medal in Beijing. There is something enjoyably improbable about it all, even now he has already gone and won a race. Great Britain is one of a handful of countries who have been represented at all 23 Winter Olympic Games. They have won a grand total of 32 medals in them, in figure skating and curling, leisure‑centre sports that can be done indoors, plus skeleton and bobsled racing, a gold in ice hockey, believe it or not, back in 1936, and a smattering of bronzes in snowboarding, freestyle skiing and short‑track speed skating. In alpine skiing, Great Britain have won exactly nothing, nada, in almost a century of trying. They almost did when Ryding’s GB coach, Alain Baxter, finished third in the slalom at Salt Lake in 2002, a turn-up so unexpected that none of the band of British journalists covering those Games were there to see it happen because nobody figured he had a chance of winning anything. But it was stripped from him because he tested positive for a tiny quantity of methamphetamine he had inadvertently ingested after using a Vicks inhaler. Which, some felt, was such an injustice that a group of MPs tabled an early day motion in parliament calling on the International Olympic Committee to overturn the decision. The IOC did not. The really odd part of this story, though, is not Britain’s comparative lack of success in the sport (“I’m from the UK,” Ryding said recently, “and we don’t have mountains”) but that if it weren’t for the British the sport would not exist at all. The strange fact is that they invented modern alpine skiing a century ago. Which means it is yet another of those sports the British conceived, organised, formalised and spread, then spent the next 100 years losing at. Most of this can be traced back to the early days of Ryding’s own ski club, the Kandahar, and one man in particular, Sir Arnold Lunn. Lunn, born in 1888, was the son of Sir Henry Lunn, who founded a travel agency that organised the first winter tours from Britain to Switzerland (the company went out of business in 2005 but – “Lunn Poly, Get Away!” – is still instantly familiar to anyone who lived in Britain in the 1980s and 90s). Henry never skied but his boy, Arnold, took to it from the start. In those early days, that meant racing cross-country, Scandinavian style, with arduous treks uphill and long stretches of flat terrain broken up by short downhill descents when the racers braked with sticks. The idea was that a man who is fast downhill is still slower than a man who is fast uphill. The descents were for resting. There were slalom races, but the competitors were marked entirely on style and technique and they were for kids. Until Lunn and a band of British tourists set about reforming, organising and codifying the sport with the devil-may-care zeal and damned‑if‑I‑won’t self-certainty of Edwardian public school boys. They had set up the first downhill race in the Alps, the Roberts of Kandahar Challenge Cup in 1903. Lunn went further and concocted an idea for a slalom with competitors judged on their time rather than technique. “The object of a turn is to get round a given obstacle losing as little speed as possible,” he wrote. “Therefore, a fast ugly turn is better than a slow pretty turn.” He organised his first slalom race, the Alpine Ski Challenge Cup a century ago, in January 1922. It was Lunn who set up the gates, staked out the course and devised the format. Over the next 10 years, he oversaw its growth, through the first championships and its eventual acceptance by the International Ski Federation (FIS) and inclusion in the Winter Olympics in 1936. The traditionalists did not always take kindly to his upstart efforts. He said it was like an American member of the MCC proposing they ought to play baseball on alternate Sundays. One Norwegian vice-president of the FIS asked him: “What would you think, Mr Lunn, if I tried to alter the rules of cricket?” Lunn replied “I wish you would. If you succeeded we might have fewer draws.” Lunn became a well-known, and occasionally controversial, thinker and theologian, but remained proud of his achievements in skiing. He wrote: “The group of Englishmen at Mürren responsible for what I have called ‘the Kandahar revolution’ had a greater effect in 10 years on competitive skiing than the rest of the world in 25 centuries.” He grew to despair of what happened to his sport. He felt it had become too slick and professional, the snow over-prepared and the skiers too familiar with the terrain. But still, you guess he would take some satisfaction in watching Ryding, a Kandahar man, and another outsider, race for gold.The Aleutian Islands are fabled in surfing. Part of the Pacific Ring of Fire, they’re a raw chain of islands connecting Alaska to Russia. The area is known as The Cradle of Storms because it’s so windy and wild. Most of the islands are made up of tundra and there are big active volcanoes. This island, Umnak, is home to a very small Aleut community. I went there in 2013. The planning alone took two years. You need to be completely self-sustained. You need to charter a small plane and have enough food and supplies for your entire stay, with the means to charge all your equipment. The surfer in the picture is Josh Mulcoy, who I’ve spent the better part of my career travelling with. He’s known to many as the godfather of cold-water surfing, one of the pioneers of the sport. He’s on a right-hander, on a beautiful point break we found. The volcano in the background is Mount Vsevidof, the only volcano on this island. Of the 14 days we were there, this was the single clear morning. It was icy cold and below freezing. We had a 15 or 20 mile all-terrain-vehicle ride to get to the beach, and then, once you’re there, you’re susceptible to all the weather and conditions. We knew there was a new swell arriving but we had no idea it would be this clear or beautiful. We didn’t even know if Josh was going to be able to surf. But it turned out to be one of the best days of surfing I’ve ever seen. Many of my photos are taken from out in the water but I took this one on land. I was crouched below rocks on the shoreline, trying to compress the wave into the background. The photograph was a cover shot for Surfer magazine. It’s probably the most iconic image of my career, the one I’ve sold the most. There are few moments in your life as a photographer when you really recognise a great image when you take it – it’s hard to do that when you’re shooting. But this stood out right away. This single image tells the viewer exactly where we went, what we did, what it was like. When you see this, you don’t need to question whether it was cold or if the conditions were harsh – you know it. This is the whole story in one, giving equal weight and space to the athlete and the wave, as well as the landscape. I was born in Pismo Beach, California, and grew up surfing. It was part of my identity as a kid. I’ve always understood the ocean, but that doesn’t mean this kind of photography is easy. It’s incredibly challenging – and that’s part of why I love it. When I started shooting surfing professionally I went to a lot of beautiful places, locations where I was selling the art of adventure, but I wanted to go beyond the surf hotspots, the sunny beaches, and learn what else was out there. That’s why I started seeking out colder environments. I wanted to immerse myself in unique places, where I felt I was giving a bit more of myself to the process. I’ve worked in the Faroe Isles, northern Norway, and in the far east of Russia on the Kamchatka Peninsula and the Kuril islands – places where you have to be prepared for any kind of weather and conditions, where it can go from being sunny to snowy in a single day. These are places that ask more of you: creatively, physically, emotionally. That’s what draws me to them. My hope is that people looking at my photographs realise that to have true and meaningful experiences, you can’t just dream about finding yourself in remote places. You need to get out there. If you let them, these places can really change you. They can show you not only the beauty of the world, but a different part of yourself. • Wayward: Stories and Photographs by Chris Burkard is out now, published by Abrams. See more at chrisburkard.com Chris Burkard’s CV Born: Pismo Beach, California, USA, 1986. Trained: Self-taught. Influences: Ragnar Axelsson, Ansel Adams, Renan Ozturk High point: “Taking my mum on a trip to Iceland and sharing one of the places I loved. She’d never travelled outside the US before.” Low point: “Being locked up in a Russian jail cell.” Top tip: “The more you know, the less you need. And the less gear you have to bring, the more meaningful and connected the experience can be. It’s good to be prepared in advance.”Ghislaine Maxwell’s legal team has argued in court papers that the juror who might not have disclosed prior sexual abuse during the jury selection process “violated” her right to a fair trial. Maxwell’s attorneys have implored Alison Nathan, the judge, “to right a grievous wrong that deprived Ms Maxwell of a fundamental constitutional right – her right to be tried by a fair and impartial jury”. They are requesting a retrial. Maxwell was convicted on 29 December of sex trafficking and related charges for facilitating the late financier Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse of girls, some as young as 14. Epstein, a convicted sex offender, was arrested in July 2019 for sex trafficking underage teens; he killed himself in a Manhattan jail about one month later, while awaiting his own trial. The controversy over Juror 50, later identified as Scotty David, stems from post-trial interviews where he publicly claimed to have suffered sexual abuse as a child. David reportedly said that he told other jurors about this abuse – and helped his cohorts see things from a victim’s perspective. David’s comments prompted questions because potential jurors filled out questionnaires as part of the selection process – which directly asked about sexual abuse. One of the questions asked: “Have you or a friend or family member ever been the victim of sexual harassment, sexual abuse, or sexual assault?” David reportedly claimed that he did not remember the query on abuse but that he had responded to every question honestly. After David’s interviews, prosecutors asked Nathan to investigate his comments; shortly thereafter, Maxwell’s lawyers asked for a hearing on the issue. The new filing from Maxwell’s attorneys is part of their push to keep their detailed arguments for a new trial under seal, for the time being. Their argument for sealing itself was initially filed under wraps, but Nathan ruled on 26 January that it must be filed publicly. Maxwell’s lawyers argued that releasing their detailed arguments before Nathan makes a decision on retrial, or before a hearing on this issue concludes, “will provide a roadmap of the defense’s examination of Juror 50 and will allow him to plan out and tailor his responses, or even potentially spoliate evidence, to paint himself and his conduct in the best light possible”. “There is also a significant risk that the publicity that will undoubtedly surround the unsealing of the motion will influence the memories of other potential witnesses,” they said. “All of this will frustrate the truth-seeking process of any factual inquiry ordered by the court and jeopardize Ms Maxwell’s one chance to vindicate her right to a fair trial.” They claim that Maxwell “does not seek to seal the motion indefinitely” and “seeks only a temporary sealing to protect the integrity of any fact-finding process ordered by the court”. David’s lawyer said “no comment” when asked about the new filings. Maxwell’s trial has once again ramped up scrutiny of Prince Andrew. The Duke of York once counted Maxwell and Epstein as associates. Virginia Giuffre, a longtime Epstein accuser, filed suit against Andrew in Manhattan federal court. Giuffre claims that Epstein and Maxwell forced her into a sexual encounter with the royal some 20 years ago, when she was 17. She has alleged that Andrew engaged in sexual misconduct with her on other occasions. Andrew denies wrongdoing. The legal proceedings have proved disastrous for Andrew. Buckingham Palace remarked in a 13 January statement: “With the Queen’s approval and agreement, the Duke of York’s military affiliations and royal patronages have been returned to the Queen. The Duke of York will continue not to undertake any public duties and is defending this case as a private citizen.”In a month of spectacular video game industry buyouts, symbolised by Microsoft’s incredible $68bn swoop for Activision Blizzard, there is one purchase that has sent paroxysms of fear across the planet. On Monday, the New York Times revealed that it had bought the viral megahit Wordle for a “low seven figure sum”. The web-based word puzzle, which launched in October, was originally intended as a gift from software engineer Josh Wardle to his partner. But it has become a viral sensation, amassing an audience of millions – and key to its appeal is the fact that it’s free, with no ads. So what does a big newspaper like the New York Times want with a game like Wordle, and what happens next? In its announcement, the NYT said Wordle would “initially” remain free to current and new users. That doesn’t mean that Wordle will never be locked behind a paywall, but for now it won’t – and bear in mind that the NYT currently lets nonsubscribers play some of its other games and crosswords for free. “It’s a little early for us to talk about where we might go with the game,” says the NYT’s general manager of games, Jonathan Knight. “Our number one objective is to continue what makes this game so special – I think in that regard we are more like stewards at the beginning. I think we have a good sense of why it’s so popular and we’re committed to maintaining that game design.” Those worried about the game being suddenly plastered with ads can probably relax, too. The NYT’s own games, as well as the Wordle page and app, are all reassuringly stylish; there’s an Apple-like concern with cleanliness and uniformity in both the visual design and the user experience. “We have a fairly minimalist design to our games,” says Knight. “We make elegant visual puzzles. Josh has said publicly that he was inspired by our games – he and his partner play Spelling Bee.” So why would the NYT pay a seven-figure sum for something that it’s not going to directly monetise? “Our number one priority is around users and engagement,” says Knight. “Our strategy is to have more people spending more time with the Times – both the news and our products around the news, whether thats games or cooking or audio or [product review site] Wirecutter. Clearly Wordle has created a huge daily engagement phenomenon and we see intrinsic value in that. So the first order of business is really to bring it on to the NYT site, introduce our audience to Wordle, and Wordle’s audience to the New York Times, and go from there.” There’s an important piece of background here that non-NYT subscribers might not realise: this newspaper is extremely serious about games. Alongside a daily crossword and sudoku, it has Tiles, Spelling Bee, Vertex, Letter Boxed and Mini Crossword – all interesting, smart and highly acclaimed, and all designed by the paper’s dedicated games team, which is effectively run as a development studio. Ideas are brainstormed then prototyped and tested over many months, and several designers are graduates of the NYU Game Center, the groundbreaking game design school that has become the industry’s equivalent of Central St Martins. This is something Knight, who has previously run studios for Electronic Arts and Zynga, is keen to emphasise. “We have a set of creative pillars for our games – we want them to feel like time well spent, they should fit well into your day, we like that we’re all collectively working on the same human-made puzzle at the same time and trying to get to the same solution – we think that’s really important. Our games are about mental challenge and mental fitness and staying sharp – what you might call smart fun.” It’s safe to assume they’re not in this for a quick buck. According to Knight, the NYT made contact with Wardle at the beginning of January, when the game was still early in its ascent. “I’ve long admired The Times’s approach to the quality of their games and the respect with which they treat their players,” Wardle said in the press release announcing the sale. “Their values are aligned with mine on these matters and I’m thrilled that they will be stewards of the game moving forward.” According to Knight, the paper, which has been running a crossword since 1942, has always understood the value of games as part of the news package. “We get incredible letters from our players and fans, heartfelt messages about people who solved a crossword with their elderly parents – even in times of tragedy, word games are the things that kept people together until the very end … [During the pandemic] we’ve all spent a lot of time indoors with each other and we feel like our games have brought a lot of joy to people. We see that in the business, too – games have really grown in popularity over the last couple of years.” The NYT games team was inspired by Wordle, Knight says, especially the spoiler-free way that it lets players share the solution on social media, with rows of coloured squares. “What I love, is that the little grid of green and yellow squares is actually a story, a personal and unique story, about how you solved the puzzle that day. And you can share that story without giving away the ending – so if I haven’t solved it yet that day, I can still enjoy that story; and once I have solved it I can sort of pick apart your story,” says Knight. “It’s really magical that way. Today I was on Facebook with some friends and someone posted a grid I’d just never seen before – so it’s a story that doesn’t seem to get old. It’s a very clever, innovative sharing mechanic at a time when people really need that.” Expecting Wardle to maintain control of his game as it became a global phenomenon was always unrealistic. In 2014, game developer Dong Nguyen was so traumatised by the demands of maintaining his viral megahit Flappy Bird that he took the game off app stores and apologised for its supposedly addictive qualities. For Wordle, stewardship at the NYT is a best case scenario. This way, the game will exist on a stable platform with a team on-hand for technical updates – and Wardle gets to benefit from what he’s created without ruining it. And if you’re worried about losing your winning streak data in the move, it’s OK. An NYT spokesperson told me: “Josh Wardle is working with us to make sure streaks and stats will work as they have to date.” Phew.Aiden is a pilgrim, a nomadic survivor who wanders the zombie wastelands of Dying Light 2, taking goods from one settlement to another like some sort of post-apocalyptic Deliveroo rider. The search for his long-lost sibling has led him to a sprawling city somewhere in Europe. Here, three warring tribes endlessly fight for resources, using a familiar combination of melee combat and unconvincing dialogue. You take on missions for various shouting sociopaths, all competing to either save the world or blow it up, or some unfeasible combination of the two. Sound familiar? If you’ve played a zombie game in the past decade, it certainly should. The various territories of the city are all teeming with the undead, and also side-quests. Everywhere you go there are hidden weapon caches, bandit camps and train stations to unlock for fast travel, and windmills that must be powered up to create safe houses – a game design trope instantly recognisable to anyone who’s played an open-world adventure since 2012’s Far Cry 3. Indeed, Dying Light 2 feels like a B-movie undead reskin of Far Cry or Assassin’s Creed – rather like Days Gone. Where that game’s unique selling point was its swarms of AI monsters, Dying Light 2 has parkour. Aiden is much safer if he stays on the rooftops, leaping from building to building, using architectural features, ropes and ladders to maintain verticality. This was a hallmark of the first title, of course, and it’s just as well implemented here. It never feels quite as good as, say, Insomniac’s ludicrously instinctual Spider-Man, but navigating this intricate playground provides the game’s strongest moments. It is fun to stand atop a tenement block, surveying the ruined skyscrapers, bubbling chemical wastelands and devastated evacuation centres, working out how to cross distances without hitting street level. As you run, the air is always full of shouts and screams and the staccato drum roll of gunfire, making you feel like the city is full of little tragedies. Getting better at parkour makes navigating the environment a constantly evolving dexterity challenge. This is a graphically impressive, professionally constructed world that desperately wants to give you stuff to do. So it’s a pity that the narrative core of the experience is as dead as its stumbling zombie hordes. Structurally it adheres so slavishly to the hero’s journey concept that Joseph Campbell should really get a writing credit. Every time Aiden feels he’s closer to his sister, some other obstacle pops up – usually in the form of a fetch quest or raid delivered by one of many identikit ruthless survivors. Every encounter provides either a facilitator or a nemesis on the mythic quest flow chart. There are dozens of cinematic scenes containing loss, grief and betrayal, but they don’t hit. Nothing hits. There is nothing like the devastating, destructive obsession between Ellie and Abby, none of the subtle, poignant interdependence of Geralt and Yennefer or the multilayered friendship of Max and Chloe. The characters and story threads are all tattered stereotypes of apocalyptic lore: we get the deranged general cut off from military order, the libertarian dudebro flourishing amid the chaos, the would-be messiah who imagines a socialist utopia rising from the ashes. But all their depth is delivered in a barrage of backstory and expository dialogue that tells us all about societal and emotional collapse – but shows us almost nothing. There’s a reason why The Last of Us makes most of its flashbacks interactive: it immerses the player in the past. I finished the game less than an hour ago and I can’t remember most of the characters’ names, let alone what they were fighting over. The one exception is stealthy assassin Lawan, who brings charm, mystery and humour and really should have been the protagonist. In its quest to go bigger, to be vast, to be endless, Dying Light 2 forgets that size doesn’t matter when it comes to affecting entertainment. The tweets that came out of developer Techland in the run up to the release of the game are so telling in this respect. 500 hours of gameplay! More words than War and Peace! But it’s not the length of Tolstoy’s novel that makes it a classic. If all you want is a gigantic zombie-filled Skinner box crammed with loot and repetitive, incremental violence, Dying Light 2 absolutely works. Honestly, you’ll love it. You can explore and level up and get into fights using increasingly powerful weapons, and the interlocking compulsion loops do their job of settling you into that grind. But oh for a moment of genuine surprise, a truly memorable line of dialogue, a spark of mechanical invention. The best apocalyptic fiction works in the pauses between horrors; it shocks us with unexpected tenderness. This is why Cormac McCarthy’s The Road ends not with an image of a wrecked city, but with the memory of brook trout swimming in rivers that wound through mountain glens, “where all things were older than man and they hummed of mystery”. The pandemic has given a lot of us firsthand experience of how weird and intimate a global calamity can be. Dying Light 2 hums not with mystery but with lethargy. I think maybe I’m done with the end of the world. Dying Light 2 is released on 4 February, £50Charles Dickens’ Oliver Twist is being given a new spin in a star-studded BBC prequel to the Victorian novel, which highlights the parallels between food poverty in the 19th century and now. Echoing the most famous line from Dickens’ 1838 classic – “Please sir, I want some more” – and Marcus Rashford’s campaign to reduce child hunger, the writers of forthcoming 10-part family adventure series Dodger say they “made a conscious effort” to put food poverty “to the fore” in their show based on the exploits of Dickens’ characters the Artful Dodger and crime-lord Fagin. The spin-off creates a backstory for Fagin, played by Christopher Eccleston, making him “more interesting, sympathetic and funny … like a Robin Hood character” than in previous screen versions and suggests he may have been the subject of an antisemitic attack, according to Dodger creators Rhys Thomas and Lucy Montgomery. The husband and wife team have also updated other characters for modern audiences. Montgomery said that Nancy, who is played by Saira Choudhry, is no longer the traditional big-hearted fallen “Cockney sparrow”, but for the first time on screen as a wily northern thief who manipulates Bill Sikes. As Tom Stoppard did with his play Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead, creating a new show around the back-stories of characters from a classical work gives, as Montgomery put it, “an opportunity to create something fresh and new”. They also wanted Dodger to be a programme the “family can all sit down and watch” for their children’s generation, while highlighting, with the use of food banks escalating due to the pandemic, that many children who will watch the BBC show will understand Fagin’s orphan gang’s battle against poverty and hunger. Thomas said he could see the children in his area who were being hit by the cost of living crisis. He said: “We wanted to make something that’s really inclusive that everyone watching can identify with. You’ve got the Malory Towers kids going off to a fancy school and that’s one life and that’s fine, but this is a different world where I think kids watching this today, it resonates with them.” He first came up with the concept after appearing in a school performance of Oliver Twist as a child and said “coming from a working-class background I’m not saying we struggled for food every week but we didn’t have a lot of money”. Although the fast-paced Dodger does not condone the crimes the characters commit it does explain why they do them, as Thomas said. “The whole thing is survival, there’s no one to rely on. As Fagin says, ‘If we don’t rob we can’t eat and if we can’t eat we’ll starve and we’ll die’. It’s a survival instinct; he’s not a greedy man who wants money in the way you’ve seen in the past.” Montgomery said that with no welfare state for Victorian children the “food bank was the local market and what could you nick”. She compared some of the exploitation of children today to the manipulation of the orphans by Fagin, with “children being used … obviously it happens today with things like county lines; this is like the 1830s version of that.” Comedians and writers Thomas and Montgomery also appear in the show, along with stars who play real-life historical characters to help teach some history to audiences, including David Threlfall as the first Metropolitan chief of police, Sir Charles Rowan, and Sex Education’s Tanya Reynolds as Queen Victoria, along with newcomers such as Billy Jenkins as Dodger. The cast have also recorded history lessons for the BBC’s website. The writers said they took Dodger to the BBC as they thought it chimed with the organisation’s mission to inform, educate and entertain. Despite the social issues raised the series is optimistic and funny, said Montgomery: “It’s children being clever and using their bravery and wit to get themselves out of problems.” Thomas added: “If Dickens was around I don’t know what he’d think of it; hopefully he’d like it and think it’s quite funny – it’s in the spirit of the writing.” Dodger begins on BBC iPlayer and CBBC on Sunday 6 FebruaryOfgem has announced it will reveal the full scale of the energy price cap hike earlier than expected, as it emerged that the government may introduce a measure to slash £200 from household energy bills in order to soften the blow. The energy regulator will announce at 11am on Thursday what is expected to be the steepest ever increase in household bills, amid growing speculation that the Treasury is considering a multibillion-pound move to protect households from the full brunt of the increase. Energy debt advice and crisis support have already surged to record levels, according to the charity Citizens Advice. The UK government has announced its plan for levelling up, with a focus on devolution, transport, education and raising the pay and productivity of towns and cities outside London and the south east. However, critics seized on the lack of new funding. Inflation in the eurozone unexpectedly ticked up to 5.1% in January, instead of slowing to 4.4% as forecast –- a new record high. This is more than twice the European Central Bank’s target, but the bank –– which holds a policy meeting tomorrow -- has so far shrugged off rising inflation, saying that it is temporary. In the US, companies cut 301,000 jobs between December and January, according to the payrolls processing firm ADP, while economists had expected them to take on 200,000 people. It is the first time the private sector has cut jobs since December 2020, ADP said. Stock markets have climbed between 0.1% and 1% in Europe, while Wall Street is also ahead, although gains over here have been limited ahead of central banks’ policy meetings tomorrow (European Central Bank, Bank of England). Our other main stories today: Thank you for reading and commenting. We’ll be back tomorrow. Bye! - JK The landlord run by the billionaire Guy Hands’ private equity firm has issued the government a two-week ultimatum to drop legal action to take over 38,000 homes for military families and instead accept a one-off refurbishment payment of £105m, reports my colleague Jasper Jolly. The Ministry of Defence revealed last week it planned to bring the properties back under government control, 25 years after a privatisation deal that has been criticised by the National Audit Office, the government’s spending watchdog, as a waste of taxpayers’ money. The landlord Annington’s offer would represent less than £2,800 per property, a figure that is thought to be unlikely to cover the costs of extensive repairs in some of the more dilapidated homes – and is lower than the MoD’s £140m spending on maintenance for a single year. It would also represent just over an eighth of what Annington paid out in a dividend to its parent company last year. As energy bills are set to rise further, with the new energy price cap to be unveiled by the regulator Ofgem tomorrow morning, our Money editor Hilary Osborne and Miles Brignall have looked at the warm homes discount and done this explainer. Wall Street has mostly opened higher, with the Nasdaq jumping 1% to 14,494, after bumper earnings from Google parent Alphabet and the chipmaker Advanced Micro Devices triggered a jump in their stocks. The Dow Jones fell slightly to 35,378 at the open while the S&amp;P 500 rose 20 points, or 0.4%, to 4,566. The government has announced its plan for levelling up, with a focus on devolution, transport, education and raising the pay and productivity of towns and cities outside London and the south east, writes our economics correspondent Richard Partington. However, it follows decades of attempts by successive governments to spread prosperity across the country, including most recent attempts with George Osborne’s northern powerhouse plan and Theresa May’s industrial strategy. While experts welcomed the focus on living standards, they warned it comes after a decade of austerity that has made the task harder, and said much more needed to be done. Katie Schmuecker, deputy director of policy &amp; partnerships at the Joseph Rowntree Foundation poverty charity, said: The lack of new funding announced today, and an approach to devolution that appears to be quite centrally controlled, suggest more needs to be done before the reality of these plans meets the rhetoric. The north of England risks being left with “second-best” trains for 200 years under the government’s £96bn rail plan, the mayor of Greater Manchester has told MPs, reports our transport correspondent Gwyn Topham. Andy Burnham said that while his city would do better than most in the north, the plan would not “maximise the levelling-up benefits” that ministers claimed it would bring. The integrated rail plan, published in November, axed the north-eastern leg of HS2 and angered leaders in the region by failing to include a new promised high-speed line linking cities across the north of England. Appearing before the transport select committee, Burnham said that while the investment would bring benefits, the north was being asked to settle for second best again. The UK’s levelling up secretary, Michael Gove, has said it is a “bogus argument” to suggest there is no new money going into his flagship levelling-up agenda, reports the Guardian’s senior news reporter Jamie Grierson. Gove defended long-awaited plans to close the gap between rich and poor parts of England in the face of accusations they contain no new money and little fresh thinking. Responding to claims there is no new money for the wide-ranging plans, Gove told Sky News: “I think that’s a bogus argument because the chancellor gave us a huge cheque in the spending review and now we are spending it. Levelling-up: some wealthy areas of England to see 10 times more funding than poorestRead more “We’re making sure in Wolverhampton, in Sheffield and in other areas that we put our money where our mouth is. And that we make sure that money which in the past was spent too much in London and the south-east is now spent in the north and the Midlands where it’s needed.” Here is our full story on Vodafone: Vodafone’s chief executive has confirmed he is in talks with rivals in its biggest markets to strike deals with “speed and resolve”, as the telecoms company seeks to respond to calls for a business shake-up from the new activist investor Cevian, writes our media business correspondent Mark Sweney. Nick Read, who has argued that the European telecoms industry must consolidate to create more profitable businesses that are more attractive to investors, confirmed the mobile operator was speaking to rivals in the UK, Germany, Italy and Spain. The chief executive has struck 19 deals since being appointed chief executive three years ago, a tempo that he said he intended to keep up, in his first comments since Europe’s largest activist shareholder was revealed to have taken a stake in Vodafone. ADP chief economist Nela Richardson said: The labor market recovery took a step back at the start of 2022 due to the effect of the Omicron variant and its significant, though likely temporary, impact to job growth. The majority of industry sectors experienced job loss, marking the most recent decline since December 2020. Leisure and hospitality saw the largest setback after substantial gains in fourth quarter 2021, while small businesses were hit hardest by losses, erasing most of the job gains made in December 2021 The ADP jobs report is out in the United States. It shows an unexpected drop in jobs in January, as the Omicron variant hit the labour market. Companies cut 301,000 jobs between December and January, according to the payrolls processing firm ADP, while economists had expected them to take on 200,000 people. This compares with a downwardly revised 776,000 gain in jobs in December. It suggests employers cut jobs for the first time since December 2020. Unsurprisingly, the leisure and hospitality industry was the hardest hit, losing 154,000 jobs. Trade, transportation and utilities cut 62,000 roles while the other services category declined by 23,000. The goods-production sector, including natural resources/mining, construction and manufacturing, cut 27,000 jobs. While the European Central Bank has argued that the rise in inflation is caused by temporary factors, and is expected to sit on its hands tomorrow, it’s a different story over here. The Bank of England was one of the first central banks to raise interest rates (from zero to 0.25% in December) to counter rising inflation, and money markets have priced in a series of rate hikes this year, to 1.25% by the end of 2022. 29 out of 45 economists polled by Reuters expect to see a quarter-point rate hike tomorrow to 0.5%, while the rest are forecasting no change. The decision is due to be announced at noon. The Bank will also release its latest inflation and growth forecasts, which are likely to show eye-watering inflation this spring. Some analysts see another quarter point rise in March as more likely than a bigger, half-point rise in February because that could spook people. Most economists also believe that the central bank will indicate that it will start unwinding its £895bn quantitative easing programme. US stock futures are pointing to a higher open on Wall Street later, especially on the tech-heavy Nasdaq. It is set to to open 1.7% higher after bumper results from Google parent Alphabet and the chipmaker Advanced Micro Devices. Alphabet shares rose more than 10% in pre-market trading after the company posted record quarterly sales and a profit of more than $20bn on Tuesday night and unveiled plans for a 20-to-one stock split. The stock split should make it more appealing to smaller investors, said Neil Wilson, chief market analyst for Markets.com, and argued that the results should lead to a return in confidence in beaten-down technology names. After all the tumult of January, solid earnings can be a catalyst for gains. Katharine Neiss, chief European economist at PGIM Fixed Income, notes that inflation in the euro area is running at a rate not seen since the early 1990s, and the European Central Bank expects it to remain high until at least the middle of this year -- but explains why the central bank can look through higher-than-expected inflation. If energy prices continue to rise — which is entirely possible given the fragile relationship between Russia and the West and limited reserves in Europe— inflation could rise even more than expected. For example, a further €25 per megawatt hour rise in wholesale gas prices and a further €10 per barrel rise in oil prices could add around 0.5 percentage points to inflation within a quarter. So, do the critics have a case, and should the ECB tighten policy? Many investors overlook the point that most of the euro area’s inflation surprise isn’t the result of unexpectedly stronger economic activity. Instead, it is caused by an unanticipated rise in energy costs, and by unexpectedly higher prices for products that experienced global supply chain disruptions due to the pandemic, such as cars and household electronics. She concludes that energy and supply chain disruptions account for most, if not all, of the past year’s inflation surprise. By contrast, other economic data paint a benign picture of underlying inflation. Euro area gross domestic product, for example, has only just recovered to its pre-pandemic level. In contrast to the US, euro area negotiated wage growth is at a multi-decade low. The average contribution of services inflation, an indicator of domestically-generated inflation, was lower in 2021 than in the three years before the pandemic. Finally, a broad range of survey and market-based measures of inflation expectations remain below the ECB’s inflation target. The bottom line is that, once unexpectedly higher energy prices and supply chain disruptions are accounted for, there is no indication that underlying inflation is drifting meaningfully above the ECB’s 2% target. Riccardo Marcelli Fabiani, economist at the consultancy Oxford Economics, has looked at the figures and what they mean for European Central Bank policy. The rise [in inflation to 5.1%] was mainly driven by a surge in energy inflation, although stronger-than-expected core inflation points to a more robust pass-through of energy prices. The current geopolitical tensions in Ukraine will maintain elevated energy prices. We now see inflation remaining higher for longer and then gradually falling. We expect a slower moderation on the back of higher energy prices and the related pass-through. Near-term risks are tilted to the upside, although the likelihood of runaway inflation remains low. We continue to think that ECB President Lagarde will push back against market pricing of a rate hike this year. But we would not be surprised if a gradual hawkish shift of the council will see her also flag that there could be faster tightening. The uptick in eurozone inflation came despite a fall in German inflation, to 5.1% from 5.7% in December, France, where inflation edged lower to 3.3% from 3.4%, and Spain, where inflation slowed to 6.1% from 6.6%. However, inflation picked up in Italy, Belgium, Portugal, the Netherlands and many east European countries. According to a separate release from Istat, Italy’s statistics agency, January headline inflation in Italy came in at 4.8% year-on-year, the highest level since 1996, driven by a 38.6% surge in energy prices. Back to our other main story today: inflation in the 19 countries sharing the euro rose to an annual rate of 5.1% in January, defying expectations of a drop to 4.4%, according to a flash estimate from Eurostat. The main culprit were energy costs, which soared by 28.6% year-on-year, followed by food, alcohol &amp; tobacco prices (up 3.6%), services (2.4%) and non-energy industrial goods (2.3%). Here is our full story on Ofgem’s energy price cap announcement tomorrow, which has been brought forward from next Monday. ‘Why is no one up in arms?’ Six householders on the menace of fuel poverty –- my colleague Rachel Obordo and Clea Skopeliti have talked to six people struggling with living costs about their fears. So, to recap: The energy regulator will reveal the full scale of energy price hike earlier than expected after it emerged that the government may slash £200 from household energy bills to soften the blow of a looming tariff increasing by underwriting loans to suppliers, our energy correspondent Jillian Ambrose reports. Ofgem will on Thursday announce what is expected to be the steepest ever increase in home energy bills, amid growing speculation that the Treasury is considering a multi-billion pound move to protect households from the full brunt of the hike. The regulator is understood to have brought forward its planned announcement on rising energy bills, originally set for Monday, to help ease growing concern and speculation over the maximum level for energy prices which is expected to climb by more than 50% to reach almost £2,000 a year. The unexpected, eleventh hour decision comes as new government measures to protect households from rocketing energy prices has emerged. The Guardian understands the Treasury is looking at the “broad-brush financial support” as well as extra payments for vulnerable customers who will be hardest hit by the energy price cap increase due to be announced on Monday. The multibillion-pound plan to “top slice” energy bills would allow suppliers to borrow government money and soften the financial impact on their customers by paying the loans back through higher tariffs over the coming years, according to senior industry sources. Ahead of the Ofgem announcement tomorrow on how much energy bills can rise from April under its energy price cap, Citizens Advice said energy debt advice and crisis support had reached record levels, and urged the government to bring forward a support package for households on the lowest incomes. More people are seeking one-to-one support from Citizens Advice than at any point during the pandemic. The charity warns that crisis support - including referrals to food banks and advice on emergency one-off grants - is at the highest level on record. Similarly, advice on managing energy debts has reached unprecedented heights. Dame Clare Moriarty, chief executive of Citizens Advice, said: Cost-of-living pressures are at boiling point. April’s price hikes haven’t yet hit and already people are turning to our services in record numbers. Frontline advisers are hearing desperate stories of families living in just one room to keep warm, people turning off their fridges to save money and others relying on hot water bottles instead of heating due to fears about mounting bills. Our data has reached red alert levels. If the government doesn’t act soon and bring forward a package of support for those on the lowest incomes, many more households will be pushed beyond breaking point. Julian Jessop, Economics Fellow at free market think tank the Institute of Economic Affairs, has sent us his thoughts on the Times story that officials are finalising plans for a new system of temporary rebates on energy bills, financed by government loans to suppliers. This proposal is better than some alternatives, but still deserves only a lukewarm response. This plan is a form of ‘price stabilisation mechanism’. The government would lend money to energy suppliers when wholesale prices are above a certain level, allowing companies to cut bills. However, when prices fall below this level, suppliers would be expected to pay these loans back, rather than pass any savings on to customers. This should be a better deal for the taxpayer than simply giving money to suppliers to lower bills. It is also right that consumers ultimately pay the going rate for the energy that they use, to give market forces and price signals a better chance of working properly. But there are four dangers in going down this route, Jessop said. First, the scheme would mean that customers pay less when wholesale prices are high, but more than they would otherwise have done in future when prices fall. This smoothing of bills over time will still be helpful, but is it important that people understand that any savings now will be offset later. Second, it would still be better (and potentially less expensive) to target more support at those that really need it. The savings being suggested (perhaps £200 per household) would still leave many poorer families struggling with their bills. This scheme would therefore need to be part of a bigger package that includes extra help for low-income households, such as a further top-up to the Warm Homes Discount (though this seems likely to be part of the final announcement too). Third, the taxpayer will bear the risks of fluctuations in wholesale energy prices, and the risks of loans not being repaid. This might be justified in an emergency. But in general, businesses should be expected to manage and hedge their own exposure to changes in their costs, and it is not the government’s job to do this for them. Fourth, the proposed scheme is described as ‘temporary’ and ‘self-funding’, but it cannot really be both. The scheme would need to be in place for an uncertain but probably long time if taxpayers are ever going to get their money back. He concludes: During this period, the government would effectively be setting prices, which should not be its job either. It is essential that the government uses this time for a fundamental rethink of its energy policies, many of which have actually contributed to the crisis. The proposed price stabilisation mechanism is another heavy state intervention that could easily backfire. Experts at Hargreaves Lansdown have looked at cold weather payments, as the government issued estimates for recipients from November to January. Just under 4 million people qualify for Cold Weather Payments. Just over 1.3m of these are on Pension Credit. Between 1 November and 28 January there were an estimated 13,000 Cold Weather Payments issued. These were all in Scotland which had six cold weather triggers over the Christmas period. Cold Weather Payments are issued to people on benefits such as Pension Credit and Universal Credit. You’ll get a payment if the average temperature in your area is recorded as, or forecast to be, zero degrees celsius or below over seven consecutive days. You’ll get £25 for each seven-day period of very cold weather between 1 November and 31 March. Helen Morrissey, senior pensions and retirement analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: Winter has yet to truly bite with only six Cold Weather Payment triggers so far this year, but this will come as little comfort to those worried about meeting surging energy costs. Energy prices have been on the rise and look to go up still further when the new energy price cap increase is announced. Many people will have been banking on these payments to help them heat their homes over the coming months and could struggle to make ends meet without them. While we should be grateful that the weather has not been colder, we could still see people fall ill because they haven’t been able to adequately heat their homes as they are forced to make difficult decisions to deal with the rising cost of living. Even households on green energy tariffs are affected by the energy crisis. Those who assumed they would be unaffected by soaring gas prices have been shocked to be told their electricity bills are rising, despite them being signed up to a renewable supply, my colleagues on the Money desk Anna Tims and Miles Brignall reported recently. The Times reported this morning that Boris Johnson is poised to announce billions of pounds in state-backed loans to reduce the impact of soaring energy prices on household bills. The prime minister and Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, have agreed to a “rebate and clawback” scheme, in which taxpayers will underwrite loans to energy firms, the paper said. The energy regulator Ofgem will tomorrow announce how much bills for around 22 million households can rise from the beginning of April. It said in a brief statement that it would reveal the new energy price cap at 11am. Millions currently have their energy bills capped at £1,277 a year for an average household. Experts believe that this could rise to around £1,900 from April 1 when the new price cap comes into force. Calls have intensified in recent weeks for the government to step in to help struggling households. Inflation in the eurozone has unexpectedly ticked up to 5.1%, instead of slowing to 4.4% as forecast –- a new record high. The consumer prices index rose at an annual rate of 5.1% in January, compared with 5% in December, according to Eurostat, the European Union’s statistics office. This is more than twice the European Central Bank’s target, but the bank –– which holds a policy meeting tomorrow -- has so far shrugged off rising inflation, saying that it is temporary. Shares are continuing to climb in Europe as investor sentiment steadies after last month’s sell-off. However, gains are limited ahead of central bank meetings, with concerns over how fast central bankers will raise interest rates to counter soaring inflation. Markets have priced in a series of rate hikes from the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England this year. The Bank meets tomorrow, as does the European Central Bank, which has so far brushed off talk of rate increases. Fed officials have played down the chance of a half-point rate rise in March. According to Deutsche Bank research, global stock markets in January had their worst month since March 2020, at the time of the Covid-19 outbreak and first lockdowns. We’ll be getting the latest inflation data for the eurozone in just a few minutes. They are expected to show a temporary drop in the annual rate to 4.4% in January from 5% in December. The pound has hit a 1 1/2 week high before the Bank of England meeting where policymakers are widely expected to raise borrowing costs again, following December’s surprise rate hike. Sterling rose to $1.3549, its highest level since 24 January, and was steady against the euro at 83.37p. Oil prices are heading higher again, with Brent crude up 0.3% at $89.44 a barrel while US light crude is 0.35% higher at $88.51 a barrel. The Opec+ oil cartel with its allies including Russia is expected to stick to a modest output increase at its meeting today. The Florida teenager demanding Elon Musk hand over $50,000 to stop him tweeting the location of the billionaire’s private jet has said he is creating dozens more accounts tracking the movements of other rich and famous people. Rupert Neate, our wealth correspondent, has interviewed Jack Sweeney, a 19-year-old college student and aviation enthusiast. He said he had created 16 automated Twitter accounts, or bots, similar to @ElonJet to follow jets owned by Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates (@GatesJet), Amazon’s Jeff Bezos, the billionaire entrepreneur Mark Cuban and the rapper Drake. Sweeney said he had also created a website, Ground Control, to “monetise” the service by offering bespoke tracking services to celebrities’ superfans and to host web versions of the Twitter bots if the microblogging site closes his accounts because of privacy concerns raised by the subjects. European stock markets are rising, while oil prices have edged lower ahead of the Opec+ meeting, giving up earlier gains. UK’s FTSE 100 up 37 points, or 0.5%, at 7,574 Germany’s Dax up 82 points, or 0.5%, at 15,701 France’s CAC up 27 points, or 0.4%, at 7,128 Italy’s FTSE MiB up 0.5% at 27,269 Spain’s Ibex up 11 points, or 0.15%, at 8,739 Amazon intends to create 1,500 new apprenticeships in the UK this year. The internet giant said it was offering 40 entry-to-degree-level schemes, including in publishing, retail, marketing and a programme focused on environmental, social and corporate governance. The company said it hired 25,000 more people at its warehouses and delivery stations last year, taking its UK workforce to 70,000 –- more than previously planned. Amazon also opened its first 17 physical stores in the UK –- 15 Amazon Fresh food stores in London and two Amazon 4-star retail stores in London and Kent, which sell products from Amazon and small businesses. The water company Severn Trent said this morning it’s on course to invest more than £500m in a programme to improve river quality, after it got fined £1.5m for illegal sewage discharges into watercourses in December. About 360,000 litres of raw sewage were illegally discharged as a result of the breaches at four water treatment plants in Worcestershire. The FTSE 100 listed company also said its full-year outlook remained unchanged. Turning to today’s corporate results... Vodafone said it’s on track to meet its full-year guidance after reporting a 2.7% rise in group service revenue in the third quarter, underpinned by growth in both Europe and Africa. Chief executive Nick Read said the company had delivered a “solid quarter” with service revenue growth of 1.1% in Germany, its biggest market. News that the activist investor Cevian Capital has taken a stake in Vodafone drove up its shares by 4% on Monday, with hopes for more deals. Read, who has already pulled off 19 deals, has called for more consolidation in Europe and said Vodafone was willing to pursue merger opportunities for its Vantage Towers infrastructure spin-out. The Financial Times reported that Cevian, Europe’s largest activist fund, wanted Vodafone to be more aggressive in driving consolidation in markets such as Spain, Italy and the UK. In further evidence of the cost of living squeeze, UK shop price inflation almost doubled in January to the highest level for nearly a decade as the cost of furniture and flooring shot up, reports our retail correspondent Sarah Butler. Annual inflation of goods bought from retailers rose to 1.5% last month from 0.8% in December, according to the latest data from the British Retail Consortium (BRC) trade body and the market research company NielsenIQ, the highest level since December 2012. The price of food rose by 2.7% in January, up from 2.4% in the previous month and the highest rate since October 2013. However, the biggest change in inflation was in non-food items, with prices rising by 0.9% compared with 0.2% a month before. Helen Dickinson, the chief executive of the BRC, said: January saw shop price inflation nearly double, driven by a sharp rise in non-food inflation. In particular, furniture and flooring saw exceptionally high demand leading to increased prices as the rising oil costs made shipping more expensive. Food prices continue to rise, especially domestic produce which have been impacted by poor harvests, labour shortages, and rising global food prices. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Oil prices have climbed towards the seven-year highs reached last week, after a drawdown on US crude stocks suggested strong demand and amid a lack of supply, but investors remained cautious ahead of a meeting by the Opec oil cartel and its allies (known as Opec+) later today. US crude stocks fell by 1.6m barrels in the week to 28 January, more than expected, Reuters reported, citing market sources who had seen American Petroleum Institute figures. Brent crude is up 20 cents at $89.36 a barrel while US light crude has gained 21 cents to $88.41 a barrel. The Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and its allies including Russia are expected to stick to the group’s policy of moderate boosts to output at today’s meeting, i.e. pumping 40,000 more barrels a day from March. Tight global supplies and geopolitical tensions in Eastern Europe and the Middle East, in particular the standoff between Russia and Ukraine, have driven up oil prices by about 15% so far this year. Last Friday, crude benchmarks hit their highest prices since October 2014, with Brent touching $91.70 and US crude hitting $88.84 a barrel. Tensions are rising between Russia, the world’s second-biggest oil producer, and the West over Ukraine, stoking fears that energy supplies to Europe could be disrupted. Vladimir Putin has accused the US of ignoring Russia’s security proposals in his first public comments on the growing crisis over Ukraine since December last night. Markets will also be closely watching inflation data for the eurozone for January. Economists are forecasting a drop to to 4.4% from 5% in the annual rate, due to events a year ago which saw a big jump in the January 2021 inflation numbers (the reintroduction of regular VAT rates and additional climate measures which boosted German inflation). Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK, says: While it will be convenient for the European Central Bank to paint this as evidence of their argument that inflationary pressure is transitory and now falling, we already know from the experience of the US it is nothing of the sort. There is also the added complication that factory gate price in inflation is even higher, and well above 20% in Germany, Italy and Spain. With markets already pricing in the prospect of two ECB rate rises this year, tomorrow’s ECB press conference will be an exercise in trying to spin a narrative that the market simply doesn’t buy. Just before the US open, we get to see the latest ADP payrolls report, which in December saw the US economy add 807,000 jobs, which was a bit of an outlier to the equivalent non-farm payrolls report a couple of days later. Today’s January report could well come in much weaker due to the disruption caused by Omicron over the Christmas and New Year period, which has seen weekly jobless claims rise sharply. The Agenda 10am GMT: Eurozone inflation for January (forecast: 4.4%) 10am GMT: Italy inflation for January (forecast: 3.8%) 1.15pm GMT: US ADP jobs report for January (forecast: 207,000)Name: The Fast and the Farmer(ish). Age: Brand new. Appearance: Two tractors blasting through a field on TV. Why are the tractors blasting through a field on TV? Are they being chased by the police? Even better. It’s a race! A tractor race. Yes! Doesn’t that sound amazing? Think of the sheer nerve-shredding adrenaline that will pulse through your body as you succumb to the incredible sight of two tractors racing each other. Is this actually going to be on TV? Oh, it’ll do more than be on TV, my friend. It’s going to redefine TV. It’s going to sear itself into the public consciousness and make history. A show about tractor racing? That’s right. BBC Three is back on television, and The Fast and the Farmer(ish) is one of its key titles. According to the channel’s controller, Fiona Campbell: “You’re not going to see that on any other channel. Everybody has said that is a show they’ve never seen before.” Do you think there’s a reason why nobody has seen a show about this before? Come on, have a little faith. Sure, The Fast and the Farmer(ish) sounds abysmal. But, admit it, so did Robot Wars before you saw it. So did One Man and His Dog. So did Don’t Scare the Hare. Don’t Scare the Hare was awful, though. OK, yes, you’ve got me there. But this won’t be. Do you remember Touch the Truck? No, what was that? It was an early Channel 5 gameshow about a bunch of people seeing who could touch a truck for the longest. I don’t remember that at all. Why did you bring it up? Oh, no reason. Anyway, listen. Isn’t it good that we have a broadcaster willing to take big swings like this? If all shows were exactly the same, television would fail to move on. We need people in our lives, such as Campbell, who are ready to gamble their entire reputation on the level of interest in a series about tractor racing. I still don’t think this is for me. Maybe you’re too old. Remember, BBC Three is a youth station, designed for viewers under 35. Maybe you just don’t like what the kids like. And what do the kids like? National tractor racing competitions, apparently. Who knew? Hang on, is The Fast and the Farmer(ish) supposed to sound like The Fast and the Furious? Yes. Yes, it is. Oh God, you’re right, this whole thing is going to be a gigantic disaster. Do say: “The Fast and the Farmer(ish) is the future of television entertainment.” Don’t say: “Next on BBC Three, wheelbarrow jousting.”On 4 August 1944 Gestapo officer Karl Josef Silberbauer, together with three Dutch policemen, marched into a spice merchant’s on Amsterdam’s Prinsengracht and demanded: “Where are the Jews?” It was a piercing moment in 20th-century history, one that never becomes dulled by retelling. Within minutes Silberbauer and his accomplices had located a dummy bookshelf, behind which lay a secret suite of rooms where two families had been hiding for two years. Placed under arrest, these eight men and women were subsequently sent to concentration camps in the east from which only one, the business’s owner, Otto Frank, returned. We know all this because one of Frank’s first postwar acts was to publish the journal that his 15-year-old daughter had kept during their immuration. The Diary of Anne Frank became a canonical text, one of the few accounts we have of living through Hitler’s Final Solution in real time. And it is Anne’s face – peaky, clever, ferociously alive – that has become the emblem of all the evil unleashed by antisemitism in Europe’s terrible mid-century. Yet despite the story being so familiar, there is one detail that remains a mystery. Who tipped off the authorities that there were people hiding at the back of Prinsengracht 263? That was the question Canadian author Rosemary Sullivan set out to answer in her account of the recent attempt by Dutch film-maker Thijs Bayens and journalist Pieter van Twisk to find this final puzzle piece. Using the methodology and tropes of a police procedural, Bayens and van Twisk assembled what they insist on calling a “cold case team”, headed by recently retired FBI agent Vince Pankoke. Among his 30 staff, Pankoke had criminologists, psychologists, archivists, forensic scientists and a much vaunted artificial intelligence whizz who built a database that stores thousands of data points – addresses, biographies, political affiliations – in ways designed to throw up new suspects. Since publication, the results of their work have been disputed, and the Dutch publisher, Ambo Anthos, has suspended a further print run pending investigation. A member of the team, meanwhile, defended the research, arguing it was “appropriately caveated”. Whatever the eventual verdict, it’s clear that Sullivan’s book struggles to find a form and style that serves her material. In particular she seems uncertain about how much prior knowledge she can assume in her readers, which means that two thirds of this book are spent rehashing the story of the Franks’ murder, and the postwar publication of Anne’s diary. Only once Sullivan moves on to actual “persons of interest” does the narrative begin to pick up, even though here again much of this information has long been in the public domain. Up first is Job Jansen, the estranged and paranoid husband of one of Otto’s employees, who is convinced that his Jewish wife is having an affair with Herr Frank. Then there is Nelly Voskuijl, a Nazi fraterniser whose sister is one of the office workers helping the Franks to hide. Or what about long-time suspect Willem van Maaren, the light-fingered warehouse manager who might perhaps have been after the bounty money of 7.5 guilders (£35 today)? Most chillingly of all, there is the notorious Anna van Dijk, who from 1943 begins to collaborate with the Germans by luring her fellow Jews into carefully laid traps. Van Dijk was hanged after the war for the sheer scale of her crimes, yet the evidence for her turning in the Franks simply isn’t there. In the end, though, the cold case team single out a prominent Jewish notary called Arnold van den Bergh, whom they speculate may have passed on the information to the Nazis as a way of keeping his own family out of the concentration camps. Blowback from historians has focused on the highly circumstantial evidence advanced for Van den Bergh’s “guilt”. Specifically they have questioned the claim that, as a member of Amsterdam’s Jewish Council, he would have known the addresses of the places where Jewish people were hiding. Regardless, what Sullivan does manage to do is assemble a compelling picture of what it was like to live in Amsterdam under Nazi occupation: here is a collection of increasingly isolated individuals, hungry, terrified and daily faced with impossible choices about whether to save themselves, their loved ones, or the nice family that lives next door. And it is this moral vacuum that follows in the wake of antisemitism, rather than any particular “perp”, that betrayed Anne Frank.The skipper of a speedboat involved in a crash in which a 15-year-old girl was killed has denied manslaughter in court. It is alleged that Michael Lawrence was driving the boat at the time of the incident in August 2020, in which Emily Lewis sustained fatal injuries when the vessel collided with a five-tonne navigation buoy. Emily was onboard the boat, Seadogz, with her mother, Nikki, her father Simon, her sister Amy, 19, and seven other passengers. Appearing at Southampton magistrates court, Lawrence, 54, pleaded not guilty to gross negligence manslaughter. Michael Howley, the owner of Seadogz Rib Charter Ltd, which ran the trip on Southampton Water, was charged with “failing to take all reasonable steps to secure the boat operated in a safe manner”. Howley, 51, from Hordle in Hampshire, faces an alternative charge of failing to take reasonable steps as director of the company. He gave no pleas but indicated he would be pleading not guilty to all charges. The district judge Anthony Callaway sent the case for trial at Winchester crown court and released the two defendants on unconditional bail until a hearing on 2 March. Emily’s family previously said in a statement released through Hampshire constabulary: “We are all in shock that our beautiful daughter and sister is no longer with us, and words just don’t seem available to express our deep sense of loss.” Stuart Parkes, the headteacher at Brookfield community school, where Emily was a student, described her as “kind, compassionate” and a “bright, conscientious student”.Exposure to a single nasal droplet is sufficient to become infected with Covid-19, according to a landmark trial in which healthy volunteers were intentionally given a dose of the virus. The trial, the first to have monitored people during the entire course of infection, also found that people typically develop symptoms very quickly – on average, within two days of encountering the virus – and are most infectious five days into the infection. The study was carried out using a strain of the virus before the emergence of the Alpha, Delta and Omicron variants. The trial’s chief investigator, Prof Christopher Chiu, of Imperial College London, said: “Our study reveals some very interesting clinical insights, particularly around the short incubation period of the virus, extremely high viral shedding from the nose, as well as the utility of lateral flow tests, with potential implications for public health.” The findings, published on Springer Nature’s pre-print server, and which have not yet been peer-reviewed, detail the outcomes in 36 healthy, young participants with no immunity to the virus. The volunteers were monitored at a specialist unit at the Royal Free hospital in London, and experienced no severe symptoms. The study found that the infection first appears in the throat and that infectious virus peaks about five days into infection, by which point the nose has a much higher viral load than the throat. The study also suggested that lateral flow tests are a reassuringly reliable indicator of whether infectious virus is present. Swabbing the nose and throat makes it more likely to detect infections during the first few days, the work suggests. “We found that overall, lateral flow tests correlate very well with the presence of infectious virus,” said Chiu. “Even though in the first day or two they may be less sensitive, if you use them correctly and repeatedly, and act on them if they read positive, this will have a major impact on interrupting viral spread.” The study also revealed that of the 18 people who became infected, all had similar viral loads regardless of whether they developed symptoms, underlining the role of asymptomatic transmission. Prof Wendy Barclay, the head of the department of infectious disease at Imperial College London, said: “A lot of people could be walking around shedding virus and not realising. It’s really marked with this virus.” Intriguingly, some of those who did not meet the threshold for being infected also had very low levels of virus detectable in their noses and throats, suggesting that they may have experienced a very short-lived infection that was seen off by immune activity in the lining of the nose and throat. The team are expected to publish further findings giving a unique window into the earliest phase of the immune response, during the first hours and days after encountering the virus. The team say the trial paves the way for future challenge studies that could help accelerate the development of the next generation of vaccines and antiviral drugs. Phase 3 studies have become increasingly difficult to plan due to the erratic levels of transmission in the population. Challenge studies are far quicker and require far fewer participants to establish efficacy. Prof Sir Jonathan Van-Tam, the deputy chief medical officer for England, said: “Scientifically, these studies offer real advantage because the timing of exposure to the virus is always known exactly, therefore things like the interval between exposure and the profile of virus shedding can be accurately described. “This important study has provided further key data on Covid-19 and how it spreads, which is invaluable in learning more about this novel virus, so we can fine-tune our response.”Raith Rovers’ women’s team are cutting ties with the club as the backlash against the signing of David Goodwillie intensified. The announcement that the Kirkcaldy football club was signing the former Clyde striker – who was found by a civil court in 2017 to have raped a woman – prompted anger and disgust from supporters and a string of resignations of senior Raith officials. After withdrawing her shirt sponsorship of the club, the bestselling crime novelist Val McDermid confirmed on Wednesday that she would fund new shirts for the women’s side, which will be printed without the Raith Rovers crest, as the team arrange to play their next fixture this Sunday away from Stark’s Park, at another ground in the town. A further statement released by the Rovers management on Tuesday evening, which insisted the signing was “a football-related decision”, further inflamed tensions. On Wednesday, Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said: “What it effectively seemed to be saying was it didn’t matter how a man treated a woman, the only thing that mattered to them was whether he could score goals for the football club.” She added: “Football players are role models and football clubs have a responsibility to make sure they are positive role models for the wee boys and the wee girls who look up to them. This is a player who was found in a civil court, albeit on the balance of probabilities, to have raped a woman and as far as I’m aware has not shown any remorse or reflection for that. Raith Rovers really do have to reflect on the message that sends.” Goodwillie and his former Dundee United teammate David Robertson were sued for damages for rape by Denise Clair, who waived her right to anonymity, in a landmark case in 2017. The pair had not been prosecuted, but the civil court ruled they had raped Clair after meeting her on a night out in West Lothian in 2011. She was awarded £100,000 in damages. They denied the allegation and appealed against the judgment, but lost. Goodwillie, now 32, was fined £250 for punching a man in a Stirling nightclub in 2008, and four years later pleaded guilty to assaulting a man in Glasgow city centre. The former prime minister Gordon Brown, who along with McDermid is one of second-tier Rovers’ most prominent supporters, said he “could not support the signing” and hecondemned rape and violence against women. Another Raith supporter, Martin Glass, has set up a fundraising page for Rape Crisis Scotland, which has raised nearly £9,000.Melinda French Gates, co-founder of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, will no longer be channeling the majority of her wealth through the philanthropic organization. According to the Wall Street Journal, French Gates still plans to distribute much of her fortune across philanthropic endeavors, but largely outside of the Gates Foundation, which is one of the world’s largest. “I recognize the absurdity of so much wealth being concentrated in the hands of one person, and I believe the only responsible thing to do with a fortune this size is to give it away – as thoughtfully and impactfully as possible,” French Gates wrote in a new letter. “The ultimate goal of any philanthropist should be to render the need for philanthropy obsolete,” the billionaire wrote. “It’s important to acknowledge that giving away money your family will never need is not an especially noble act. There’s no question in my mind that the real standard for generosity is set by the people who give even when it means going without. “That’s why, as part of this pledge, I commit to doing more than writing checks. I also commit my time, energy, and efforts to the work of fighting poverty and advancing equality – for women and girls and other marginalized groups – in the United States and around the world.” In 2010, French Gates and her then husband Bill Gates, co-founder of Microsoft, launched The Giving Pledge, alongside billionaire investor Warren Buffett. The campaign encourages the world’s richest people to dedicate the majority of their wealth to charitable causes. At the time, the former couple revealed in a joint letter that they have “committed the vast majority of our assets” to the Gates Foundation in efforts to address preventable death from various diseases and “tear down other barriers to health and education”. However, since their divorce in 2021, French Gates and Gates have each penned individual letters detailing varying philanthropic commitments. In 2015, French Gates founded Pivotal Ventures, an investment and incubation company that seeks to advance social and professional progress for women and families across the US. In French Gates’ letter, she reiterated her commitment to giving away the vast majority of her wealth. “I think philanthropy is most effective when it prioritizes flexibility over ideology – and why in my work at the foundation and Pivotal Ventures I’ll continue to seek out new partners, ideas, and perspectives,” she wrote. In a separate letter published by Gates, the Microsoft co-founder emphasized his philanthropic commitments to the Gates Foundation: “The foundation is my top philanthropic priority, even as my giving in other areas has grown over the years.”BT is in talks with the Premier League as it enters the final stage of offloading its sports TV business, with possible deals from streaming service Dazn and US pay-TV giant Discovery under discussion at the telecoms giant’s monthly board meeting on Wednesday. Dazn, the “Netflix for sport” that has made no secret of its desire to secure crown jewel Premier League rights to ignite its streaming business in the UK, has been positioned as the favourite since BT began exploring strategic options for BT Sport last April. However, Eurosport owner Discovery, which has expressed interest in Premier League rights in the past and has a £920m deal for the TV rights to the Olympics across Europe, is considered to still be in contention. BT, which will also need any deal to be signed off by the Champions League, for which it holds the UK rights, is expected to gain clearance as the rights bodies need a viable second player to Sky after the current three-year cycle ends in 2025. “This level of engagement with the rights holder typically means that the commercial wrangling over a deal is for the most part done,” said one source, who has been involved in similar change-of-ownership deals. “That tends to signal the last stage.” BT’s board was due to meet on Wednesday with an agenda that includes discussing the strategic review of BT Sport, which is also complicated by carriage deals with Sky that will need to be re-examined with a change of ownership ahead of the company’s third-quarter results on Thursday. There have been significant hurdles surrounding the offloading of the sports TV business, including what financial guarantees may be needed around the current multibillion-pound rights deals BT has in place. Dazn, which is backed by the multi-billionaire Sir Leonard Blavatnik, remains heavily loss-making. The decade-old BT Sport business, which has UK rights to sports including Champions League football and Premiership Rugby, has cost the company billions in sports rights but also succeeded in stemming the defection of millions of broadband customers to Sky, which offers its own service packaged with prime sports. In recent years, the battle between BT and Sky has cooled after a groundbreaking channel-sharing deal allowing customers to watch all Premier League games without being forced to buy separate TV packages. The company has instead focused on aggregating content through its BT TV service, offering content from partners including Sky, Netflix and Amazon. With broadband customer churn stabilised, BT is seeking to refocus its business on its core telecoms operation. The company is investing £12.5bn in upgrading much of the UK’s internet network to next-generation full-fibre broadband and is spending billions on building its 5G mobile network. BT, Dazn, Discovery and the Premier League declined to comment.Innocent drinks have been accused of “greenwashing” by plastic pollution campaigners after releasing an advert that claims buying their smoothies can help save the environment. Activists, who recently occupied the company’s headquarters, have lodged a complaint with the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) about claims made in an advert entitled Little Drinks, Big Dreams. The ASA is currently reviewing the evidence submitted by the activists and Innocent, and is expected to make a ruling imminently. The TV ad tells the story of a man and and his aquatic sidekick, Otter, as their boat is hijacked by revellers celebrating and making a mess as they approach a large waterfall. They sing about “messing up the planet” until they find themselves in peril, hanging off the edge of a cliff. They then row back to safety, clear up the rubbish, and start turning apples on a tree into Innocent smoothies, which they all consume as they “fix up the planet”. The brand, which is known for its “wackaging”, has been making an effort to boost its climate credentials among consumers. Kirsty Hunter, Innocent’s marketing director, said when the ad launched that the company hoped the message would turn consumers into “recycling activists”, but campaigners have argued it is misleading to suggest that purchasing single-use plastic can save the planet. Douglas Lamont, the company’s chief executive, said at the time: “The launch of Little Drinks, Big Dreams is an important moment for us. It gives us a platform to talk about the many fantastic initiatives within the company – from carbon reduction to recycling, sustainable farming and helping people and communities – sharing information and what we’ve learned along the way and hopefully inspiring others.” Matt Palmer of the direct action group Plastics Rebellion said: “Greenwashing is dangerous – in the case of Innocent it’s one thing to hide your ecocidal practices, that’s bad enough, but to go to the next level and pretend you’re ‘fixing up the planet’ is far worse. It means that people will willingly – and unwittingly – opt in to support your project in the belief that they are doing good for the planet.” Plastics Rebellion pointed out that Innocent was owned by Coca-Cola, which has frequently been accused of creating pollution, and was recently found to be the brand most littered on British beaches. The group also claimed Innocent created 32,000 plastic bottles an hour, and said plastic bottles were responsible for a large amount of marine pollution. The group also said that by repeating the mantra “reduce, reuse, recycle”, Innocent was guilty of “trivialising the plastic crisis”, adding: “Recycling only happens 9% of the time [and] much plastic waste is still landfilled.” Plastics Rebellion has asked that Innocent be banned from making adverts the group described as “greenwashing” in the future. Innocent has been contacted for comment.Jack Dromey knew how to make things happen and capture public attention, as I found out when working alongside him at the TGWU. When the union was seeking to improve the pay and conditions of cleaners in government buildings including the offices of the secret services, the Sun headlined the story “The name’s Mop – Mrs Mop”. He also did much on behalf of refuse and other workers when councils transferred their services to outside employers. The landmark victory secured then has protected many thousands of workers since. Jack always had a number of reasons for doing what was necessary in every campaign he was involved in. He would list them in his presentations, and in the end it always came down to one simple reason – it was the right thing to do.The European Commission has been accused of undermining its climate goals after it defied critics by pushing ahead with plans to include gas and nuclear in an EU guidebook for “green” investments. Gas and nuclear were deemed bridge technologies to meet the EU’s target of net zero emissions by 2050, in long-awaited proposals on the EU’s “taxonomy for environmentally sustainable economic activities”, which were published on Wednesday. “The reason we are including gas and nuclear in the way we are doing it is because we firmly believe that this recognises the need for these energy sources in transition,” the EU commissioner for financial services, Mairead McGuinness, told reporters. Critics said including gas and nuclear in a guide intended to prevent greenwashing jeopardised the EU’s climate goals and hopes of keeping global heating below 1.5C. “The European Commission is significantly undermining the EU’s credibility as a climate actor,” Bas Eickhout, a Dutch Green MEP and vice-chair of the European parliament’s environment committee, said. “At the UN climate summit in Glasgow, small steps were taken towards phasing out fossil fuels. Yet, unfortunately, the commission is already turning back the clock and leaving the door open to the gas industry.” Laurence Tubiana, the chief executive of the European Climate Foundation and an architect of the landmark 2015 Paris climate agreement, said: “The EU taxonomy was envisioned as a vital tool to align financial flows with the Paris agreement. Instead, Europe is undermining its climate leadership and lowering standards in the EU and beyond. When a gold standard does emerge elsewhere, this taxonomy will be left behind.” Since the proposals leaked on New Year’s Eve 2021 – fuelling bitter accusations of a lack of transparency – the commission has made minor tweaks that make it easier for gas projects to get in the green guidebook. Gas plants can get the stamp of approval if they switch to low-carbon gases or renewables by 2035. A previous requirement to phase-in low-carbon fuels by 2026 has been dropped. The taxonomy – intended to channel billions of private money into climate-friendly investments – is fast becoming one of the biggest controversies of Ursula von der Leyen’s tenure as European Commission president. Last month Greta Thunberg and climate activists slammed the plans as “fake climate action” that flout scientific advice. In a further sign of anger, campaign group Avaaz staged a mock burial of the taxonomy on a roundabout outside the commission headquarters, with activists wearing face masks of Von der Leyen, Germany’s Olaf Scholz and France’s Emmanuel Macron. France pressured Von der Leyen to grant the stamp of approval for nuclear power, while Germany had lobbied for the inclusion of gas, although Scholz’s coalition government is split on the issue. “Europe is witnessing our biggest setback yet in our moonshot mission,” said Patricia Martín Díaz of Avaaz. “Labelling fossil gas and nuclear as green is incompatible with the EU’s 2050 climate targets and our hope of keeping 1.5C alive.” The Institutional Investors Group on Climate Change, which represents 375 funds holding €51tn assets under management, also urged the commission to drop gas, citing International Energy Agency studies that show Europe’s existing gas plants will have to close by 2035. “Put simply, there is no remaining carbon budget for new investments in natural gas,” the group said. Other critics include an expert panel convened by the commission, which said the plans were “not in line” with the original regulation, agreed in July 2020. In its stinging rebuke, the EU platform on sustainable finance – a group that includes industry, NGO and finance experts from EU institutions – said they had doubts about the criteria for gas and nuclear, while “many are deeply concerned about the environmental impacts that may result”. The group said only gas plants emitting less than 100 grams of CO2 equivalent per kilowatt hour over their lifecycle should be allowed, a criteria that excludes conventional gas. In contrast, the commission would allow gas plants emitting 270g CO2e/kWh to be classed as “sustainable” until 2030. A second alternative would allow gas plants that emit an average of 550g CO2 e/kWh over a twenty-year lifespan. Critics describe this as loophole that allows new gas plants to be built on a promise of carbon capture technology that is yet to take off. The EU taxonomy became law in July 2020, but legislators left important details to be resolved through so-called delegated acts – secondary legislation meant for technical issues that is not subject to the same degree of ministerial and parliamentary oversight. Critics have accused the commission of abusing the process, by smuggling in the controversial issues of nuclear and gas into the latest delegated act, rather than drafting a separate law. Only a supermajority of 20 out of 27 EU member states, or a majority of the European parliament’s 705 MEPs can now defeat the plans during a scrutiny period of four to six months that began on Wednesday. Commission officials played down the threat of a legal challenge from Austria and Luxembourg, describing it as “a very theoretical discussion”. Both countries oppose nuclear power, while Green ministers in the German coalition government have dismissed the plans as greenwashing. Denmark, Sweden and the Netherlands had urged the commission not to label gas as green, while Germany declared its opposition to nuclear. Yet France, backed by central and eastern European member states, lobbied Von der Leyen to include gas and nuclear, which they consider as a bridge to the EU’s net zero future. The largest group in the European parliament, the European People’s party has come out in favour of gas, underscoring the difficulties of defeating the plans. “Flexibility is needed in the way we decarbonise. If, for example, Poland would like to replace a coal plant with several small gas plants, this should be possible if it helps achieve climate neutrality”, Esther de Lange, a Dutch Christian Democrat, said. Lisa Fischer, who leads the E3G thinktank’s work on climate neutral energy systems, said gas and nuclear had no place in the taxonomy. “Gas investments are not only harmful to the climate they are also increasingly financially risky. Nuclear makes the EU’s energy transition more costly than it needs to be.” In a sign of the intense arguments, McGuinness revealed that had been no unanimity among the commission’s top 27 officials; she said an “overwhelming majority” of EU commissioners had backed the plans. “We were legally obliged to do this,” she said referring back to the initial July 2020 law. Opponents in national capitals, however, say the commission had no obligation to include gas or nuclear.Hormone replacement therapy could be made available over the counter in the UK for the first time under proposals to reclassify one form of the treatment, vaginal oestrogen tablets, which are used to offset symptoms of the menopause. The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) has launched a public consultation on plans to make Gina vaginal tablets available from pharmacies. The regulator denied reports that suggested all forms of HRT could become available without a prescription. This product is only inserted into the vagina and not taken orally. The consultation follows a series of recent moves by the government to improve accessibility of HRT. The Guardian reported last year how ministers were planning to “reset the dial” on women’s health to tackle decades of gender inequality in England, with plans to appoint a women’s health tsar, eradicate medical taboos, ban harmful “virginity repair” operations and increase menopause support. It has already been announced that the cost of repeat prescriptions for HRT is to be significantly reduced in England. Millions of women in the UK go through the menopause every year, with the majority experiencing some symptoms that can be severe and have a negative impact on everyday life. The particular type of vaginal tablets – called Gina or estradiol – that could be reclassified, are a form of HRT that treat vaginal dryness, caused by oestrogen deficiency in postmenopausal women. GPs, pharmacists and the public are being asked for their views on whether this product should become available over the counter, without a prescription. If reclassified, it would only be made available over the counter to women aged 50 and above who have not had a period for at least a year. Pharmacists would have access to training materials and a checklist enabling them to identify women who can be supplied with this medicine safely. Dr Laura Squire, the chief healthcare quality and access officer at the MHRA, said: “Every response we receive will be vital in helping us gain a better picture of whether people think this form of vaginal HRT should be available over the counter. “The menopause can cause unpleasant symptoms and HRT-based medications form an important part of alleviating them. This is why it’s so important for us to hear what women think about this possible reclassification.” The minister for women’s health, Maria Caulfield, said menopause support was a key issue the government needed to do more to address. “This consultation is another step forward to ensure women’s voices are being heard loud and clear on how they want to access HRT to reduce the impact of the menopause on their lives,” she said. The Proprietary Association of Great Britain (PAGB), which represents the makers of branded over-the-counter medicines, welcomed the move as a “positive step”. Michelle Riddalls, its chief executive, said: “The effects of vaginal atrophy – dryness, soreness, itching, burning, and painful intercourse caused by post-menopausal oestrogen depletion – can be hugely debilitating, affecting women’s emotional wellbeing and self-esteem. “Thanks partly to a growing menopause-awareness movement supported by women in the public eye, the impact of menopause and the challenge of dealing with symptoms such as vaginal atrophy is being recognised as never before.” But Fiona McKay, a businesswoman whose own experience prompted her to launch Menopause Maze, a programme to help women going through the menopause while in the workplace, expressed concerns about the move. “This is great as a short-term access point for women who perhaps can’t get their repeat prescription and need it urgently,” she said. “However, HRT isn’t one size fits all, it’s a very individual medication and can take a real ‘trial and error’ process to get the balance of hormones right. “I worry that, by allowing increased access via over-the-counter HRT, it’s an abdication of care for women – putting the onus back on them to totally ‘self-solve’ one of the biggest life transitions that they will face.” Dr Edward Morris, the president of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, said: “While we support increased access to products like Gina, every woman will experience the menopause differently and there is no one size fits all. It is vital that treatment is tailored to her needs and symptoms. “It is important that women feel that they can speak to a doctor about their symptoms, and discuss all the different treatments available for the menopause, including the different types of treatment which may include HRT. We will be responding to the consultation.” • The text and picture caption of this article were amended on 3 and 9 February 2022. The vaginal tablet product is called Gina, not Gina 10.Pret a Manger is increasing the price of its coffee subscription service by 25% as the cost of milk, coffee beans and staff pay goes up. The coffee shop chain said the monthly fee for up to five barista-made drinks a day would rise to £25 from £20 from 3 February for new subscribers, and from 16 March for those already signed up. The increase comes less than two months after the advertising watchdog advised Pret, which has about 400 shops in the UK, to rethink how it advertised its subscription service launched in September 2020, after receiving thousands of complaints about options on the deal not being available in some outlets. Pret blamed the imminent price rise on inflation and the government’s planned increase in VAT to 20% from 1 April, from 12.5% at present. It said VAT would add £2 to the cost of the subscription, £1.50 would go towards extra staff pay and a further £1.50 to cover inflation. “We believe the Pret coffee subscription continues to offer great value,” the company said in an email to customers. Coffee is one of the everyday basics whose price has risen significantly during the pandemic as one of the biggest producers, Brazil, suffered from droughts and the worst frost in over two decades while shipping costs soared. It is understood that the price Pret pays for its Arabica coffee beans is likely to rise 40% this year from 2020 levels. The cost of producing milk has soared by nearly a quarter as increased labour and machinery costs have combined with the rising price of cattle feed, driven by inflation in fertiliser costs, which are linked to surging gas prices. Coffee shops in the UK are experiencing further inflationary pressure as they battle for staff after many workers returned to Europe during the pandemic and have not returned post-Brexit. Last month, Pret increased pay for its workers for the second time in four months from a minimum of £9.40 an hour to £9.80. More than 6,900 of its 8,500 UK staff will now earn at least £10 an hour. That came after pay was put up 5% in September. In September, rival chain Costa gave its workers a 5% pay rise to £9.36 an hour while Itsu, the Asian-inspired fast food chain, increased minimum hourly pay by 11% to a minimum of £10.40 an hour. Jeffrey Young, the chief executive of the World Coffee Portal, said coffee shops had also had to deal with an increase in the cost of importing equipment such as coffee machines from Europe after Brexit while even paper cups were more expensive. He said: “Energy costs, the costs of repairing and maintaining buildings, insurance – all of that has gone up substantially,” prompting an average 10p-a-cup rise in the price of a coffee across the UK while profits are still under pressure. Businesses fear that shoppers, who are squeezed for cash amid widespread inflation, will rein in spending at cafes and coffee shops which are struggling to get back on their feet after numerous high-street lockdowns. “When VAT goes up it could be catastrophic,” Young said. “Operators will have to go higher [on price].”A set of delicately carved sculptures cut by hand from the pages of famous Scottish literary works have been sold at auction for more than £50,000, to fund a reading charity. The five pieces were made by an Edinburgh-based artist who began placing her first book sculptures in public places in 2011, captivating the city’s literary world. She insisted on remaining anonymous, adding to the mystique. She made the five sculptures sold in the auction – which include an elaborate multimedia work cut from JM Barrie’s Peter Pan and another from Whisky Galore, Compton Mackenzie’s tale about whisky-starved Hebridean islanders – for the Scottish Books Trust the following year. The trust then placed them around the country, releasing a daily clue to lead searchers to each item’s location. Now, almost a decade later, the trust will be using the sale proceeds to fund its free book banks and reading initiatives for children in less well-off areas of Scotland. In a week-long online auction hosted by the Edinburgh-based auctioneers Lyon &amp; Turnbull, the five works raised £50,500 after a spate of last-minute bids. Peter Pan, which had been originally placed in Barrie’s birthplace, Kirriemuir, fetched £12,000; Whisky Galore, found in 2012 in the lounge bar of the Am Politician on Eriskay – the island where the SS Politician carrying 22,000 cases of whisky ran aground in 1941, achieved £9,000. A carving from the leaves of Robert Louis Stevenson’s Treasure Island reached £13,000, the highest bid of the five. It depicts Long John Silver and a parrot on a treasure chest. It was secreted in the Scottish Seabird Centre in North Berwick. A sculpture from Alasdair Gray’s Glasgow-based modern classic Lanark, featuring the author seated, achieved £9,000 and had been originally placed in Glasgow School of Art; a paper and wire sculpture of Robert Burns’ epic poem Tam o’ Shanter, which shows Tam riding his mare with the witch Nannie in pursuit, and had been placed in the Burns museum in his birthplace of Alloway, reached £10,000. Marc Lambert, the book trust’s chief executive, said the charity was delighted with the sale price. “Thanks to the generous bids, we will be able to provide even more books to those who need them most, though food banks, local authorities and other partners, and deliver more of our life-changing work,” he said. Ian Rankin, the Edinburgh-based crime writer whose novel Hide and Seek was used in the artist’s first series of pieces, knows the artist and said she preferred anonymity. “She doesn’t want recognition for this. For her I think it represents a lot of people’s love for Edinburgh and for reading. This is just a small token of that,” he said. “They comprise a love story. It’s a story of one artist who really appreciates Edinburgh as a city of writers and a city of stories.” • This article was amended on 3 February 2022 to include detail about the 2012 sculpture hunt based on clues.A telegram sent by Samuel Beckett to James Joyce on his 49th birthday, 91 years ago today, has been given to the University of Reading by Joyce’s grandson and his wife. The missive, in which the Waiting for Godot author tells his friend: “Teems of times and happy returns. Beckett”, is part of a major collection of books and documents given by Stephen James Joyce and his wife Solange to the university. The donation, which also includes a photograph of Solange and Stephen James Joyce at their wedding, with an awkward-looking Beckett, who was the best man, was announced to mark the centenary of the publication in Paris of Joyce’s seminal novel Ulysses, as well as the 140th anniversary of Joyce’s birth. “The unusual birthday telegram from Beckett to Joyce says much about them as friends. Short and sweet, the playful language hints at a shared sense of humour and shows the respect Beckett had for the writer who greatly influenced his own writing style,” said Dr Mark Nixon, an English Literature researcher at the University of Reading and co-director of its Beckett International Foundation. “The new collection silverplates the relationship we knew existed between Beckett and Joyce, with their personal correspondence shedding fresh light on the closeness between the two. Such gems among the collection will prove invaluable to those studying these two historic writers.” The university is already home to the Samuel Beckett Collection. Edward Beckett, the nephew of Samuel Beckett, said it was “wonderful to have the Beckett and Joyce archives together under the same roof”. “The two writers were close friends and their estates and families had also stayed close. That it was possible to unite their literary archives is an achievement to applaud,” he added. Almost 900 letters to and from Joyce are included in the collection, the majority of them unpublished, including missives from Beckett, HG Wells, and around 100 from Joyce’s supporter Harriet Shaw Weaver. “There are two or three letters that speak to his struggles to get out of Vichy France in 1940, which was an incredibly fraught time for him. It took him at least three months to get the paperwork sorted out in order to leave France and to get the visa to enter Switzerland, at the end of 1940. And, of course, Joyce died a month later in Switzerland. So one of the last things he does is to get his family out of occupied France,” said Nixon. “This is material from very late in in Joyce’s life, that we don’t have that much of, which makes it exciting.” The collection also includes a copy of the poem Ecce Puer handwritten by Joyce to mark the birth of Stephen Joyce, and a Christmas present from Joyce to his wife Nora, in which he copied out his poetry collection Chamber Music for her. “It’s really quite astonishing,” said Nixon. “It’s a really beautiful sign of his love for Nora. Together with a lot of the personal items and the letters that he wrote to Stephen, it really shows Joyce as a family man, not just this literary giant. A lot of these items show him at his most human.” The University of Reading intends to make the archive publicly available to scholars. “James Joyce was a writer who transformed our ideas about the world, about creativity and about humanity. His letters, manuscripts and artefacts are rightly treasured but we are taking this collection not just to protect it but to share it,” said Professor Robert Van de Noort, vice-chancellor of the institution.Boris Johnson’s promise to “level up” the UK is “highly unlikely” to be achieved, experts have warned, after the government published a 350-page white paper underlining the yawning gaps between regions. Setting out 12 “missions” to help left behind areas catch up, levelling up secretary Michael Gove hailed the long-awaited document, telling MPs it would “shift wealth and power decisively to working people and their families”. Experts said the weighty document, littered with references to Renaissance Florence and larded with footnotes, gave an accurate picture of the UK’s economic imbalances. It finds that if the 25% of areas where productivity is lowest could be levelled up to the national average, it would bring economic benefits equivalent to £2,300 a worker, for example. But Gove was accused of failing to match his ambition with adequate resources. Paul Johnson, director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies thinktank, said, “The targets are largely in the right areas, but many look extremely ambitious – that is to say highly unlikely to be met, even with the best policies and much resource. “There is little detail on how most of them will be met, and less detail on available funding. There is something for everyone, and hence little sense of prioritisation: ambition and resource will be spread very thin.” The 12 “missions” cover everything from healthy life expectancy to local transport links. The government will legislate to give departments a duty to achieve these goals by 2030 – an approach previously taken by Labour governments in relation to child poverty. Gove also promised a fresh wave of devolution from Whitehall, with local areas offered a “menu” of options, including the creation of new metro mayors. “We need to allow overlooked and undervalued communities to take back control of their destiny,” he said. Torsten Bell, director of the Resolution Foundation, said the plans combined “George Osborne and Tony Blair” by promising more devolution and redirecting spending towards poorer areas. However, Prof Sir Michael Marmot, director of UCL’s Institute of Health Equity, warmed that the funding promised as yet is “tiny”, given the “scale of the problem”. “Mr Gove’s reliance that the money he is putting in will ‘trickle down’ to those who will benefit is, simply, inappropriate by an order of magnitude,” he said. Marmot, who carried out a seminal report into health inequalities, added that they had been worsened by spending cuts. “At the heart of the dramatic and avoidable falls in life expectancy has been the government’s agenda since 2010 to cut public services. This comes on top of the mass deindustrialisation of the 1980s and contributed to stripping the heart out of those communities the levelling up agenda is intending to reinvigorate.” Lisa Nandy, the shadow levelling up secretary, echoed that view, furiously accusing Gove in the House of Commons of “turbocharging the decline of our communities, cutting off choices and chances for a generation of young people”. She asked Gove: “Is this it?” adding: “He talks about 12 missions. This is 12 admissions of failure.” The National Audit Office has warned that Gove’s department is not monitoring closely enough how it is spending the £11bn set aside for levelling up schemes, and whether its approach in different areas is working or not. Gove set out a smörgåsbord of specific policies in the white paper, some of which have already been announced. Promises included everything from ensuring additional Arts Council grants are spent outside London and south-east England, to “refocusing” brownfield development away from the capital, to funding more grassroots football pitches. He argued that the renaissance of areas outside London and the south-east would be driven by private sector investment – though the government is also promising to redirect public spending, including on research and development. Sources at Gove’s department insisted the Treasury was fully behind the levelling up plans, saying: “Rishi loves it.” Will Tanner, the director of the Conservative thinktank Onward, suggested by setting public targets, and promising to publish an annual assessment of its progress, the government was “changing the rules of the game”, creating targets “against which departments, including the Treasury, will be held to account. “Just as the Office for Budget Responsibility drives fiscal discipline, so too will this regime create a rod for the government’s back to ensure that opportunity is spread fairly around the UK.”When the football team I support, West Bromwich Albion, first got promoted to the Premier League 20 years ago, our first away game was at Arsenal and, within half an hour, we were three goals down. I was most fed up. At this point the unmistakable smell of cannabis wafted over us visiting supporters packed in the away end. The vibe was very much of the old TV adverts for Hamlet cigars, featuring people being calmed by smoking after experiencing various disappointments. I have barely touched drugs, but if I’d been offered a puff of something at that moment to take the edge off my pain, I might well have done so. There is a school of thought that part of the reason football hooliganism fell out of fashion for a while was that stuff like cannabis and ecstasy became the fans’ drugs of choice. I’m told these substances are more about peace and love than hate-filled rampages. Alcohol, of course, is more about the latter than the former. Here’s what happens when you go to away games these days. At least, here’s what happens if you follow West Brom, but I can’t imagine it’s very different with other clubs. Upon entering the stadium through the turnstiles into the visitors’ end, you find yourself on a concourse. A range of overpriced food and drink will be available, including rather weak lager. Always, but always, there will be a large group of younger fans, loosely arranged in a circle, chanting their heads off and making a terrific noise. The chants will either feature words venerating our club or more unpleasant words denigrating other clubs. This choir will tend to be very animated – leaping around, throwing around fair amounts of that overpriced, understrength beer. This kind of thing happens at home games, too, but it’s more spread out. Away matches are more intense because the fans who travel are more dedicated and, arguably, more passionate. Also, kept together in one small part of the ground, and greatly outnumbered, just being there feels like an act of defiance. It was in the away end at Leicester City that, with embarrassing naivety, I once wondered aloud to a copper what on earth this lot had been drinking. “Drink is less of a problem these days,” he sighed. “It’s more about drugs. For the price of a few cans of lager. they can get absolutely wired. And it’s harder to police on trains and to stop them bringing it in.” This was seven years ago. Judging by the scenes ahead of the Euro final last summer, things haven’t much improved. I was outside the away end at Millwall on Saturday chatting to the handler of a sniffer dog, a beautiful wire-haired pointer. He told me he was trained to identify anyone carrying the scent of “pyros” – flares etc – and drugs. Upon catching a whiff of either of these things on anyone, he said, the dog would go up to the person in question, sit down and look up at him. Right on cue, his dog did what my dog does, less usefully, when he sees a squirrel – lurches away, all but tearing your arm off. He took up position: seated before a dismayed-looking West Brom fan. The handler approached the bloke and asked, in a low voice, if he was carrying any drugs. “Not today!” he blurted out. I advised the fellow to come up with a better defence than that if the matter got to court, which it won’t. We lost the game 2-0, which caused some of our fans to stage a mini-riot, damaging a toilet, tearing up seats and letting off flares. So it appears the odd pyro slipped past our pointer. Perhaps some drugs had got through, too, or had already been taken outside the ground. Or perhaps the perpetrators were just idiots, and, as far as I know, dogs aren’t yet able to sniff out idiocy. Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnistThe owner of attractions including Alton Towers, Legoland and Madame Tussauds is to take over Cadbury World in a 50-year deal. Europe’s biggest theme park operator, Merlin Entertainments, which was taken private in a £6bn deal two years ago, is to acquire the operations and brand licences for the attraction at the chocolate-maker’s Bournville factory in the West Midlands. The £6m attraction, which was opened in 1990 by John Major and is visited by more than 600,000 people annually, is controlled by Cadbury’s parent company, Mondelez International. Kraft, which controversially acquired Cadbury for £12bn in 2010, subsequently created and spun off Mondelez, which is home to snack brands including Trident gum and Oreo. Under the deal, Merlin, whose portfolio also includes the London Eye and The Bear Grylls Adventure, will take on Cadbury World’s 150 employees and hold brand rights usage in the UK. “As we approach Cadbury’s 200th anniversary I’m really excited about this deal,” said Louise Stigant, the UK managing director at Mondelez International. “We want to build on the strong foundations we’ve laid so that people can continue to enjoy Cadbury World for generations to come. By working with Merlin Entertainments, we will be able to bring the history and heritage of the Cadbury brand and the joy of chocolate to more and more people.” Merlin has plans to invest in developing the attraction, which includes the world’s biggest Cadbury shop and an “unmissable 4D chocolate adventure”, ahead of Cadbury’s bicentenary in 2024. Cadbury started in Birmingham in 1824 and moved manufacturing to Bournville in 1879. “We have long-admired Cadbury as the nation’s favourite chocolate brand and have already successfully worked together across a range of experiential activities and retail spaces in our UK theme parks,” said Mark Fisher, the chief development officer at Merlin. “We are now excited to continue the relationship and bring to life the sights, smells and fun experiences that chocolate lovers have come to love, but just with the additional helping of some Merlin magic.” Merlin has intellectual property rights deals with brands including Lego, Bear Grylls, Disney’s Marvel and the BBC. The theme park group, which was founded in 1999, operates more than 130 attractions, along with hotels and holiday villages, in 24 countries. In the UK, its businesses also include Chessington World of Adventures, Blackpool Tower and Dungeons attractions in London and other cities. Merlin was floated on the London Stock Exchange in 2013 but was taken private six years later in a £6bn buyout led by Kirkbi, the private investment company of the family that controls the Lego empire, which took a stake in Merlin in 2005.Pupils from an ultra-Orthodox Jewish boarding school near Paris have been taken into care after allegations they had been cut off from their families and subjected to years of abuse. Many of the children came from Israel and the US and spoke no French. One relative said parents thought they were sending their children abroad to a “Harry Potter school”. The alarm was raised after a 15-year-old boy ran away from the Beth Yossef school at an isolated property in Bussières, a commune in Seine-et-Marne 37 miles (60km) east of Paris, in July and sought help from the US embassy. The boy claimed pupils were treated badly, served out-of-date food and sometimes deprived of meals. Other pupils ran away from the school, which offers boys over 12 a strict Orthodox education in Torah studies, at the end of last year. A number of young adults were also believed to be among the students at the establishment, described as “an extremely closed environment”. The public prosecutor Laureline Peyrefitte said the school was attended by “numerous undeclared American and Israeli minors who did not speak French”, isolating them further. The rescued children told of “being locked up, having their identity documents confiscated, living in poor conditions, acts of abuse, lack of access to education and healthcare and with no possibility of returning to their families,” she said. On Monday police raided the school and arrested 16 teachers, who are being questioned as part of a preliminary inquiry into allegations of “organised kidnapping, aggravated violence, deprivation of care and food and aggravated abuse of vulnerable people,” Peyrefitte added. “The first elements of the inquiry, namely interviews with the minors who ran away or former pupils of the establishment, have confirmed our suspicions that offences have been committed,” the prosecutor said. About 42 pupils have been moved to temporary accommodation, of whom between 25 and 30 are believed to be Israeli nationals. Simon Seroussi , a spokesperson for the Israeli embassy in Paris, said the Israeli ambassador, Yael German, had visited the children on Tuesday and reported they were being well cared for. “The ambassador insisted they were allowed to call their parents. Now, with the French and Israeli authorities, we’re doing all we can to ensure the Israeli minors can return to their families in Israel as quickly as possible,” Seroussi told the Guardian. A documentary team from Israeli public television told Agence France-Presse it had been investigating the school for months and had passed information to investigators. “We found ourselves with around 30 witness accounts dating back to the 2000s from former pupils saying they suffered violence,” the documentary film-maker Dubi Kroitoru said. Rivka Azoulay, 26, from Jerusalem, whose 13-year-old brother started at Beth Yossef last week, told the Times of Israel: “It seemed like the Harry Potter school, out in the green spaces.” She said her brother had called home and had seemed happy at the school. Since July the French government agency charged with observing extreme sectarian movements has tracked down several ex-pupils who had returned to the US or Israel and who reportedly spoke of having had their mobile phones and passports taken away while at the school. A number of them told detectives they had been banned from leaving the grounds for several years. France’s chief rabbi, Haïm Korsia, said: “It’s unacceptable for children’s lives to be put in danger. The conditions they were living in are unacceptable, full stop.” There was no reply when the Guardian attempted to contact the school. According to its website, Beth Yossef was founded by Rabbi Gershon Liebman after he arrived in France from Poland in 1948, and it is part of the Ohr Yosef institution. The school day starts at 8am with prayers and ends in the evening with an ethics lesson, a walk in the forest and the study of “sacred texts”. “Today, the yeshiva is proud of its success and brings together more than one hundred students from the around the world … the students assiduously deepen their Torah knowledge in order to become Masters of the Torah themselves,” the school writes.Two of the first human patients to be treated with a revolutionary therapy that engineers immune cells to target specific types of cancer still possess cancer-killing cells a decade later with no sign of their illness returning. The finding suggests CAR T-cell therapy constitutes a “cure” for certain blood cancers, although adapting it to treat solid tumours is proving more challenging. CAR – chimeric antigen receptor – T-cell therapy works by genetically engineering an individual’s T-cells to recognise and destroy cancer cells. T-cells are a type of white blood cell that can recognise and destroy foreign cells, including cancer cells, but because cancer is very good at evading immune detection, they often miss their mark. CAR T-cells are engineered to make them better at detecting cancer cells. In the UK the therapy is approved for use in children and young adults with B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) and adults with certain types of lymphoma – both are blood cancers. In trials, CAR-T therapy has been extraordinarily successful, putting patients into remission who had months to live, but the long-term effects had not been extensively studied. Now, Prof Carl June, at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, and colleagues report in Nature how cells from two of the first patients to be treated are faring 10 years on. Both patients were suffering from chronic lymphocytic leukaemia when they had CAR-T therapy in 2010, and achieved complete remission within months of treatment, meaning all signs and symptoms of their leukaemia disappeared. They remain cancer-free today. One of the patients, Doug Olson, said he had taken up running half-marathons after his treatment. When the researchers examined the patients’ blood, they could still identify CAR T-cells that were capable of proliferating and killing cancer cells, as well as others that help to shape immune responses. “We call these cells a living therapy, but it was a big surprise to us that they are still able to kill cancer cells 10 years after infusion,” June said. “We can’t say whether every last cancer cell was gone within three weeks [of treatment], or it could be that they keep coming up like whack-a-mole and then get killed, but we know that these [CAR T-cells] are on patrol. They persist and they are functional.” Prof Martin Pule, the director of the UCL Cancer Institute CAR T-cell programme, described the paper as a landmark. “A decade ago, CAR T-cell therapy was a therapeutic approach explored by a very small number of scientists and was considered a fringe approach and unlikely to work,” he said. “This paper shows us that CAR T-cells can give patients with cancers which no longer respond to chemotherapy remissions which last a decade.” Prof David Porter, of the University of Pennsylvania, who was involved in the research, said the team had been unprepared for how successful it would be. “Cancer doctors don’t use words like ‘cure’ lightly or, frankly, very often. But we now have patients like Doug who haven’t relapsed, and we really believe that we can start to use the word ‘cure’.” CAR-T therapy does not work for all patients or for all types of cancers. It is also labour-intensive and expensive, although June said the costs would come down. Pule said: “Solid cancers are harder to treat with CAR T-cells because they surround themselves with proteins and cells which shield them from the immune system. This is called the ‘tumour microenvironment’. We know that CAR T-cells can work well against solid cancer. For example, [we] have shown that they are active against solid cancers like neuroblastoma; however the CAR T-cells are overwhelmed by the microenvironment.” Second-generation T-cells, engineered to recognise the tumour and resist the microenvironment, are being tested in clinical trials, including one in leukaemia patients at UCL.When Matt Bloomfield staggered off the pitch at Exeter last August he did not know it would be his final game as a professional footballer. Nor did the 191 visiting Wycombe supporters realise a freak blow to the head and concussion would abruptly end a proud playing career after 558 appearances – all but one for their club. “I was trying to walk to the tunnel and I kept veering right, towards the away fans, when I was trying to head straight,” Bloomfield recalls. “It is quite a narrow tunnel at Exeter and I was bouncing off the walls to get to the changing room. I was sat in the dressing room and the [club] doctor said I was very agitated and irritable. I couldn’t deal with everything. It all unravelled that evening.” He got home to Felixstowe just as his daughters, Rosie, four, and Mollie, six, were rising. By then Bloomfield had been warned by the club doctor, Bob Sangar, that he might not return to the field. “It affected my mood, it affected my energy levels and I struggled to see the light in the everyday activities that I usually love doing with my girls,” he says. “Things that I usually jumped at doing with them felt like a bit of an effort. They read their stories to me at night and I couldn’t focus on what they were telling me. Sitting with them and them giving me a cuddle with their stories is usually a special time, so I knew I wasn’t right. I thought that it would go within a day or two and a week later I was still feeling the same. I knew it was more serious than some of the other concussions.” Bloomfield is not the sort to court the limelight but feels “a bit bad” that his parents, Jackie and Steve, and his grandparents were not able to watch him one last time. For Bloomfield, the Carabao Cup first-round tie at Exeter was a chance to impress. “I’m not sure I had ever been as focused or determined to prove my point. As you get older, everybody keeps telling you that your days are numbered and I’ve spent the last seven years, since turning 30, proving them wrong and that I can keep going. I was thinking: ‘If I play well and we win tonight, I’m going to show the manager that I deserve to be playing at Cheltenham [in League One] on the Saturday.’ I had set myself up that it was going to be the night I would [show I could] play this season.” It was not to be. After several visits to doctors and specialists, Bloomfield retired on medical advice. No more “going to war at five to three”. The written confirmation arrived a couple of weeks ago. “I re-read it a few times and then it was just that realisation. I told everyone I was fine and that if this was it, then I’m fine with it but actually dealing with it in my head, knowing I was never going to pull on a Wycombe Wanderers shirt again, never wear my No 10 again and never going to play football again … that was quite a big thing to deal with.” It is about 1pm at Wycombe’s training base and Bloomfield, who has taken on coaching duties, carries two bags of balls inside before sitting to talk. Emotions are raw but there are a couple of obvious highlights: captaining Wycombe to promotion to the Championship at Wembley and José Mourinho shaking his hand as he left the pitch in his testimonial game against Chelsea in 2014. Mourinho had another word with Bloomfield when his Tottenham team visited Wycombe in the FA Cup last year. “He did a kind of double take: ‘Wow, you’re still going! How old are you now?’” he says, laughing. “He is perceived to be so cold but my dealings with him have always been fantastic.” Bloomfield estimates he has suffered about five concussions in the past four years. The last came not from a sickening clash but a teammate playing a quick free-kick on halfway, which smacked him on the back of the head. The process that followed was not so simple, which is why he is determined to raise education around brain injuries and concussions in the game. He is keen to assist the Professional Footballers’ Association, wants to raise funds for former players living with dementia and for research, and would change the way players with a suspected concussion are assessed. “I’ve been fairly vocal in my dealings with the PFA,” he says. “I believe that the player should be taken away to a sterile environment – a physio or doctor’s room – and be assessed properly under bright lights rather than by the side of the pitch in the moment. Even if we’re saying the referee is not going to put any pressure on the physios or the doctors, you’ve still got a crowd, a clock ticking, a score on the scoreboard and players itching to get on with the game. “As footballers, we don’t take it seriously. I know I didn’t. About 14 or 15 years ago I remember being knocked out on a Saturday and I played on the Tuesday. I’m lucky we’ve got the protocols that are in place now. Whenever I’ve had an injury in the past, it’s been, ‘I’m fine, I’m going to carry on’ because as sportspeople we’re geared towards blocking out pain. ‘I’ve got a performance to put on, we need to get three points.’ My whole life has been around performing on Saturday or Tuesday because that’s how I earn new contracts, pay the mortgage and earn my win bonuses.” The lasting extent of his latest concussion became clear a month later on a trip to Peppa Pig World. “I went on the teacups with my youngest and I was getting dizzy. I was thinking: ‘This isn’t right; I’ve been on the teacups with them a million times.’” The incident also affected his vestibular system and has left him nervous when balls are flying at training. “I get really jumpy. I left school in July 2000 and for 21 and a half years I’ve been on training grounds five days a week and never given it a second’s thought, whereas now every time there are balls around and about I’m quite on guard, which is an ongoing issue that will hopefully subside.” His memory has also been affected. “I forget simple words. There are definitely things I have noticedover the last couple of months and the long-term implications scare me, of course they do. My brain health is fine in terms of the MRI scanning … but these things can develop over time. It scares me, 100% it scares me.” There have been difficult conversations – including explaining to his daughters why “daddy doesn’t play on the pitch any more and just stands on the side shouting” – but this is not a sob story. Bloomfield, as his wife, Madeleine, was quick to remind him, knows he is lucky to have had so long in the game and he is grateful for the support of the manager, Gareth Ainsworth, and the owner, Rob Couhig. Bloomfield spends weekends clipping up game footage to present analysis to the squad on a Monday. “I don’t want to be that person in life who is always harping back to his past, looking backwards and feeling sorry for himself. I still have a lot of life to live and I want to be the best coach – and maybe manager – that I can be.” He is enjoying some of the things he stayed clear of over the years. “I say yes to a lot more treats,” he says, smiling. “In the coaches’ office after a game, if we’ve won and they’re having a beer, I’ll join them, which is alien to me. I actually took great pleasure in saying ‘no’ to drinks at parties, in getting to bed at the right time, drinking water and being the fittest I could possibly be . To not have to attain to those standards has been a reverse … it has been quite tough.” Such is Bloomfield’s makeup, he still gets into training for 7.30am to do a gym session and, after, will often go for a run. “I see this as a new beginning,” he says. “I need to try and use it as a positive. I can’t sit back and say: ‘This is what ended my career, the ball on the back of the head, poor me.’ I want to help others.”The past decade has not been kind to the British sketch show. It is so rarely seen on television, that, in purely televisual terms, you would be forgiven for thinking the form had died out with 00s mainstays, such as the landline, DVDs and outrageous misogyny masquerading as friendly and completely harmless conversation. But sketch comedy has thrived on the perimeters of mainstream culture. Social media teems with incredibly clever and inventive quickfire skits, while character-comedy acts have been responsible for some of the slickest and most entertaining material on the live circuit in recent years. Finally, it seems, TV wants in – again. This week, BBC Three – newly revived as an actual on-air channel – has launched with a brand new series from Edinburgh fringe favourites Lazy Susan, AKA comics Freya Parker and Celeste Dring. And it’s not the only sketch show BBC Three has committed to: it has ordered a full series of Ellie and Natasia, following a 2019 pilot by comedians Ellie White (who happens to be the braying Princess Beatrice to Dring’s Princess Eugenie in the excellent royal sitcom spoof The Windsors) and Natasia Demetriou. That’s right: two female-led sketch shows on the same channel in the same year. Although all debate about womankind’s propensity for producing tenable comedy has officially been declared over, this fact is still relevant – largely because many of Lazy Susan’s most inspired sketches revolve around gender dynamics. Singing In Your Face sees the romantic tensions of vintage Hollywood movies get a very satisfying (and very minor) nudge into sexual harassment territory, and, in a recurring skit titled A French Woman In A Film (Written By A Man), the pair send up the liberated, vacantly eccentric lady trope with aplomb. Some of the series’ sketches – including those examples – are taken from the pair’s uproarious 2018 Edinburgh fringe show, Forgive Me, Mother!, which featured a running narrative arc about Parker’s fear of being murdered by an obsessive male fan. The TV iteration isn’t quite so direct, but themes of sexism and gender norms hover ambiently behind most sketches. And, just as those themes have had a modern revamp in recent years, so has comedy about them. “You’re skewering things but not in a way, from 10 years ago, where there’s a woman in a meeting and everyone’s talking over her,” says Dring. “Yes, that still happens but we know that in comedy now, so you don’t want to be making the same point.” Instead, it’s the more insidious aspects that seem most ripe for parody, such as how “skincare has replaced makeup as another standard of beauty, or clean eating replaced dieting”. In their musical parody Sleepy Girls, a dreamy, Lana Del Rey-esque number is used to home in on a contemporary, Insta-friendly sort of damsel in distress: the ideal of a woman who is “beautiful and waif-like and their main trait is that they have no agency”. Although the pair’s sketches frequently revolve around gender, this isn’t about pointing fingers, but, rather, spoofing the culture that has shaped all our brains. Yes, there is an element of resetting the power balance in some small way – “It’s always fun to play the men we’ve been subjected to, it feels quite cathartic,” says Dring – but part of the fun of parodying misogynistic tropes is acknowledging their own complicity. “I think a lot of women who grew up in the era I grew up in probably have quite a lot of internalised misogyny,” says Dring, who, like Parker, is in her early 30s. “I thought for ages, when I was a teenager, that I was one of the boys. When you realise that wasn’t that authentic, and take a step back, you’re like: that’s quite funny.” I’m speaking to Dring and Parker over Zoom: Dring is in the spare bedroom of her north London home (“for guests or when me and my boyfriend have an argument”); Parker is wearing a blond curly wig and having her makeup touched-up on the set of Wonka, the Willy Wonka origin story starring Timothée Chalamet, in which she plays a character called Miss Bon Bon (“real ‘blink and you’ll miss me’ vibes, but I’m very happy to be here”). The pair have been working together for a decade, but have also made a splash individually: as well as her recurring role in The Windsors, you may also recognise Dring as Kurtan’s love interest, Kayleigh, from This Country; Parker, meanwhile, played various characters in the news satire Late Night Mash, and also has a role in the upcoming Jurassic World sequel. As Lazy Susan – and their other work – makes abundantly clear, the pair are both extremely talented actors, far surpassing the usual sketch comedy standards. So it’s no surprise to discover they started out on the more straight-faced end of the spectrum. Parker was a jobbing actor (repeatedly cast as a child in theatre productions “because I’m small”), and Dring was in the post-university “wilderness years”, when they were introduced and quickly began making some “inexcusably bad” serious theatre. In one play they were two little boys whose father had left them. “It was like a reverse Waiting for Godot,” says Dring. “It died a death.” Soon after, comedy called. For one thing, it was more accessible – stage time was easier to come by and they could perform something they had written that day. “It seems like more of a meritocracy,” says Dring. “Dramatic acting feels like you need connections, you need to look a certain way.” Yet, on the other hand, comedy also seemed impenetrable – like magic, says Dring. “Or maths.” Growing up, she says, “I didn’t have any notion of how I could be funny. I saw sketch in that tradition of Monty Python and Fry and Laurie. Posh men doing wordplay, and I was like: what am I going to contribute to that?” The show sports an impressive roster of recognisable guest stars, including standups James Acaster and Lou Sanders, double Edinburgh award-winner John Kearns and Stath Lets Flats star Kiell Smith-Bynoe. Most are friends of the pair, who, nine years on from their Edinburgh fringe debut (they were nominated for the newcomer prize a year later in 2014) are well entrenched in the British comedy scene. Surely by now they are sketch experts, too? Not so, they insist. “If you said to me, you’ve got to write three sketches this week I would be like: ‘oh no!’” says Dring. “I honestly feel like, every time, we’re fumbling around in the dark – neither of us feel like we know what we’re doing. Not in a self-deprecating woman way – but that’s definitely part of it as well.” Parker laughs. “Please don’t let that be the headline: “I don’t know what I’m doing.” She pauses to view her, now visor-covered, face on her phone screen. “I look absolutely insane with this mask on.” New comedy is always divisive – particularly in the UK, and particularly in the everyone’s-a-critic social media age – but sketch shows, with their inevitable hit-and-miss nature, are especially so. The series even includes a sketch about a hotline that disgruntled viewers can use to vent at the pair (“if you don’t like our material, or you think we’re ugly and need to know!”). So, how are they preparing themselves for the reaction to Lazy Susan in real life? “I’ll put my full address on Twitter and I’m just going to let them come,” deadpans Parker. In fact, they say, the extreme, bile-filled “kill yourself” criticism is not the most painful. “I’m a massive perfectionist, so fair criticism is actually worse,” admits Dring. “I find it easier to tolerate people being like ‘I hope these sluts die,’ than someone that’s like ‘I feel like it lagged in the second half’. You’re like: ‘Owww, that’s really fair.’” So, if you really must criticise Lazy Susan’s inventive, ludicrous and sharply satirical sketches, then please ensure your grievances are as disturbing as possible.For nearly 30 years, Pink Narcissus was a film as mysterious as it is sensual and erotic. Clocking in at just over an hour, it was released in 1971 with an anonymous director, and skirted the obscenity laws. Artistic, radical, with a truly innovative cinematic palette, it remained unashamedly gay and pornographic. Shot on Super-8 and almost dialogue free, it builds a loose narrative around the dreams and fantasies a male sex worker has in his New York apartment between clients. He imagines himself a Spanish matador, a Roman slave, and among leather-clad bikers hanging around grimy toilets. As much as the acting, the sensuality of these scenes comes from the washes of scenographic colour: the bullfighter pulls up his high boots amid a variety of purple hues; the cottaging spot is a monochrome of black and grey; Narcissus is shown in a boudoir of burning pink. The climax comes when the sex worker – a mop of dark curly hair, high cheek bones – plays both a Middle Eastern potentate and his catamite, entertained by an increasingly energetic male belly dancer, the latter’s erection barely covered in a sheer veil. In 1999, James Bidgood, who died on Monday aged 88, was revealed as the author of this underground classic. The director had fallen out with the producers over the final cut of the movie and, despite having spent six years making it, meticulously building the sets and filming the entire thing in his Hell’s Kitchen apartment, he demanded his name be removed. The film, he said, was a portrait of his own dreams as a young gay man in New York. “I’m addicted to dreaming,” he told Butt magazine in 2010. “If you mean getting lost in fantasies, ideas, hearing tunes, seeing rhyme couplets, cuz I’m workin’ on a musical, the whole schmear, book, music, lyrics. I win all sorts of awards dreaming. I’ve won the Tony and wept uncontrollably giving my thank you speech at least a dozen times in my imagination, usually in the bathtub.” The revelation that Bidgood was the author ended years of speculation, and put paid to rumours that Pink Narcissus was the secret project of either Andy Warhol or Kenneth Anger. The former had released Blow Job in 1964, a 34-minute silent flick concentrating on the face of the lucky receiver; Anger’s biker fetish film Scorpio Rising had been released the year before. Both films revelled in erotica yet neither reached the same level of kitsch flamboyance as Bidgood. The director had been in New York for two decades when Pink Narcissus was released. Born in Wisconsin in 1933, at the height of the Great Depression, his first cinematic obsession was the Ziegfeld Follies, a series of song and dance extravaganzas. When he left home aged 18 he found that: “New York was exactly as it appeared to be in MGM musicals. It was fast and it was more exciting than your second orgasm.” He turned to drag, making his own costumes and debuting as “Terri How” at Club 82, a basement cabaret frequented by the mafia as much as the underground gay scene. “When I made my entrance, all dolled up in glitter and soft, fat ostrich feathers, I imagined I was working the boards at the Ziegfeld theatre,” Bidgood told Another Man in 2019. He was tasked with mixing with the clientele, encouraging them to buy more drinks, and the pay got him into Parsons School of Design where he honed his costumer skills. Soon he was able to make a living making dresses for society balls, giving him maximum freedom in his art. His photographic style seemed to be fully formed from the start: young men with boyish looks, smooth chests and pert bottoms posed on a variety of mythological and fantastical stage sets. The photography series Apache (1964–66) shows a lad leaning on a lamp-post against a fairground background. The deity Pan sits demurely on a tree trunk in Pan from Behind (1965-1969); Jack Frost, in nothing but a jockstrap and glitter spray, is tied to a giant snowflake. The August/September 1965 issue of Muscleboy, one of the “fitness magazines” then skirting the obscene-material laws, featured a cover image by Bidgood: a young man reclining in an undergrowth clearly constructed with old green and blue scrunched up textile. A year earlier, Young Physique, another such title, had a brunette in white furs and tall white leather boots. Bidgood said he was traumatised after losing control of Pink Narcissus. As the pornography laws in the US loosened, he filmed a hardcore orgy scene titled Baghdad, but the feature film it was intended for never got completed. Meanwhile his masterpiece inspired the likes of Pierre et Gilles and David LaChapelle, who enjoyed the fame and economic security that eluded him. Bidgood has also been cited by a younger generation of creatives, including singers Charli XCX and Olly Alexander, and his influence can be detected in the style of rapper Lil Nas X among others. He enjoyed a retrospective at the Museum of Sex in New York in 2019, a monograph published by Taschen, and a 2020 collaboration with designer Christian Louboutin. Nonetheless he remained until the end in the cramped apartment in which he made his work. “I’ve been stuck with my dreams for close to 80 years now, and I still have to worry whether I have the rent money every month,” he said in 2010. A fundraiser has been set up to meet the costs of his funeral.It may have been dominating conversation in Westminster on Wednesday, but questions about levelling up were met with blank stares among shoppers on Wednesfield’s high street in Wolverhampton. Most had never heard of the concept, while of those who had, many doubted it would do much to improve their quality of life. “Does levelling up just mean the whole country will be the same level of poor together?” said Gary Green, 56, who has worked on the street’s fruit and veg stall for 22 years. “Whatever we gain in levelling up, we’ll lose more with taxes going up, energy prices are devastating everybody. They are 100% out of touch. How can anyone make a living and survive when everything is going through the roof?” Just outside the city centre, Wednesfield sits in Wolverhampton North East, one of a number of former “red wall” seats that voted Conservative in the last general election. Green said he had “voted Conservative my whole life but I wouldn’t vote for them again”, adding that he doubted levelling up would do enough to cut through anger over the cost of living and the long-term economic impact of Covid. The city of Wolverhampton has been promoted by the government as a key beneficiary of its new strategy, and was one of the first areas to be prioritised for a share of a £1.5bn brownfield fund. It was home to the first new government HQ outside London, when the housing ministry opened a site there last year. “We want a government as focused on Wolverhampton as it is on Westminster,” proclaimed the levelling up secretary, Michael Gove, on Wednesday morning before the publication of a white paper. Ian Brookfield, the Labour leader of Wolverhampton council, said: “It would be cheerless of me not to welcome it, we’ve been starved for so long. Of course I’m grateful for anything that we receive. But will it make up for the past 10 years of budget cuts? Probably not.” In Wednesfield, many shoppers were also sceptical about the real-world impact of the policy. Sharon Gunter, 55, a retail worker, said she knew little about the white paper and would “believe it when I see it happening”. “It’s a lot of talk. I’m very disheartened with things at the moment,” she said. “They’ll say they’re doing this [levelling up] to try to distract from what’s going on and make people forget about the parties scandal.” Others, although sketchy on the details, were more hopeful about the potential of the levelling up agenda to bring some needed investment to the area. “It sounds positive, I’m optimistic,” said Adil Chutoo, 67, a nurse. “I feel they are trying to help. We need more investment around here, people are struggling. The traditional high street is gradually dying. The intentions are there; whether they become actions, we don’t know.” Kim Denny, 60, shopping with her mother, said: “You look around and things aren’t the same as they used to be. Shops are shutting, this used to be a lovely little vibrant town and it’s not like that any more. So I think levelling up sounds like a great idea, I just don’t know much about it.” Brookfield said he was not surprised that so many people knew little about what levelling up means. “This is infrastructure-led levelling up, it is not people-based. People doesn’t know what it means for them and just wave it away,” he said. “There’s going to be cataclysmic events later on this year with the energy crisis and cost of living. Of course we could do with a new building here and there, but its people who need to be looked after first.”Steve Hitchen has resigned from his scouting and recruitment post at Tottenham and is under consideration for a similar role at Everton, who are restructuring under the new manager, Frank Lampard. Hitchen had been marginalised on the recruitment side at Spurs since the appointment of Fabio Paratici as the managing director of football last summer and, having considered his position for a number of months, he has decided to move on. The 45-year-old met the chairman, Daniel Levy, on Tuesday to ask to be released from his contract. Everton, who are in the throes of a chaotic season, have been operating without a director of football, head of recruitment and manager of scouting after the respective departures of Marcel Brands, Grétar Steinsson and Dan Purdy were announced in early December. Newcastle also have an interest in Hitchen as they, too, look to reshape their recruitment operation. Hitchen, a former player at Blackburn, Macclesfield and Bangor City, went to Spurs as the chief scout in February 2017, having worked at the club between 2005-2010, initially as a European scout based in France and then in a more international role. Hitchen returned to Spurs as they regrouped after the resignation of the head of recruitment, Paul Mitchell, who was working a notice period. Hitchen would be promoted in September 2020 to the role of technical performance director, which the club said would have “responsibility for scouting, performance and recruitment analysis and youth recruitment”. Despite being friends, Hitchen and Paratici felt like an odd combination in the sense that their most important job was the same – to buy and sell first-team players. The Guardian understands that Hitchen had little involvement in the transfer window last summer and again in January, and was focused more on overseeing departments such as sports science and medical. Hitchen’s watch will show more misses than hits on the market, with the former headlined by Tanguy Ndombele and Giovani Lo Celso in the summer of 2019 at a combined and eventual cost of about £115m. They were loaned on Monday to Lyon and Villarreal respectively. The midfielders were signed for the manager at the time, Mauricio Pochettino, but he would leave in November of that year. Neither Ndombele nor Lo Celso has been a fit for the subsequent managers and the churn from Pochettino to José Mourinho to Nuno Espírito Santo via Ryan Mason to Antonio Conte has been challenging for everybody at the club, including Hitchen. The most successful signings of Hitchen’s time in charge of recruitment will go down as Lucas Moura from Paris Saint-Germain in January 2018 for £25m and Pierre-Emile Højbjerg from Southampton in the summer of 2020 for £15m. Hitchen went to Liverpool after his first spell at Spurs, where he was instrumental in the signing of Luis Suárez in January 2011. He then worked in senior recruitment positions at Queens Park Rangers and Derby.ALLAN KEY Last Saturday certainly was a day to forget for poor old Allan McGregor. He got up at the crack of dawn to travel the 187 miles north from Ibrox to Dingwall for a lunchtime kick-off, and will wonder why he bothered. The hapless Pope’s Newc O’Rangers keeper endured a shocker, fumbling a cross that let Ross County back into the game, then inexplicably letting a bobbling ball ping off his chest in the last few seconds of added time, teeing up a Staggie to slam home from close range and deny the champions a couple of precious points. It’ll have been a long four-hour drive home after that carnival display. And an uncomfortable one, too, if several items later discovered along the southbound A9 – three square wheels at Aviemore, a radiator with steam parping out of it near Pitlochry, a large water-filled flower and bucket of glitter outside Perth – were anything to do with him. Reports remain unconfirmed. Honk. What we do know for certain is that his team’s quest for an historic Two in a Row is suddenly very much in the balance. The champions have been unconvincing of late, also shipping points from a winning position against Aberdeen, and only just squeaking past ersatz Meadowbank Thistle tribute act Livingston at home. The Queen’s Celtic, by contrast, have suddenly developed something of a swagger, winning 12 of their last 13 matches in all competitions and drawing the other. In fact, confidence is so high that manager Ange Postecoglou feels able to drop folksy aphorisms such as “I don’t just sign players, I sign people” unselfconsciously, and without being fingered in the press as a Rodgers-Brent wannabe. (The “very mature” Matt O’Riley, £1.5m from Franchise FC, since you ask.) As the bitter rivals prepare to throw hands at Parkhead on Wednesday evening, the momentum is very much with Postecoglou and his Bhoys, and their bid to leapfrog the Light Blues at the top of the table could be further boosted by the possible return of captain Callum McGregor, who took a serious knock to the coupon against Alloa a couple of weeks ago. The visitors, by contrast, have concerns up front, with Fashion Sakala and Cedric Itten out of sorts, and Alfredo Morelos on an ever-so-slightly pointless 15,000-mile beano around South America with Colombia, watching the rest of the squad play football. With new signing Aaron Ramsey unfit, some breaking news there, the goalscoring burden may fall to Kemar Roofe. The Fiver suggests he’ll need to bang in a couple at the very least if the Gers are to come away with anything … unless, of course, Po’ Allan manages to relocate his mojo quicksmart. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Paul Doyle for hot Afcon semi-final MBM coverage of Burkina Faso 0-2 Senegal from 7pm GMT, while Scott Murray will be on hand for the Queen’s Celtic 1-1 the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers at 7.45pm. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I forget simple words – it scares me” – Wycombe’s Matt Bloomfield tells Ben Fisher why a freak concussion – by his estimation a fifth in four years – has ended his career. FIVER LETTERS “I can totally sympathise with Pierre Emerick-Aubameyang ending up signing for Barcelona while on holiday (yesterday’s Fiver), as a similar thing happened when I was in Malta a few years back. Got talking to a guy who claimed to be the owner of a then-top-flight club and once he found out I played football, he seemed keen to sign me up. Not wanting to cast aspersions on the quality of Maltese football, but he wasn’t even deterred when I clarified it was very much Sunday league-level. For my part, I wasn’t exactly convinced he was a club owner anyway, so I joked that he could prove it by bringing me a kit … which he duly did the following day. In a state of mild surprise, I accepted the gift, made it clear I couldn’t make the switch and he went on his way. Having checked, said team didn’t appear to have a club shop and it seemed to be a player spec shirt, so” – Jim Hearson. “Re: yesterday’s Quote of the Day. It turns out Uefa Media Relations sent the pizza shop owners an email saying they have no problem with the ‘Champignons League’ pie after all. The email is somewhat interesting, but at the same time completely pointless and unnecessary. Is this what they call a non-fungi-ble token?” – Peter Oh. “Re: yesterday’s last line. Can I be the first of 1,057 NFL fans to wonder whether, after such a stellar career, Tom Brady is a little deflated about the way it ended” – Ed Taylor (and no other NFL fans). Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Jim Hearson. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Join Max and co for the latest edition of Football Weekly. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Manchester United’s Mason Greenwood has been bailed following his arrest on suspicion of raping, assaulting and threatening to kill a woman. The 20-year-old remains under investigation. Raith Rovers’ women’s team are cutting ties with the club as the backlash against David Goodwillie’s signing intensifies. A tin-eared club statement (“first and foremost, this was a football-related decision”) defended bringing in the striker, who was found to have raped a woman by a civil court in 2017. On Wednesday, Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said: “What it effectively seemed to be saying was it didn’t matter how a man treated a woman, the only thing that mattered to them was whether he could score goals.” Dazn and Discovery are sniffing around now BT is in talks with the Premier League regarding the offloading of its sports TV business. No more Jake Humphrey? West Brom have given head coach Valérien Ismaël the boot, little more than seven months after paying Barnsley to take him off their hands. Fellow Frenchman Jean-Luc Vasseur is also out of employment after Everton Women called time on his 10-game tenure. Steve Hitchen has done one from his scouting and recruitment gig at Spurs, with a similar role at Everton in the pipeline. And to the Fun and Games in South America Dept: Peru’s equaliser in their 1-1 Human Rights World Cup qualifier with Ecuador produced an enjoyable commentator-gasm. STILL WANT MORE? Sid Lowe has the inside gen on how Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s last-minute move to Barcelona came off. Big Website transfer guru Fabrizio Romano runs the rule over a January window characterised by certain clubs acting decisively and having a plan. Barney Ronay, meanwhile, argues that a return to unsustainable big spending is nothing to cheer. In Ligue Urrrn, it was the strugglers who really splashed the cash, reports Eric Devin. The predictability of Asian qualifying for HRWC 2022 is doing no one a favour, reckons John Duerden. Clubs that have won trophies in three different centuries, footballers who have played for the most Uniteds and more are picked over in this week’s Knowledge. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! OUR WELSH COUSIN IS FUMINGAged care workers are among thousands of people locked out of Australia due to the government’s continued hard border for bridging visa holders. Australia is currently grappling with dire workforce shortages in the aged care sector, a problem compounded by the Omicron crisis. At the same time, the government has continued its tough border restrictions for one visa category – bridging visas – despite opening the border for all other fully vaccinated temporary visa holders. Freedom of information documents show the continued hard border was affecting 18,993 active bridging visa holders in Australia who are hoping to leave the country, and 4,246 people who are stranded overseas, as at 15 December 2021. Those stuck abroad made 6,008 exemption requests to travel to Australia between August 2020 and mid-December last year. Only 1,595 were approved. Among those who were stranded abroad was aged care worker Kaur Simar, a registered nurse, whose employer in regional New South Wales had written letters of support, urging the government to let her in. Simar was stuck in Dubai and India since June, and made 28 applications for an inbound travel exemption on the basis of her work. All 28 were rejected. “My employer sent me several emails, which showed that they needed [registered nurses] in regional areas and they couldn’t replace me,” she said. “Even more RNs left regional areas for a better future in different states or cities.” “They were frustrated as I was.” Eventually, after more than six months, the government approved an exemption and gave her a skilled work visa, allowing her to return to Australia last month and work in Coonabarabran. For many others on bridging visas, the continued hard border has trapped them inside Australia. Some have been denied exemptions on compassionate grounds to attend funerals abroad. Others have been kept away from family for years. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Shorya Prashar, a Canberra-based restaurant manager, came to Australia on a temporary skilled worker visa, but is on a bridging visa while he challenges a decision by the immigration department in the administrative appeals tribunal. But the waiting times for AAT decisions have ballooned during the pandemic, leaving him stuck on the bridging visa for the foreseeable future, unable to travel. He has already been waiting 29 months, but expects it could take as long as three years. Prashar, who is fully vaccinated, has not seen his family in India since the pandemic began. He says it is deeply frustrating that the government’s continued border restrictions have singled out bridging visa holders. “We are paying taxes, we are working for an Australian employer, they need us, we are working full-time,” he said. “We can’t understand what the logic is behind this.” He said his parents, also unable to visit from India, have lost hope. “We are working here for the last six years,” he said. “We have given everything to Australia, like the taxes and everything, and still we are not eligible to get visas to go and come back to Australia. This is the only thing we want.” The federal government has previously defended its continued border restrictions for bridging visa holders. A spokesperson for the home affairs department said they were needed to “balance the need to safely reopen with the continuing need to protect the Australian community from Covid-19”. “These border policies have contributed to Australia having one of the lowest death rates from Covid-19, strongest economies and highest vaccination rates in the world,” the spokesperson said.In every election the cost of living is a big-ticket item. This year, with inflation rising faster than it has for most of the past decade, the issue will likely dominate debate, especially as the big price rises in the past year have been for items we can’t avoid buying. On Tuesday, Scott Morrison was asked about the price of bread, milk, and rapid antigen tests. I am generally averse to such “gotcha” questions. They don’t actually reveal much about the abilities of the prime minister. Such questions mostly just lead to political advisors ensuring everyone is armed with the latest prices of groceries and some pithy line about what type of bread they like to eat. I do however agree with Amy Remeikis who noted that knowing such things is “important when you lead a government that decided $44 a day was enough for those without a job to live on, and constantly bang on about needing to ‘live within your means’”. This is pertinent because on Wednesday the latest cost-of-living index showed that in 2021 the cost of living for those in vulnerable situations – those on pensions or jobseeker – rose quite ahead of those who live in households where the main income comes from employment: If the graph does not display please click here And yet for all households the cost of living grew less in 2021 than did inflation. The reason is to do with what counts as inflation and what counts as cost of living. To work out the consumer price index (CPI) figures, the Australian Bureau of Statistics puts together a basket of goods and services which it then weights in order to represent the average amount spent in a week on each item by the average household. For the cost-of-living figures, the bureau weights those items dependent upon the average spending of different types of households – eg employees, aged pensioners, self-funded retirees. The weightings given can vary quite a lot. Aged pensioner households, for example, spend 13% of their weekly expenditure on essential food and drink compared to 8% by employee households. Because they are older, self-funded retirees and aged pensioners spend a lot more of their budget on health than other households, and self-funded retirees spend a lot more on holidays than everyone else: If the graph does not display please click here The big difference though between the CPI and cost of living is housing. In the CPI the ABS measures house prices but not mortgage costs, while the opposite is true for cost of living. So, when house prices are rising much faster than mortgages (as they are now because interest rates have fallen) then generally inflation grows faster than cost of living: If the graph does not display please click here But this does not mean cost of living pressures are being exaggerated. What is important is what prices are going up the most. Last year the ABS issued a one-off look at the price rises of “non-discretionary items” (eg bread, rent, electricity, petrol, healthcare) compared to discretionary items (cakes, restaurant meals, motor vehicles, holidays). Even here there are issues – hairdressing is defined as “discretionary”, not so much because you can go without a haircut forever but rather because it can be put off. The same applies for items such as garments and footwear. Yes, we need clothes, but you generally don’t need to buy clothes each week in the same way you do food or paying for childcare or rent. What the figures show, when combined with the cost-of-living figures, is that poorer households spend significantly more of their weekly budget on non-discretionary items than do wealthier ones – and much more so than is represented in the CPI figures: If the graph does not display please click here This is important because in the past year there has been a big rise in the prices of non-discretionary items compared to more discretionary ones: If the graph does not display please click here And in the past decade the prices of non-discretionary items has risen by 26% compared to just 12% for those items we can put off purchasing. It all goes to the fact that while inflation is a useful measure, it can hide the reality not just of cost of living but also of the impact of price rises of items that you cannot avoid – in effect, the cost of essential living. But even here there is still more work that can be done. Even when we look at items as essential or discretionary there remains a great deal of difference within each category. In the UK, Jack Monroe has been campaigning to calculate what is known as the “Vimes Boots Index” of prices. The index draws on the Terry Pratchett character, Sam Vimes, who noted that having to constantly buy cheaper, badly made boots would end up costing poor people more in the long run compared to what wealthy people could afford – expensive but well-made boots that would last a decade or more. It’s why for example the ABS might suggest footwear is a non-discretionary item, but it only is if you can afford footwear that lasts. And so the cost of living should very much be a focus during this election – but if we just leave it with asking politicians the price of milk and bread, we are doing those for whom buying essentials is a daily struggle a major disservice. • Greg Jericho is a Guardian columnist and policy director at the Centre for Future WorkVentilation audits in schools across New South Wales have come under fresh scrutiny after two reviews of the same Blue Mountains school weeks apart resulted in the student capacity of one classroom rising by 500%. The government announced last year it would conduct ventilation audits at the 2,200 public schools across NSW to ensure there was enough fresh air inside classrooms, libraries and halls to prevent the spread of Covid-19. But as schools return for 2022 amid high community transmission of the Omicron variant in the state, new questions are being asked about the audits. The Guardian obtained copies of two audits conducted for the same school, which came to dramatically different conclusions about student capacity. In one example, a 55.4 sq metre “teaching space” was originally classified as having capacity for 25 students. But a second audit conducted less than three weeks later found that 154 students could safely occupy the room. In another case, a slightly larger room went from a capacity of 26 students to 77. In a third, the school’s bay was changed from a capacity of six to 19. In another, the result went the other direction; a classroom designated as being safe for 77 students was downgraded to 39. The department did not respond to questions about specific schools, but said they “worked with schools and provided guidance on how spaces should be used relative to the availability of natural ventilation”. “In many cases, this resulted in updated information on reports which were reissued to schools.” The Guardian understands the second audit was based on an in-person inspection of the school and the individual characteristics of the teaching spaces, while the first was an indicative measurement based on the room’s size in square metres. But experts have questioned how the audits could have come to such dramatically different conclusions. Lidia Morawska, director of the International Laboratory of Air Quality and Health at the Queensland University of Technology, said the audit for the school was based on calculations that resulted in classroom capacity below 1 sq metre per person. “If the space per person is less than 1 sq metre people would be touching each other like sardines so at this close distance ventilation does not help much,” she said. “It is a very big concern if people could be at such a close proximity to each other – then they are at a very high risk of inhaling high concentration of particles emitted, and if the particles contain the virus then getting infected.” Morawska also questioned the widespread use of air conditioning in schools with windows that do not open. Dubbed “sealed schools”, there are 48 of them across the state. The department has said that air conditioning has been installed in all “sealed schools”, and the Guardian has seen correspondence from one principal that states the units will be kept running at all times. But with no carbon dioxide monitoring, Morawska said the plan for classroom ventilation remained unclear regardless of the use of air conditioners. “I’m amazed that they pretend they are doing something,” she said. Despite NSW and Victoria working closely together to develop a return to school plan, the two jurisdictions had different approaches for school ventilation audits. Geoff Hanmer, a professor of architecture at the University of Adelaide and the chair of OzSage’s ventilation group, said Victoria’s approach was “not perfect” but “driven by more science” compared with NSW’s because it involved CO2 monitoring. “If you want classrooms to be safe then you need to check ventilation, which means measuring using a CO2 monitor,” he said. “If people get this wrong the consequences are quite serious. There’s been a tendency to want to believe that schools are not a place where Covid spreads despite all the evidence to the contrary.” NSW is currently conducting a pilot program using CO2 monitors in some public schools across metropolitan, regional and NSW but the approach is not widespread. In Victoria, the state government gathered data from a range of ventilation assessments across 100 schools that comprised a representative sample of different building types, including the use of CO2 monitors, to determine ventilation. After the audit, the state government delivered 51,000 air purifiers to schools on a needs basis. NSW Labor’s shadow education minister, Pru Carr, said the government had “provided no proof that they actually know whether ventilation in schools is sufficient”. “Education Minister Sarah Mitchell and School Infrastructure NSW gave school communities assurances that the ventilation audit undertaken was comprehensive. It’s unclear then why significant changes to some room capacities were made and reports altered,” she said. “For schools without openable windows, there are also concerns that air-conditioning systems now being used are not filtered to prevent COVID-19 from spreading.” A department spokesperson said its ventilation and “asset use” was informed by NSW Health advice, research from the Doherty Institute, guidelines from the World Health Organisation and independent, peer-reviewed advice from building services consultants Steensen Varming. “The ventilation guidelines from the World Health Organisation for Delta are appropriate for the Omicron variant,” the spokesperson said.The Great British Bake Off, and all of its spin-offs around the world, are perhaps one of the strangest TV success stories. On paper, a bunch of amateur bakers competing in an extremely low-stakes reality competition, making the kinds of delicious treats you’d be fed by a delightful grandma, do not sound like the necessary ingredients for high octane television. Nevertheless, what we’re served is the most delightful cake, perfect television. Wholesome, funny, gently exciting – sometimes even inspirational and moving, Bake Off’s success comes down to the joy that the contestants hold for baking, and the show’s ability to share that joy with the audience. No matter where you watch the show, it tends to follow a certain recipe when it comes to casting – and I think it’s time to break down the staples of a good season of Bake Off. And from what we’ve seen of the latest season of The Great Australian Bake Off, they’re adhering pretty closely to some of these classic tropes – with a few new ones thrown into the mix. The Christmas Boy Hark! Is that the sound of a very good boy who simply loves Christmas? One of the most bizarre and overwhelmingly wholesome Bake Off tropes is the number of boys who bake cakes themed around that most wonderful time of the year. The 2020 GBBO winner, Peter Sawkins, is perhaps the most recent example, famously using “Christmas flavours” and decorations on several of his bakes. (In Australia, our Christmas flavours are prawns, heatstroke, and repressed anger.) However, Sawkins does not celebrate Christmas through baking alone, with several bright eyed boys preceding him in various seasons. (We all loved Henry, didn’t we?) And there’s nothing wrong with a Christmas Boy; they’re terminally delightful. Grandmother Chaos Despite a lifetime of experience, a stoic attitude forged through the pain of existence, and knowing more about baking than many people on this round Earth, many of the older women contestants are avatars of chaos and mishap in the Bake Off tent. This is often demonstrated through a somewhat elastic relationship with time, a cavalier attitude to measurements, and frequent run-ins with the concept of physics (if a cake starts to topple, a chaos grandma is often behind it). Think of wonderful Karen, or Maggie, or Diana of bingate. But the Grandmother Chaos type is usually oblivious to the drama she creates; she doesn’t live for the drama, she simply is it. She’s also usually a remarkable baker, pulling victory out of the jaws of anarchy week after week. Grandmother Chaos has also been young, and also not a woman before – yet they all retain the vibe of an elderly matriarch. Some Guy With a Hat Hey, there’s often some guy with a hat. Their baking is usually fine, they’re usually fine, but the main thing is that they’re wearing a hat inside. Sure, it’s a tent, so maybe it’s more of a liminal zone than a normal house, but it doesn’t stop the hat from sticking out. It’s a rarer trope than some of the others, but one of the most quickly identifiable: it’s a guy wearing a hat. The Traveller This person went somewhere once – perhaps exotic, perhaps simply influential in a culinary way, and it blew their tiny brains, changed them in an irrevocable way. Remember all those hippy movies from the 70s where an uptight businessman does acid and then gives it all up for a life of free love on the road? This is kinda what happened to the traveller trope, except it’s more that they tried turmeric somewhere, and now all their baking is about recreating that one perfect moment of cuisine. Taking them back to the year they threw caution to the wind and bit into a “pineapple”. The Engineer This contestant often is an actual engineer, or studying to be one, or in some kind of engineer adjacent field (bridge appreciation?): think Giuseppe who won the last season of GBBO. But sometimes the Engineer is a scientist, who seem to frequently turn up on Bake Offs – like Sunny, who won the last season of Australian Bake Off, or Haydn this season, or GBBO’s Jürgen the physicist. These contestants approach baking with the attitude of someone erecting a tall building: it’s precise, it’s considered, it’s often as much a work of logistics as it is pastry. The Engineer will usually go far, as they have a plan, and a knowledge of angles. The ‘trade’ of the season To borrow a RuPaul’s Drag Race term, the “trade” of the season is the unexpected hottie, the absolutely gorgeous contestant. I’m not talking about merely handsome or beautiful – every Bake Off tent has been full of lovely looking people – I’m talking about a ridiculously sexy idiot who makes everyone go a bit weird, including the judges. Chigs in the last season of GBBO is the most recent example of this. You just don’t expect a person that sexy to be on a baking competition. Hot AND able to cook? Hopefully they’re also functionally illiterate, so they’re not literally perfect. The Prodigy Somehow, there’s always one baker who only started baking like six months ago. The aforementioned Chigs is one of these, but it’s a common trope. It’s a great story for the show, because it means they get to make a big deal about how far they’ve come along in such a short time. It’s also sometimes funny, because they’ll be told to “whip cream” and have a complete breakdown because they’ve never done it before. Also known as: the Baking Virgin. An Actual Child There’s always a literal child, a tiny baby, who often has the same vibe as the Prodigy – due to their extremely limited years on this Earth – but also sometimes they’re unspeakably awkward and wearing an odd combination of clothes. They are often adopted by other contestants. Noel Fielding’s Best Friend One of the best parts of the British version is the very personable host, Noel Fielding, and the fun that he has with the contestants. Once every blue moon, he will find a kindred spirit, someone who he genuinely seems to love, and who will often end up baking cakes for Noel’s children. The latest season of The Great Australian Bake Off is airing on Foxtel nowRapid antigen surveillance testing in schools should remain in place beyond the initial one-month period but could be then used in a more localised way, according to epidemiologists. In Victoria and New South Wales, where the school year commenced this week, governments are urging primary and secondary school students and staff to use at-home rapid antigen tests twice a week for the first four weeks of term in an effort to slow the spread of Covid. With the number of active Covid infections dropping nationally, parents and students alike may be hoping for a reprieve from the process after four weeks. But the head of the University of Melbourne’s school of population and global health, Prof Nancy Baxter, said if surveillance screening was successful in detecting Covid infections it should be in place for longer than four weeks regardless of whether Australia had passed the peak of Omicron cases. “One of the challenges is we will see high case numbers for a considerable period of time, so four weeks may be a good time to re-evaluate but it’s not going to be the time to stop,” she said. “We can expect a lot of transmission in schools but it’s going to be even higher if we start loosening restrictions.” The chair in epidemiology at Deakin University, Prof Catherine Bennett, said as the Omicron wave moved beyond its peak, surveillance screening at workplaces and educational institutions would gradually become less useful. “As incidence goes down in the population these tests become less useful as an active screen of asymptomatic people which is why we didn’t use them during Delta,” she said. “So you run the risk of having false positives and wasting a lot of tests without finding any cases or finding as many false positives as true positives.” But she said rapid antigen tests could be in place for longer than the initial one-month period in localised settings. “Say there’s a regional centre like Bendigo and suddenly they see lots of cases in the community, you might have that [rapid antigen surveillance screening] in the Bendigo schools. “They’re going to learn a lot this month about how many kids who test positive and then go and have a PCR come back negative and how many cases they are picking up. This is the big test week because kids are coming out of the community, haven’t been tested and we’re finding kids who are positive and took Covid to school unknowingly.” Under South Australia’s guidelines, close contacts need to undergo a rapid antigen test every day for seven days and can attend school if they return a negative result. Prof Adrian Esterman, an epidemiologist at the University of South Australia, said a “test-to-stay” approach or surveillance testing could limit outbreaks in schools. “Anything we can do to reduce transmission is a good thing,” he said. “I can’t see the reasoning for only doing it for four weeks. It makes sense to do it on a permanent basis.” Victoria’s deputy premier and education minister, James Merlino, said the rapid antigen testing would help minimise disruptions from staff absences to ensure children could remain at school. Guardian Australia understands the Victorian government has not ruled out extending the surveillance testing measure if it is successful at detecting infections, subject to potential supply constraints. In NSW, the state government will review the strategy after two weeks. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning For parents, adding rapid antigen testing into the weekly routine has not been without challenges. But executive director of advocacy group The Parenthood, Georgie Dent, said most families were happy to participate in the process. “I know the surveillance screening isn’t perfect as parents and children doing it themselves is not as accurate as a trained nurse,” she said. “But parents and children are fairly comfortable with this uncomfortable reality.”The Morwell coalmine fire in Victoria set high school students back more than 18 months academically, according to a new study. The analysis of the Monash Rural Health Study led by Dr Emily Berger, published in the Trauma Psychology journal in December 2021, found that the 2014 fire led to an 18.5-month delay in the academic progress of secondary school students. The research measured academic performance through examining the Naplan results of more than 300 students from 20 primary and secondary schools in the Latrobe Valley both before and after the mine fire, as well as surveying the students using the Children’s Revised Impact of Events Scale (Cries-13), as a measure of psychological distress. Berger said combining the two datasets was important because the educational and emotional states of students “go hand in hand” in disaster events. Berger said the 18-month delay would have led students to a loss of engagement in learning and self-esteem, making it more likely for them to leave school before finishing year 12 or not complete higher education. The fire in the Morwell open-cut brown coalmine next to the Hazelwood power station blanketed Morwell and surrounding areas in smoke and ash for six weeks in February and March 2014. Dan Swallow, the acting principal of the Morwell Campus of Kurnai College, was year 7 coordinator at the time of the fire. He said what stuck with him most was the disruption for the new cohort at “such a huge transition time”. He said the fires occurred at the start of the year, which led staff to try to take the students on as many excursions as possible, “anything to get them out of the valley, anything to give them a break from the air”. Swallow said many families chose to keep their kids at home, worried about asthma and air quality. Tracie Lund, the manager of the Morwell Neighbourhood House, said the industrial fire was a “harrowing 45 days”. “People were reporting almost immediately short-term impacts, experiencing stinging eyes, thick heavy heads, the onset of asthma or respiratory issues they’d never had before, unable to sleep, difficulty breathing,” she said. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter Swallow said the teachers were also severely impacted. “They might not have been getting rest at night, they might not have been coming in with the same energy, or calling in sick,” he said. The smell of the smoke was also traumatic for families at the school who had experienced Black Saturday and moved to the township to get away from the threat of bushfire only to experience a coal fire, Swallow said. Lund said the trauma of the event, with high levels of anxiety experienced, and the length of it, left her unsurprised that students fell behind. “While I’m not surprised, it’s also quite distressing to know what we were crying out for in those early days, and what we were fearful of, is actually coming to be recognised now, that there were immediate and long-term impacts across the board.” Berger said a similar study of children and adolescents impacted by the 2002 Prestige oil spill disaster in Spain showed that one year after the event 15- to 16-year-olds living in a more heavily polluted area had lower academic achievement compared to those from less impacted areas. While a clear impact was seen for older students in Morwell, unlike other studies looking at the academic impact of disaster, this study did not find that academic outcomes for primary school students in the affected area were impacted by the fire. The authors of the study hypothesised that extra resources and academic support provided to primary school students may have made the difference. Brooke Mawson, whose daughter was in grade 5 at the time of the fire, said that the children were still dropped off at school in Morwell and then bused to the school in the nearby town of Moe, which resulted in them losing an hour’s learning time each way. Wendy Farmer is the president of the local community group Voices of the Valley, which formed out of the catastrophe. She said one anecdote that had stayed with her was from a parent whose five-year-old son returned from attending primary school in the neighbouring town to say he did not want to be back home “because his house hurt him”. “That’s not what any parent wants to hear; your house is your safety net,” Farmer said. Berger said the findings of the study had clear implications for the need to ensure there was appropriate and adequate educational and emotional support for students after disaster events, because “those two go hand in hand in response to those sorts of events”. Berger said the study also related to rural schools more broadly. “Rural and remote areas are more susceptible to experiencing disaster events, it might be farming families and drought, or other disaster events, they’re more likely to experience those sorts of events,” she said. “And then coupled with that, in regional and rural areas, there is less access to psychological services and support services that can support families, children and teachers when there is an adversity or a trauma.” Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the community“Patient” is a useful word for the reserve bank governor, Philip Lowe, when it comes to the timing of any interest rate rise. It’s vague and gives few clues as to how much time is left. After Tuesday’s RBA meeting, Lowe said the bank’s board “was prepared to be patient as it monitors how the various factors affecting inflation in Australia evolve”. He echoed the sentiment at Wednesday’s National Press Club address on the year ahead. We know Lowe would like wage rises to be “sustainably” higher than underlying inflation but we remain in the dark about how much they need to rise – and for how long – before the RBA would lift the official cash rate from the record low 0.1% annual rate it has sat at since November 2020. That matters for borrowers on variable interest rates but also for those experiencing price rises that are already making it hard to get by. It’s not that clear what constitutes “wages” for Lowe. Yes, there is the wage price index that he said had risen 2.25% in 2021 compared with the bank’s forecast of 1.75%. The half percentage point miss isn’t bad given we’ve been in the midst of a pandemic for two years. But the gap was more than twice as big for the underlying inflation result, which came in at 2.6% in 2021 compared with the 1.5% forecast by the RBA, implying real wages were in retreat last year. The RBA expects the wage price index to increase by 2.75% in 2022 and 3% in 2023. Its “central forecast” is for underlying inflation of 2.75% this year and next, suggesting that 2021’s loss in real wages won’t be made until at least 2024, depending on whether the index can keep outpacing inflation. But the “broader measures of labour costs” seem to be what Lowe – and to some extent the prime minister, Scott Morrison, as he seeks re-election in May – are relying on to lift wage earners’ confidence they are keeping ahead of price rises. These include superannuation contributions and “pay increases that arise from job switching and job reclassifications in a tight labour market” which is presumably going to be more common if the jobless rate drops below 4% as the RBA and the government expect. Economists, such as the head of Australian economics for the country’s biggest lender CBA, Gareth Aird, aren’t happy about the haziness. He described Lowe as “opaque” when it comes to how much wages would need to rise before the RBA hikes rates. “The RBA wants the annual rate of wages growth to be ‘3-point-something’ to ensure inflation is ‘sustainably within the target’,” Aird said in a briefing note. “But we are none the wiser on whether that means the governor wants to see the annual rate have a 3-handle on it before the cash rate is lifted or if a six-month annualised rate of 3% or above is sufficient.” Financial markets pared back their punt on when the RBA would first move to raise the cash rate to 0.25% after Tuesday’s statement – picking June-July rather than May. The CBA and Westpac reckon that move will come in August and the ANZ expects September, although Lowe was careful not to give a clear steer. Aird said the CBA’s internal data indicates the wage growth seen at the end of 2021 had extended into the early part of 2022 despite – or perhaps even because of – the Omicron Covid distortions. “An acceleration in wages growth is the natural response to a tight labour market,” he said, adding that trend reinforces the CBA’s forecast of an August rate rise. Lowe said Australia’s labor market had quirks such as wage negotiations that were often annual if not tri-annual events, supporting his rates caution. There is “substantial inertia in aggregate wage outcomes even if there are large wage increases in some pockets”, he said. Those workers, though, who are relatively early into their negotiation period won’t take much consolation from soaring prices now. Nor can they assume their lag will be caught if inflation gets away. New Zealand’s experience may offer some pointers, particularly for politicians on this side of the Tasman. Figures out on Wednesday showed unemployment there fell to a record low 3.2% in December, with further tightening to come. The ANZ described it as a “highly inflationary set of labour market data”, and said the Reserve Bank of New Zealand would need to lift the interest rate at every meeting until the cash rate is 3% by April 2023. New Zealanders’ wages are rising, but only at a 2.8% annual clip compared with inflation running at almost 6%. “As workers use their newfound bargaining power to demand larger-than-usual wage rises to compensate for surging inflation, that is likely to exacerbate the rise in domestic inflation pressures over 2022,” the ANZ said. Asked whether inflation could spike in Australia, Lowe reverted to form: “We are not worried about a massive inflation outbreak and are prepared to sit for a while.” Lowe may have the patience of a saint but he doesn’t have a mortgage to pay – as he disclosed in Wednesday’s address. Nor does he face the challenges of the 1.1 million people on jobseeker payments, 80% of whom have been on income support for over a year, according to the Australian Council of Social Service (Acoss). People like Imogen, a Brisbane resident holding down part-time jobs in retailing and security, say their patience is worn thin by the debate over interest rates and politicians such as Morrison who don’t know the cost of daily basics such as bread, petrol and rapid antigen tests. “I’m very cognisant of the price of these things,” said Imogen, who requested her surname not be used. “The thing right now is that I am just out of milk today … and my bread is at the point where I should throw it out because it’s a little bit harder than desirable.” Rent eats up almost 80% of the support Imogen gets and if she earns extra she is penalised with reduced welfare payments. The economy may be recovering but if anything she has been going backwards. “Workers are spending more than ever on essentials, literally bread, milk, petrol, transport and rent,” she said. “We’re not getting as much for our dollars as we used to get last year, five years ago, 20 years ago.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Acoss chief executive, Cassandra Goldie, says people on jobseeker and Youth Allowance are “back to skipping meals, especially in the last days of their pay fortnight, they often have zero money for days”. “Most people on these very low payments can’t afford to own or drive a car, but if they do have one, they can’t afford to drive it as petrol prices climb.”Consumer advocates have accused the Morrison government of failing to fulfil a key recommendation of the banking royal commission after the Coalition proposed a review of financial advice that wouldn’t examine commissions paid to agents who sell junk insurance. In a submission to Treasury, the Consumer Action Law Centre (Calc) said the draft terms of reference of the review should be scrapped and re-written to explicitly include insurance commissions, which Kenneth Hayne – the retired judge who headed the royal commission – said were difficult to justify. The royal commission heard evidence that commissions were harming consumers. Pastor Grant Stewart gave evidence in 2018 that his son, who has Down’s syndrome and difficulty understanding whether things were cheap or expensive, bought funeral, accidental death and accidental injury insurance sold to him over the phone by a company called Freedom Insurance, which then refused to cancel the policies. The commission heard Freedom’s sales agents were incentivised through commissions and prizes including a “boat party” and a trip to Bali – which the company admitted encouraged aggressive and inappropriate sales. The company no longer sells insurance. Junk insurance has also been targeted by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission, which in 2020 said it had secured $160m in remediation for consumers who bought useless products. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In Thursday’s submission, Calc said that although the Treasury review’s draft terms of reference claimed to be consistent with Hayne’s recommendations, it could not “be said to be meaningfully implementing these recommendations without considering commissioner Hayne’s commentary on the conflicts between interest and duty in financial services”. “These findings, and the evidence at the royal commission of atrocious sales behaviour motivated by commissions and incentives, appear to have been forgotten in the drafting of the TOR, which make no reference to these issues.” Cat Newton, a senior policy officer at Calc, said it seemed like the government had largely forgotten the harm uncovered by the royal commission. “It’s good that the review is happening – it was slated to happen around 2022 – but what we really need is for this review to be meaningfully examining these issues, and making sure it’s proposing solutions that are going to prevent the harm that we saw at the royal commission, otherwise it’s not doing justice to those issues,” she said. Conflicted remuneration – commissions and other incentives – in selling financial advice were abolished after the royal commission but Newton said they remained at large in the insurance business. “We know it motivates appalling sales behaviour, where the emphasis is on making the sale rather than getting people into the product that they want or need and understand,” she said. “So we think all conflicted remuneration needs to go and that would be really beneficial to people, it would mean that they’re getting into products that they want and that they need and that are useful for them, rather than just being flogged a product based on somebody wanting a trip to Bali or a boat tour.”Aged care providers estimate about a quarter of all shifts – or the equivalent of 140,000 shifts a week – are going unfilled, while the disability sector has reported roster vacancies of up to 30% during the peak of Omicron. The ongoing staff shortages – which the government this week sought to address with two $400 retention payments – have sparked widespread calls for the government to do more for both the stretched aged care and disability care workforce. The disability sector, whose carers are not eligible for the government payments, says its carers will miss out on the bonus despite doing equivalent work to that in aged care under similarly stressed conditions. Workers for large home care providers who look after people in both aged care and disability will also be financially penalised for their NDIS clients, with one organisation estimating that up to 40% of its staff will receive no bonus at all. Both the disability and aged care sectors are struggling with workforce shortages, with the National Disability Services chief executive, Laurie Leigh, telling Guardian Australia that up to 30% of shifts could not be filled in the first two weeks of January as the Omicron wave peaked. “When you are getting up past sort of 20% or so of your workforce absent on any one day, that is extreme, and it means that providers are having to make difficult decisions about what shifts they can fill and what essential services have to be done,” Leigh said. “That’s put a lot of pressure on both individual workers in terms of the extra hours that they’ve been putting in, and on providers in terms of some of the costs around extra overtime and agency staff.” Leigh said the $400 bonus payments to aged care workers “did not scratch the surface” of what was needed in that sector, but disability care workers would receive nothing at all. “Looking at it from a disability sector, it’s a workforce that does very similar work in terms of supporting vulnerable people, it is a workforce that has been working as hard through the same sort of conditions that the aged care workforce has, but it’s a workforce that we don’t see having the same sort of recognition,” she said. “It’s the sense that, once again, the disability sector has kind of come in second to the aged care sector and that there’s more recognition in that sector of the needs than there is for even the start of a conversation in the disability sector.” Stuart Miller from myHomecare Group, which represents about 10 providers servicing more than 20,000 people in residential care, said that while he welcomed the retention bonus, it did not do anything to address structural issues in the sector. “It is a sugar rush because it is all about retention, it’s not about actually giving these people what they deserve. I will take that help, but it doesn’t fix things structurally,” Miller told Guardian Australia. He also said that up to 40% of his staff may not receive the payment, with carers having a combination of home care clients whose services may not be covered by the eligible programs and being financially penalised as a result. “In our organisation, as the largest provider, I’ve got people who work for veterans, I’ve got people who work for disability, or people who work for workers’ compensation and they’re not entitled to it (the payment) because it’s not federally funded,” he said. “There’s people in the office who are care managers who aren’t necessarily giving direct contact care, but are talking to our clients and managing their care, but those people aren’t necessarily going to be eligible either.” He also said providers were being burdened with the additional paperwork to administer the scheme, needing to calculate how many hours of care a worker had undertaken with certain clients to qualify for the payments. “I want to make sure our staff get everything they’re entitled to on this, but it won’t quite be what everyone thinks it will be. This is more spin than anything else.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The concern about the payments from the disability sector has also been raised by aged care providers, who say many workers will be excluded from the retention bonus program, including reception, lifestyle and maintenance staff, and all those employed for the Commonwealth Home Support Program. “It is definitely unfair when these people are providing services to people in very similar conditions,” the chief executive of Aged &amp; Community Services Australia, Paul Sadler, said. Sadler said that provider surveys had revealed staff shortages of between 15% and 50% since the Omicron wave hit, with the 25% average figure to be released in a situation report for the sector on Tuesday. “This has been at a level unprecedented,” Sadler said. “From our point of view it’s absolutely a crisis in aged care, and we have been calling for urgent help from the government, including from the Australian Defence Force, and from whatever other sources we can to provide support.” The situation report says that while the government had been able to provide some support with a “surge” workforce of about 1,000 shifts a week, the scale was “clearly insufficient” to meet demand. “This seems unlikely to be resolved in the near future,” the report says. “Government has been working for several weeks on avenues to fill staffing shortages, including volunteers, private hospital staff, and retired and student nurses. “Unfortunately, there is no sign of a surge workforce that might approach the scale needed to address the current crisis. We ask families and clients for their support during this difficult time. Staff and providers are doing absolutely everything they can with the resources they have available.” The report says the sector had been advised that the idea of using the military for support “has been explored as an option but is not considered viable”. The latest figures from the Department of Health showed there were 23,900 active Covid cases within the aged care system across 1,261 residential aged care facilities. That included more than 14,000 staff and close to 9,000 residents. In January alone, 499 aged care residents died from Covid – more than the total number of aged care residents who passed away in 2021.The 10 funniest things I have ever seen on the internet? Like, ever? How about the last 10 things I liked on TikTok? Cool. Why has a 50-year-old got a TikTok account? Before you call the authorities, we made a kids’ show back in 2006 and most of the fans had no idea who the Umbilical Brothers were. But now we have more than 600,000 20-year-old college students captured and addicted. OK … I’m calling the authorities. 1. Face mask life hack Social distancing is easy with these mask tips. 2. Staring competition (baby edition) A masterclass in onscreen title writing. 3. Dad joke Lil Stace runs the account but it’s her dad who’s the real star. 4. Customer service Jesus Imagine this guy’s costume room! 5. Killer comedy Hope this guy is doing OK. 6. Critical head injury I’m a little biased because this is my son, Ro. 7. Stitch-up There’s a feature on TikTok called “stitch” which lets you take someone else’s video and cut yourself into it. 8. Inception The definition of self-reflection. 9. Hardball Doug Bayne co-wrote the new Umbilical Brothers show, The Distraction, which is all about our addiction to screens. The audience watch us on a screen throughout the entire show while Doug is making backgrounds and visual effects live. It’s amazing and weird and like nothing you’ve ever seen before. Like all of Doug’s stuff. 10. Lying on your CV The joy of TikTok is you can put an idea out into the world without having to think about it too much. This one is from the set of The Tourist, starring Shane and I (as far as I’m concerned). Now streaming on Stan &amp; BBC. The Umbilical Brothers’ new show, The Distraction, plays all across Australia in February. See all the dates hereAmnesty International has called on the Australian government to unequivocally condemn “crimes against humanity” after the prime minister dismissed the group’s assessment that Israel is perpetrating apartheid against Palestinians. Scott Morrison told reporters “no country is perfect”, in response to Amnesty’s 280-page report on Israel. A spokesperson for the foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, told Guardian Australia: “We do not agree with the report’s characterisations of Israel, and we remain a firm supporter of the state of Israel.” The Labor opposition also said the use of the term apartheid was “not helpful” – but it described Amnesty’s detailed report as “concerning” and urged the government to “stand up for human rights everywhere”. Amnesty International said it had concluded that Israel had “perpetrated the international wrong of apartheid, as a human rights violation and a violation of public international law”. The London-based human rights organisation said it had “demonstrated that Israel has imposed a system of oppression and domination over Palestinians wherever it exercises control over the enjoyment of their rights – across Israel and the OPT [Occupied Palestinian Territories] and with regard to Palestinian refugees”. Israel’s government swiftly dismissed the report, saying the findings were “divorced from reality”. It also accused Amnesty of antisemitism. When asked directly about the report’s findings, and whether his government would condemn Israel over the matter, Morrison said Australia – together with the US – had been among “the closest and strongest friends of Israel”. “No country is perfect,” Morrison said. “There are criticisms made of all countries, but I can assure you that Australia and my government, in particular, will remain a staunch friend of Israel.” Nikita White, a campaigner with Amnesty International Australia, said the prime minister’s response to the report was “particularly disappointing”. “While he’s right that no country is perfect, not all countries commit crimes against humanity, and when they do, Amnesty International believes that Australia has an obligation to condemn these crimes but also an obligation to act,” White said in an interview. “The prime minister needs to consider whether remaining a staunch friend will contribute to this system of apartheid and the suffering of Palestinians who are living under that system.” White said it was not good enough to raise concerns behind the scenes, because the Amnesty report “builds on a growing consensus that what Israel is doing amounts to apartheid”. Payne’s spokesperson said Australia was a strong supporter of a two-state solution “with Israel and a future Palestinian state establishing internationally recognised borders”. “The conflict between the Palestinians and Israel must be resolved so that peace and security can become normalised,” Payne’s spokesperson said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “We have always urged all parties to refrain from actions and statements that undermine the prospects for peace.” The Greens senator Janet Rice said she would be writing to Payne “to urge a response to Amnesty’s powerful report”. “The PM’s ‘no country is perfect’ is a feeble and absurd response,” Rice said. Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong, said the report’s findings were concerning. “We expect the government to review it closely, assess the situation on the ground, and make representations about Australia’s view,” Wong said. “Labor does not agree with the use of the term ‘apartheid’. It’s not a term that’s been found to apply by any international court and is not helpful in progressing the meaningful dialogue and negotiation necessary to achieve a just and enduring peace.” Israel’s foreign minister, Yair Lapid, had earlier rejected the report, saying: “Amnesty quotes lies spread by terrorist organisations.” “I hate to use the argument that if Israel were not a Jewish state, nobody in Amnesty would dare argue against it, but in this case, there is no other possibility,” Lapid said, adding: “Israel is not perfect, but it is a democracy committed to international law and open to scrutiny, with a free press and strong supreme court.” White said the foreign minister’s response was “not unexpected” and said Amnesty International “stands against discrimination of any kind, including antisemitism”. She said Amnesty had “a long history of reporting on Hamas’s human rights abuses and the human rights abuses of several Palestinian armed groups and the Palestinian Authority as well”. The executive director of the Australian Centre for International Justice, Rawan Arraf, said Morrison “would benefit from looking up the crime of apartheid in our criminal code”. “It’s a serious criminal offence which Australia has an obligation to prevent and punish,” Arraf said. “Australia was also a strong supporter of the apartheid regime in South Africa, and it took a widespread movement of ordinary people, civil society and unions to come together and force change, this needs to happen again here.” Israel’s embassy in Canberra was contacted for comment but directed Guardian Australia to the statement from the foreign minister.A majority of voters oppose a key plank of the Coalition’s religious discrimination bill that would allow discriminatory speech and say they want greater protections for LGBTQ+ students and teachers, a new poll suggests. The YouGov Galaxy poll of 1,030 voters, conducted for lobby group Just Equal, suggests the public doesn’t back the bill which some government MPs oppose due to the potential impact on marginalised students. The poll comes after Citipointe Christian College urged families to sign an enrolment contract that included asking them to agree “homosexual acts” were immoral. That controversy caused Labor and Liberal moderate MPs to warn against waving the bill through federal parliament when it resumes on Tuesday. The poll suggests 77% of voters oppose the “statements of belief” clause that would mean statements grounded in religious belief do not breach discrimination laws banning speech that humiliated, intimidated, insulted or ridiculed people based on protected attributes. Some 64% of those polled said it should be against the law for religious schools to expel or refuse to enrol students who were bisexual, gay, lesbian or transgender, including children of same-sex couples; while 62% said the same of dismissing a teacher for their sexuality. Opposition to allowing harmful speech in the name of religion was higher among Labor voters (81%) as was support for prohibiting schools from discriminating in enrolment (75%). On Friday, two parliamentary inquiries into the religious discrimination bill are due to report before a short parliamentary sitting in which Labor support would probably be required to pass the proposed legislation. In both committees, the Coalition and Labor are collaborating with the aim of writing a joint report, but Labor could go further in expressing significant concerns about the statements of belief clause and expanded hiring and firing powers over teachers. The Greens oppose the bill. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But even with in-principle support from the committees, which are chaired by Liberal senator Sarah Henderson and National MP Anne Webster, the government would still need to force a vote on a bill that has become extremely contentious in its own ranks. Labor’s holding position, adopted by caucus in November, is that the government must “deliver on its three-year-old commitment to protect LGBT students from discrimination”, suggesting it may make amendments. But Labor could delay a final verdict until the government has responded to the committees’ reports in the hope that divisions on the Coalition side grow. Three Liberal MPs have reserved their position and a further four – Angie Bell, Katie Allen, Fiona Martin, and Dave Sharma – have called for LGBTQ+ students to be protected from being expelled in the same package as the religious discrimination bill. In answers to the committees’ questions on notice, the attorney general’s department revealed it did work on drafting to remove the provision from the Sex Discrimination Act that allows gay students to be expelled, which would implement Michaelia Cash’s purported deal with Bell and the other MPs. But in December, Cash appeared to renege on that by saying protections for students would have to wait at least 12 months for a separate review process. Allen also commissioned work from academic Liam Elphick about how the statements of belief clause, if retained, could be softened by ensuring it no longer overrides state discrimination laws. Opponents say the case for the religious discrimination bill has been weakened by one of Queensland’s largest independent schools asking families to sign an enrolment contract that includes asking them to agree “homosexual acts” are immoral, listing them along with bestiality, incest and paedophilia as “offensive to God”. The “statement of faith” required for enrolment at Citipointe Christian College also includes statements that imply transgender students will be recognised only by their “biological sex” at the school – that students should identify “with the gender that God bestowed”. Labor MP Graham Perrett, the deputy chair of the human rights committee considering the bill, told Guardian Australia that contract “might focus the mind of all 227 politicians about what this bill might mean for multi-faith and multicultural communities”. Perrett noted that every state and territory except New South Wales and South Australia already had some form of protection against religious discrimination, but the case of Citipointe “will certainly focus the mind about this legislation the prime minister personally introduced”. Allen said her support for the religious discrimination bill was “conditional on protection of gay and trans students’ rights” and removing the section of the SDA allowing their expulsion would be “critical to that support”. “The Brisbane school [Citipointe Christian College] highlights how problematic statements of belief can be,” she told Guardian Australia. Bell said Citipointe’s decision demonstrated that “for many years, religious schools have preserved the ability to terminate a child’s enrolment based on their sexual orientation, gender identity, marital or relationship status or pregnancy”. Bell said she would continue to negotiate to ensure children were treated on merit not sexual or gender identity. “A child should be able to attend any Australian education institution without hindrance or judgment,” she said, urging Citipointe college to “focus on the education of children and fostering a positive environment, where every child feels safe”. A spokesperson for Just Equal Australia, Brian Greig, said the Morrison government “must reassess its ideological push for this divisive bill and the opposition must recognise the strong objections to this bill from Labor voters”. “Australians do not support special privileges for religious people to be exempt from anti-discrimination laws,” he said. “Nor do they support a bill that allows people to discriminate against others in the name of faith.” Greig said the bill must not be rushed through parliament in the “chaotic environment” of the last few sitting days before the election. “This bill must be withdrawn and rewritten to remove its unwanted, harmful content.”The longer a policy paper, the more likely it is that it’s full of waffle. In the case of the so-called “levelling up” white paper, I don’t doubt, for a minute, the sincerity of Michael Gove, who for a long time has been interested in social mobility and is, from his own political standpoint, genuinely trying to open up opportunity. But when you’re in a cabinet and government that holds, as its central tenet of philosophy, that it’s no business of government and the state to provide the framework for greater equality, the chances of success are zilch. Leaving aside that much of the funding is already announced, and the rest unclear, and concentrating on the few new measures proposed, there is little that will genuinely make a difference in “levelling up” the country. The 12 national ambitions to be achieved by 2030 don’t even begin to address the intergenerational challenges and the damage caused by austerity cuts since 2010. The scope of the missions range from transport to local pride, but only two focus on transforming the lives of individuals through education. New bus routes, home ownership and spruced-up streets are important, but unless people’s lives are changed, the physical environment will begin to deteriorate once again. The white paper recommends a “significant” increase in primary school children reaching expected standards in reading, writing and maths. We know from the report of Sir Kevan Collins, who was appointed by the government to develop plans for post-Covid recovery in the education system, that vast sums of money are needed to reverse the emergence of a divide in outcomes. But, instead of £15bn over five years, which would have made the difference, the government allocated £1.4bn. The much-vaunted national tutoring programme got off to a stumbling, but relatively solid, start. However, it was effectively halted by the government as it tendered the contract for the second part of the programme to the cheapest provider. It would appear that from September, only 15% of the agreed take-up had actually been achieved. What is needed now is a return to clearly targeted funding for the most disadvantaged children, extending the pupil premium and adopting Collins’ recommendations in full. Education doesn’t stopat school-leaving age, and the report sets the goal of a “significant” rise in the numbers completing high-quality skills training across the UK. According to the Institute for Fiscal Studies, there has been a 50% fall in spending since 2010 on adult education. Despite the government’s rhetoric on investment in skills, it will not be until 2025 that its “guarantee” of training will kick in. The funding pot for skills from the Departments for Work and Pensions, and which has already been announced, is often aimed at attempting to fill the jobs left by the million-plus migrants who have returned home, with little emphasis on planning for the future workforce, the digital revolution or climate change. Universities are a key driving force for economic and social renewal across the country. For young and old alike, these anchor institutions, and the knowledge transfer made possible by them, can be transformational in the most deprived communities, and areas previously reliant on heavy industry. But there is nothing in the missions to improve their lot. In fact, government policy is actively undermining universities in the north of England. The Office for Students has been asked to mark down universities if their cohorts do not move into “skilled work” after graduation, something less available in areas outside of the south due to regional inequality. This means northern students attending university nearer home will be tempted to leave their areas for well-paid jobs elsewhere. To help make regeneration a reality, contradictions in government policy must be set aside. To mislead people into believing that you are doing something transformational when you have no intention of committing the resources or policies to make that possible is to create greater mistrust and disillusionment. Promises of levelling up may temporarily help some Conservative MPs hold on to their seats, but at the long-term price of undermining confidence in the democratic process. David Blunkett was secretary of state for education and employment between 1997 and 2001Jimmy Kimmel Late-night hosts continued to check in on the House’s slowly evolving investigation into the January 6 insurrection, including a report that many of the official documents handed over by the National Archives had been ripped up by Donald Trump. “The National Archives didn’t explain how they know they were ripped up by Trump,” said Jimmy Kimmel on Tuesday evening. “My guess is tiny little barbecue sauce fingerprints.” It’s not surprising, given that Trump’s habit for ripping up official documents has been well publicized. “He was under the impression that the documents couldn’t be put back together because his son Eric ate all the glue at the White House,” Kimmel quipped. The documents are intact, however, thanks to National Archives employees who have taped the papers back together. “I love that Robert Mueller couldn’t get him but Trump might finally get brought down by a roll of Scotch tape,” Kimmel joked. Stephen Colbert Tuesday 1 February, marked the first day of Black History Month – “for Americans, this is a time to celebrate the black experience and black contributions to our country,” noted Stephen Colbert on the Late Show. “And for corporate brands, it’s a time to suggest that Langston Hughes would’ve enjoyed the new Wendy’s Double Baconator.” In other, more ominous news, the House committee on the January 6 attack on the Capitol received evidence that Trump, in the weeks after the 2020 election, personally directed his lawyer, Rudy Giuliani, to ask the Department of Homeland Security if it could seize voting machines in swing states. “Let’s be clear: it is difficult, after years of building a thick, protective callous over my heart and my brain just to protect myself from the hot black tar of his narcissistic, evil impulses, for me to take this information in, for the gargantuan and grotesque violation of everything this country holds dear,” said Colbert of the information, first reported by the New York Times. “But I think it’s worth taking a moment right now just to let this sink in. Just to marinate in his madness,” he continued. “Because the former president – still the leader of one of the two major parties, who has all the Republican balls in a little velvet pouch that he wears around his neck like an amulet – wanted troops, US troops, to go into your local polling place, grab the machines, throw them in a truck, and then God knows what? Waterboard them until they he won? “You should be alarmed, even if you voted for him, because military coups do not lead to healthy societies,” he concluded. “Nobody ever says, ‘if only we could emulate the economic miracle that is Myanmar.’” Trevor Noah And on the Daily Show, Trevor Noah celebrated the retirement of the NFL great Tom Brady at the age of 44, after 22 seasons and seven Super Bowls. “Whether you loved him or hated him, you have to admire Tom Brady’s journey,” Noah said. “I mean, when this dude started his career, he was picked almost dead last in the draft. And yet he ended up dominating the game for 20 years. Which is an important lesson for all the little kids out there who might be coming in last. “And that lesson is: this probably won’t happen for you. See, this was only going to happen one time, and Tom Brady took it, I’m sorry.” The retirement isn’t surprising, Noah continued, as press swirled around unofficial reports that Brady would hang up his cleats for days. “What is surprising is that at 44 years old this guy was still dominating the NFL! Think about it: the NFL, where people car accident each other for a living. And this guy was doing that in his 40s. Most people I know in his 40s are like, ‘ah, my back hurts, I think I slept too long.’” Brady’s retirement raises the question: is he the best quarterback of all time? “Some people say yes, because he holds all the records and won the most Super Bowls,” Noah answered. “Other people say ‘no, because he didn’t do that to my team!’”Michael Gove has announced the government’s plan for levelling up, with a focus on devolution, transport, education and raising the pay and productivity of towns and cities outside London and the south-east. It follows decades of attempts by successive governments to spread prosperity across the country, most recently with George Osborne’s northern powerhouse plan and Theresa May’s industrial strategy. The focus on living standards has been welcomed, but it comes after a decade of austerity that has made the task harder. “The lack of new funding announced today, and an approach to devolution that appears to be quite centrally controlled, suggest more needs to be done before the reality of these plans meets the rhetoric,” said Katie Schmuecker, deputy director of policy &amp; partnerships at the Joseph Rowntree Foundation poverty charity. Funding At Rishi Sunak’s spending review in October the chancellor announced an expansion in government funding to end austerity. However, the Institute for Fiscal Studies said many areas would still have funding lower than in 2010 by 2025, despite a steady rise in pressures for public spending from an ageing population and the climate challenge to hit net zero. Local authority funding, regarded as a key mechanism for levelling up, has been cut particularly hard. Central government grants – including retained business rates – have been reduced 37% in real-terms over the decade to 2020, an effective cut worth £15bn in real terms, according to the Institute for Government. Britain’s poorest local authorities have been hit hardest. Salford has suffered the deepest cuts in the UK, with a 48% reduction since 2010 according to the Centre for Progressive Policy. Red wall areas such as Wigan, Gateshead and Rochdale are also in the top 10 for cuts, with budget reductions of more than a third. Poor regions that benefited from EU funding – such as Cornwall, Wales and north-east England – are likely to get less after Brexit, despite Boris Johnson promising to match support allocated by Brussels. The Commons’ Treasury committee warned last week the UK’s post-Brexit “shared prosperity fund” is worth 40% less, with an average annual budget worth £1.5bn compared with £2.5bn from the EU. Wages Gove has set out targets for pay, employment and productivity rises in every part of the UK by 2030, with the gap between top and bottom places narrowing. It will require making a start at fixing among the worst productivity gaps in Europe, with regional differences the worst since 1901. It’s a long-running issue, stretching back at least to deindustrialisation in the 1980s and 1990s. It’s also a task that comes amid the cost of living crisis, with workers’ pay expected to fall in real terms in 2021 due to inflation hitting the highest rates in three decades. Real average weekly earnings across the UK remain below the peak recorded in February 2008, in the worst period for wage growth since the Napoleonic wars. The IFS has warned real wages are unlikely to rise significantly by the middle of the decade, leaving the average worker £13,000 worse off than under pre-2008 financial crisis pay growth trends. Narrowing regional gaps will be hard. The thinktank said workers in London were paid £20 an hour on average, more than 60% higher than £13 an hour in Scarborough and Grimsby – although the differences at the top end are starkest. While wages are similar across regions for the poorest 10% in Britain, the top 10th of earners in the capital get 80% more an hour than the top 10th in Scarborough. Cuts to benefits will make the task harder. Poorer areas have higher proportions of benefit claimants. Analysts warned when the government cut universal credit by £20 a week in October that “red wall” constituencies would be hardest hit. Inequality has actually widened since Johnson’s 2019 election victory. According to the New Economics Foundation, the poorest 50% of families in Britain are on average £110 a year worse off in real terms, while the richest 5% are £3,300 a year richer between December 2019 and December 2021. Education Levelling up targets include increasing educational attainment, skills and training. However, it follows an unprecedented period for cuts in the education budget. According to the IFS, per pupil spending in schools will have returned to 2010 levels by 2024, highlighting “a remarkable lack of priority afforded to the education system since 2010.” The thinktank said the extent to which schools’ funding is targeted at schools with the most deprived pupils has declined since the early 2010s. Since 2013, the average funding per pupil for the fifth of schools with the highest levels of deprivation has dropped from 35% higher than for the fifth with the lowest levels of deprivation, to 23% higher in 2019. Despite the levelling up plan, the Learning and Work Institute estimates that skills investment will still be £750m lower in 2025 than in 2010. Stephen Evans, the thinktank’s chief executive, said: “To truly ‘level up’ demands better investment, greater local control and long-term commitment. Unfortunately, the education and skills plans fall short.” Health The plan includes a mission to narrow gaps in healthy life expectancy between local areas and increase it nationally by five years by 2035 replicates a target set by Theresa May in 2018 under her industrial strategy. Over the past decade, however, the gap in the number of years a person can expect to live a healthy life has widened to become as large as that between the UK and Sudan, according to the Centre for Progressive Policy. Reflecting rising inequality between rich and poor areas, people in Blaenau Gwent in south Wales can expect up to 16.4 fewer years of good health than those in Wokingham in Berkshire. Jo Bibby, director of health at the Health Foundation, said the ambition of the government plan was welcome, but that several of the worst places in the UK for healthy life expectancy would be outside expanded mayoral authorities. Before Covid-19, the health policy thinktank calculated it would take 75 years on current trends to improve UK healthy life expectancy by five years. “It appears the government has failed to grasp the enormity of the challenge,” Bibby said. “The regeneration schemes are too narrowly focused to address the entrenched inequalities in left behind areas.”CNN chair Jeff Zucker, one of the US’s most powerful media executives, resigned on Wednesday following the disclosure that he was having a relationship with another senior executive at the news organization. In a memo to staff obtained by the New York Times, Zucker said he was in a consensual relationship with his “closest colleague” and had failed to disclose it, as required by company policy. The colleague is Allison Gollust, CNN’s executive vice-president and chief marketing officer. Gollust and Zucker have worked together for 20 years. The relationship came to light during the network’s investigation into the conduct of Chris Cuomo, the CNN anchor fired for trying to help his brother, the former New York governor Andrew Cuomo, fight accusations of sexual misconduct. “As part of the investigation into Chris Cuomo’s tenure at CNN, I was asked about a consensual relationship with my closest colleague, someone I have worked with for more than 20 years,” Zucker wrote. “I acknowledged the relationship evolved in recent years. I was required to disclose it when it began but I didn’t. I was wrong.” Zucker, 56, also stepped down as chair of WarnerMedia’s news and sports division. In a statement obtained by the Times, Gollust said she was remaining in her role at CNN. She said: “Jeff and I have been close friends and professional partners for over 20 years. Recently, our relationship changed during Covid. I regret that we didn’t disclose it at the right time. I’m incredibly proud of my time at CNN and look forward to continuing the great work we do every day.” Both Zucker and Gollust are divorced. Zucker stood by Cuomo, then one of CNN’s biggest stars, for months amid revelations that the anchor was advising aides to his brother on how to fend off sexual misconduct allegations that led to the governor’s resignation last August. The former president and CEO of NBCUniversal, Zucker has long been one of the dominant executives in US media. He launched the media careers of Donald Trump on The Apprentice and Joe Rogan on Fear Factor. He joined CNN in 2013 and soon found himself at odds with Trump over CNN’s coverage of the former president, who labeled CNN an “enemy of the people”. Zucker had been expected to step down from CNN in the coming month after CNN’s parent company, US telecoms company AT&amp;T, completes the spinoff of its WarnerMedia media assets into a separate business in combination with Discovery. Zucker’s resignation is effective immediately.The Manchester City footballer Benjamin Mendy has appeared in court to face a new allegation of attempted rape. Mendy, who appeared in the dock at Chester crown court, is now accused of nine offences relating to six alleged victims. A judge ruled that the new charge, one of attempted rape involving a new complainant, could be reported. The France international spoke only to confirm his identity and leaned his head towards a French interpreter who sat between him and his co-defendant, Louis Saha Matturie. Mendy, 27, of Prestbury, Cheshire, is accused of offences including seven counts of rape relating to four women, one of sexual assault and the latest charge. Mendy joined City from Monaco in 2017 for a reported £52m, then a record fee for a defender, and has made 75 appearances. The club suspended him after he was charged. Matturie, 40, of Eccles, Salford, is accused of 10 offences, involving seven women, including seven counts of rape relating to five women and three of sexual assault. All the charges span from late 2020 to August 2021. Both defendants were given bail in January. Judge Patrick Thompson set a further pre-trial hearing for 11 March.Donald Trump will charge top-paying guests $250,000 to attend a “Take Back Congress Candidate Forum” at his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida this month – with proceeds going to his own Super Pac, rather than Republicans who will actually try to take back Congress. Nor is the top price tag, which guarantees a private dinner and picture with Trump as well as VIP seating at the forum, necessarily the full cost for any couple who chooses to pay it. On Twitter on Wednesday, the New York Times reporter and Trump watcher Maggie Haberman said: “$250k lets you pay for a Mar-a-Lago guest room.” Further down the menu, a couple paying $100,000 will get a photo with Trump and seating at a private dinner with endorsed candidates, with comments from Trump. For $50,000, guests will get the dinner and the Trump comments, but a picture only with “endorsed candidates”. Price tags descend to $5,000 per couple, for attendance – but presumably less than primo seating – at the dinner with comments from Trump. Emphasising Trump’s grip on the Republican party, Haberman pointed out that the former president “is spending almost no money on other Republicans so far. But he’s trying to raise for his group using congressional Republicans.” The Mar-a-Lago event is notionally aimed at the midterm elections in November this year, when Republicans are favoured to take back the House and possibly the Senate. A House takeover would see Trump well positioned to dictate to loyalists in party leadership, under Kevin McCarthy, the current minority leader. They are expected to pursue aggressive investigations of the Biden administration including a revenge impeachment and even, should the former speaker and McCarthy adviser Newt Gingrich be believed, the attempted jailing of members of the committee currently investigating the January 6 insurrection. Trump has his eyes on the 2024 presidential election, when he has strongly hinted he will run for the White House again. At a rally in Texas last week, he promised to pardon January 6 rioters and urged supporters to stage huge protests against prosecutors in New York and Georgia investigating his business affairs and election subversion. Trump has amassed a huge campaign war chest, of $122m. In a statement this week, spokesman Taylor Budowuch said the former president had “built a political organisation that continues to capture and define the future of the Republican party. “There is no question that the Make America Great Again (Maga!) wave is set to crash across the midterms and carry forward all the way through 2024.” But Trump’s leadership committee, Save America, this week declared donations of just $205,000 to endorsed candidates in the second half of 2021 – $45,000 less than the tag for a top-priced ticket to the dinner and forum at Mar-a-Lago on 23 February (not including guest room). CNN also reported that Trump’s Make America Great Again, Again! committee has spent around $1.7m on legal expenses as Trump fights investigations and congressional oversight. It has been widely reported that the Republican National Committee has helped to pay Trump’s legal bills. Trump’s Super Pac includes among its officers Pam Bondi, a former attorney general of Florida to whom Trump once controversially donated; the former ambassador to Germany and controversial former acting director of national intelligence Ric Grenell; and Matt Whitaker, briefly and controversially acting attorney general in the Trump administration. Kimberley Guilfoyle, Donald Trump Jr’s fiancee, is national finance chair.Twenty years on, after innumerable TV series and spin-offs, lawsuits and movie franchise iterations the Jackass crew is back with yet another festival of fantastically pointless and immature bad taste, including a new younger generation of Jackass stuntsters who tell the camera they can’t believe they’re on the show they grew up with. The last film was Jackass 3D in 2010, part of the 3D craze in cinema which has now been quietly abandoned without anyone noticing or caring. But Jackass marches on. As ever, the guys are taking turns doing stupid and dangerous things, while the rest of the gang scream with supportive, incredulous laughter and the participants scream with laughter right back at them once the stunt is over. In fact, the real Jackass gonzo discipline would seem to be keeping up the grinning party mood even after a heavyweight boxer has hit you in the balls. Are there any cutting-room-floor-moments when any of them seriously lost their sense of humour? The gang are getting attacked by bees, bears, bulls. One woman gets a “scorpion botox”: the creature stings her on the lips. Jackass leader Johnny Knoxville is fired into the air wearing feathery wings in homage to the Icarus myth. It hardly needs saying that the Jackass identity is overwhelmingly male – but what also needs saying is that the movies are unique in popular culture in actually showing the penis: that part of the male body that is fastidiously avoided in even the most avowedly explicit films. In Jackass Forever, the penis is shown repeatedly, explicitly and in a way that’s weirdly the opposite of macho. Its vulnerability and absurdity is what comes across in Jackass. It’s like an exotic, strange creature, a victim-version of the menacing creatures in the film – like the huge spider that in one very ingenious game is set up in a plastic tube interconnecting two plastic helmets in which two players’ heads are enclosed. Each has to blow the spider at the other and the loser, having let the spider into his helmet, has to let the spider bite him. “This isn’t a Mensa convention!” says one player. Is that disingenuous? Isn’t there, in fact, some advanced showbiz intelligence and surrealist savvy in the way Jackass is set up and edited? Either way, it has a horror-comedy impact. • Jackass Forever is released on 4 February in cinemas.Bob Kerslake states that Downing Street has betrayed the civil service (1 February). Surely it is we the people who have been betrayed by the civil service? Maggie Owen Hockwold, Norfolk • In response to Richard Smith (Letters, 31 January): yes, Deezer allows you to transfer your Spotify favourites over easily, but if this is meant to be a protest against Spotify’s hosting of Joe Rogan you will be disappointed. Deezer also hosts some of his material. Tracy Berger Brisbane, Australia • My Welsh grandmother had a raft of funny sayings (Letters, 1 February), but my favourite was when she had an indiscreet moment and would say, “An empty house is better than having a bad tenant”. I will let readers work out what the indiscretion was. Ralph Griffiths Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire • Was Emma Howard Boyd’s letter a serious defence of the performance of the Environment Agency in combating pollution (30 January)? If so, her admission that the EA, which she chairs, received “more than 76,000” reports of incidents last year and managed to respond to “hundreds” rather undermines her efforts. Colin Piper Winchester, Hampshire • Will correspondents please stop listing institutions we can be proud of. You are just giving the Tories ideas for what to destroy next. Lawrence Ahlemeyer Beckenham, London • The prime minister’s position: un10able. Martin Constantinides Ely, Cambridgeshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The latest report from the Independent Office for Police Conduct raises the question as to whether the Metropolitan police can ever be trusted to reform itself (Met officers joked about raping women, police watchdog reveals, 1 February). The list of crimes proven against officers in recent years is as shocking as it is long, ranging from an apparent endemic culture of racism, misogyny, homophobia and bullying, to corruption, rape and murder. It is time to strip back the Met from its bloated and pernicious condition, and reform it with new leadership, a new name and a remit to engage with the diverse communities that it claims to serve, not just the white middle classes and the establishment. It is a failing organisation with an annual budget approaching £4bn, much of which could be better spent in regenerating the deprived and marginalised communities that the Met has played a part in stigmatising. Increasing police budgets has not led to a reduction in crime. It is time to divert the money to social and infrastructure investments, which would make a real difference to communities. Now that would be levelling up. David Coates Coed y Glyn, Wrexham • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.“Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the Beijing Games 2022! Let me hear your voice!” And so to the Ice Cube for the mixed curling for an intriguing first day of action at these XXIV Winter Olympics. Before the opening stone was cast, a Chinese military band of bagpipers dressed in kilts blasted out Scotland the Brave, while a dancing panda mascot pulled shapes. But the surreal soon turned into the reassuringly familiar as the British gold-medal favourites, Bruce Mouat and Jennifer Dodds, secured an opening night victory over Sweden. Unlike at the Tokyo Summer Games last year, a select band of around 200 spectators were also on hand to watch this most slow-burning of sports – although whether the crowd was quietly enthralled, or merely bored, was unclear until they exploded into sustained cheers after China won a sudden-death match over Switzerland. Don’t be surprised if a similar switch gets flicked in Britain over the coming fortnight, just as it did when Rhona Martin inspired Team GB’s women to curling gold in Salt Lake City 20 years ago. Britain’s men and mixed doubles teams are world champions, and the women recently won the European title. True, it is early days. But there is a notable confidence that a three-pronged attack on the medal table is not out of the question. “We will be trying to improve on that but it is a great start,” Mouat said, after a match that was not nearly as comfortable as the 9-5 scoreline suggests. “We know Sweden will be at the top of the table at the end of the week so we are really chuffed with how we played.” Mouat also conceded that hearing the bagpipers put a spring in his step, adding: “We saw them outside the venue a couple of days ago so we knew they were here and were excited. They did not disappoint.” Meanwhile Dodds believes the friendship between the pair could make all the difference when the mixed doubles gets down to the business end next week. “We’ve known each other since we were 10,” she said. “The fact that we’re friends from way back and the dynamic that we have has helped us. We’re not getting at each other’s throats if we’re down in a game; we’re being positive and trying to get each other’s momentum going.” These Games do not officially kick off until Friday’s opening ceremony, but after a week dominated by criticism from human rights groups and rising Covid cases inside the Olympic bubble, with 11 people now hospitalised, organisers will be relieved that some of the world’s focus can now be diverted towards the field of play. That message was conveyed by the front page of the China Daily’s Winter Olympics supplement. Its headline? “Gold Vision: How President Xi’s leadership is delivering ‘fantastic, extraordinary and excellent’ Winter Games’. “Beijing’s vision of hosting a sustainable Winter Olympics is materialising in a big way, with the Games’ venues and projects primed to benefit local communities and the economy far beyond the closing ceremony,” was the message. The official mouth organ for the Chinese government also hailed the three curling tournaments – which are all 10-team round-robin events, leading to a semi-final and final – and the fact the games are being staged at the same venue where Michael Phelps won a record eight Olympic gold medals. Incredibly after a feat of engineering worthy of Brunel, what was nicknamed the Water Cube in 2008 has temporarily become the Ice Cube. The work has required organisers to completely drain the 50m pool before complex scaffolding and mounting plates went in, and an insulating and waterproof layer were put down. Finally a removable ice making system was installed and the ice was sculptured and sprayed. And, just like that, a 10-lane Olympic swimming pool became a four-sheet curling rink. “To be in the same arena as all those amazing athletes before such as Phelps and Rebecca Adlington means a lot to us,” Mouat said. “Hopefully we can keep it going.” A range of sensors in the building are designed to monitor the temperature of the ice and facility. But there were some understandable teething issues, with the British team struggling to read the ice as it slowed during the course of their match. “Both teams noticed around the fifth it was just starting to slow a wee bit and then we just had to play that bit heavier,” Dodds explained. That may have been a factor in a patchy performance that was only settled on the final end. With Team GB 8-5 up, Sweden had an easy shot to take the match to sudden death only for Sweden’s Almida de Val to miss a sitter. “We expect them to make most of their shots and this time we were fortunate it went our way,” Dodds said. “We set up a good end and I just missed one with my last. We can build on it.” While Britain, the USA and many western countries have announced they will stage a diplomatic boycott of the Games, Russia’s president Vladimir Putin is coming to Beijing, and Saudi Arabia leader Mohammed bin Salman and Pakistan’s Imran Khan are expected to attend the opening ceremony. Putin and Xi are also expected to sign a deal to increase capacity of the Power of Siberia, a 2,485-mile pipeline that transfers gas from eastern Russia to China. That is another sign that sport and politics are intertwined – and Putin, of course, will watch Russia’s athletes competing in their third consecutive Olympics without their flag and national anthem.Your editorial (30 January) says that boosting the sentencing power of magistrates is the wrong way to reduce the backlog of criminal cases. I agree. There is a more effective solution, and that is to restrict the number of “either way” cases that defendants can elect to have heard in the crown court. There are three categories of criminal offence. One (eg assault, criminal damage up to £5,000) can only be tried in magistrates courts. One (eg murder, firearms offences) can only be tried in crown courts. In the middle are “either way” cases (eg theft, burglary), which magistrates can accept, but defendants have the right to elect to have heard in crown courts – and often do. This creates anomalies. Three magistrates will hear a case where £4,000 worth of criminal damage to property is alleged, but a charge of stealing a £6 chicken goes to jury trial in a crown court if the defendant wishes, and it will be many months, if not years, before the case is heard. Extending magistrates’ sentencing powers will have little impact on the crown court backlog. Recategorising the less serious “either way” offences so that they can only be heard in magistrates courts would immediately relieve the workload in crown courts. Nicky Ottaway Bletchingley, Surrey • It’s pleasing to see the Guardian shine a light on the problems plaguing our criminal justice system. The £135m-a-year funding increase recommended in the independent review of criminal legal aid should be implemented immediately. Otherwise, we fear that criminal defence solicitors will leave at ever faster rates, seriously compromising the government’s ability to clear the huge backlog in the criminal courts. Hundreds of criminal defence firms have shut their doors over the past decade. Our research shows that the solicitors who remain are ageing, and some areas risk being left with insufficient criminal duty solicitors to answer the call when someone needs representing in a police station. You can pour all the money you like into policing and prosecution, but without a healthy criminal defence profession, British justice will cease to exist. I Stephanie Boyce President, Law Society of England and Wales • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Anand Menon rightly points out that the disastrous effects of Brexit on trade, tax rises and growth are now becoming apparent (Covid has been an easy scapegoat for economic disruption, but Brexit is biting, 31 January). He’s right, too, to note that Covid has become an easy scapegoat for economic disruption. However, the political realignment also brought about by Brexit seems to offer little chance for reopening the process of rejoining the EU, given that it resulted from a referendum whose legitimacy we all have to accept, however reluctantly. Membership of the European Economic Area could be the answer. Nothing on the referendum voting slip committed us to the hard Brexit to which we find ourselves condemned. Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway are also outside the EU, but covered by the EEA agreement that guarantees their compliance with EU legislation on the single European market, competition and employment rights. Prof Menon observes that 57% of Britons now think the government is handling Brexit badly, so surely they too will increasingly want to find a way through. EEA membership would allow us to remain outside the EU while regaining some of the practical advantages of EU membership. It would also put us in a stronger position to rejoin the EU if and when the electorate so decided. Michael Gold Emeritus professor of comparative employment relations, Royal Holloway, University of London • Once again it is claimed that the economists who opposed Brexit warned that it would lead to catastrophe (The post-Brexit economic crisis never materialised – Labour is right to move on, 31 January). At the time (2016), serious observers such as the National Institute of Economic and Social Research and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development predicted that the long-run fall in GDP resulting from a Brexit where we left the single market would be 3.2% and 5.1% respectively. Split the difference and we get a fall of a bit over 4%, roughly what the Office for Budget Responsibility currently believes. “Long run” means comparing the situation in, say, 2030 with what would have happened if we had stayed in. No catastrophe, no crisis, just a slow-burn decline in national wellbeing. When Keir Starmer said there was “no case” for rejoining, I take it that meant there is no realistic possibility, not that staying out somehow makes us wealthier. Simon Price Professor of finance, Essex Business School • Last week, I ordered five copies of my book about the Spanish civil war from a UK publisher for delivery to Madrid. The wholesale cost of the books and postage was £48. The carrier then demanded an additional €40 to cover the tariff charged on the delivery of goods from a non-EU country. Evidently, this Brexit tax nearly doubles the cost of the transaction. Labour’s shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, recently made the welcome pledge that the next Labour government would be “pro-business”. But she then said that she saw no prospect of the UK rejoining the single market for the next 50 years. It is hard to reconcile the two statements. Businesses across the country are complaining about the barriers they must now leap to trade with the EU. Labour’s reticence in talking up the benefits of integration with the EU single market is a policy choice that the party must revise. Dr David Mathieson Madrid • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.We are sick of being let down. That’s the truth of it. The north of England has a history of being overlooked by both Labour and the Conservatives, so when Boris Johnson declared he was going to “level up” Britain, many who were proud to hail from beyond the M25 were willing to hear him out – regardless of their normal political persuasions. The promise of a burgeoning north recovering at last from years of underinvestment and neglect convinced dyed-in-the-wool Labour voters to switch allegiances. Johnson’s blue band of parliamentary newcomers broke the “red wall” in constituencies from Bury to Bishop Auckland in 2019. And it’s no wonder – Labour, which had controlled these councils and parliamentary seats for generations, was just as guilty of letting down many of these traditional working-class communities. The political stars, it seemed, were aligned for a once-in-a-generation event: a government empowered by an 80-seat majority, elected on the promise of raising up the forgotten-about areas of the north. It was as welcome as it was overdue – all we needed to know was what it actually meant in practice. Primed with an array of buzzwords, soundbites and promises, we waited for the clarity that would turn the slogans into action. The pandemic hit. So we waited some more. We were dazzled by talk of the levelling-up fund and the towns fund. We kept waiting. We were told all would become clear in the white paper. The white paper was delayed. Now the wait is finally over. To be honest, I wish we were still waiting – because at least waiting allows for some hope. This white paper feels like the ailing levelling-up agenda taking its dying breath as a hapless Michael Gove runs around with a defibrillator, assuring us that everything will be OK. The trouble is, the defibrillator isn’t plugged in – or at least the electricity bill hasn’t been paid (probably because they can’t afford the spiralling prices). Few would disagree with the white paper’s 12 “missions”, from cutting crime to narrowing gaps in life expectancy and investing in research projects outside the south of England. Yet these 12 targets are not accompanied by new funding beyond that already announced in the spending review, and several comprise just another set of slogans and buzzwords – from “pride in place”, which will apparently “rise across the UK”, to a promised increase in “wellbeing”. The plan smacks of a rush job, with one person briefed on the plans before the white paper’s release telling the Guardian that the 12 targets were “all over the place”, adding: “One is about raising life expectancy, and it literally had ‘by X’ in the draft when I saw it.” The full white paper is more than 300 pages long but is similarly scattergun and vague. It includes a timeline showing the largest cities in the world since 7,000BC, as though the solutions to inequality in Britain might lie in discussion of Jericho or Thebes rather than a bit closer to home. Steve Rotheram, mayor for the Liverpool city region, argues that it’s little more than a long retelling of old ideas: “Although there were a few encouraging elements, it is largely a rehashing of things we have already heard before … It reads like a recipe cooked up during Veganuary – something severely lacking in meat.” The reality is that without clear strategies, measurable targets and proper funding we can’t tackle the entrenched divisions we face – and nothing materially new has been added to the debate by this white paper despite the years of promises. There is little here that can really tackle the divide between north and south, rich and poor – which all too often are really the same things. And Labour can get off its soapbox too. Yes, the Tories have been in power long enough to have made a difference, but this issue didn’t appear from nowhere in the past decade. Unlike Covid, the virus of inequality spread slowly and cruelly throughout the 20th century and into this one, through a lack of a clear post-industrialisation strategy and through privatisation. Tony Blair’s vision of Cool Britannia brought the Gallagher brothers to Downing Street but didn’t create lasting jobs in Hyndburn, my home town, where the crumbling industrial mills still stand in testimony to generations of neglect. Johnson’s government was right that something radical needed to change – but it has failed to identify what that is or how it is going to do it. Analysis by the Guardian based on the levelling-up funding announced so far has found that the council in Accrington, my home town, will receive just £2.85 a head, while Sajid Javid’s constituency, Bromsgrove in Worcestershire, will receive £148 per person – a total of nearly £15m. It’s already one of the wealthiest areas in England. We know the pandemic put pressure on public finances but you can’t spend £15m in one of the wealthiest areas of the country and nothing in Knowsley, one of the poorest, and call it “levelling up”. And you certainly can’t plaster over that fact with 12 new slogans masquerading as missions and expect us to keep buying it. Northern voters came out in their droves at the last election in the hope of some real change. This white paper is a worrying sign that it is all adding up to another hollow promise. This northerner, for one, has had enough of waiting. Karl Holbrook is the editor of the Northern EchoJavanese Hailey found her daughter hunched over in pain inside their home in Manassas, Virginia, about 32 miles south-west of Washington DC. The nine-year-old could barely walk because her stomach hurt so much, Hailey said, recalling that Sunday evening in October. So, she asked her basketball- and gymnastics-loving fourth-grader the question that had become routine in recent weeks: on a scale of zero to 10, how bad is the pain? It’s above 10, her daughter, Haley Bryson, told her. For about two months, Haley had experienced some combination of headache, fatigue, stomachache, sore throat, earache or breathlessness – reporting pain levels normally around six or seven. She would collapse into bed when she got home from school and ended up losing 17lb from her already small frame, her mother said. “There did not seem to be a pattern to her symptoms,” said Hailey, a middle and high school math teacher. “Some days were worse than others. Some days she couldn’t even get out of the bed because her stomach hurt so much.” She added: “It was the scariest thing I ever experienced in my life.” The symptoms began soon after Haley and her mother contracted Covid-19 in early August. They both had a relatively mild reaction and recovered. But days later, Haley became sick again. In October, after more than half a dozen trips to her pediatrician, urgent care and the emergency room, she was referred to Children’s National hospital in Washington DC, diagnosed with long Covid and treated in its Pediatric Post-Covid Program, which treats all ages up to 21. Though long covid diagnosis is considered very rare in children, Haley is not alone. Some children across the US have reported an array of symptoms – ranging from headaches, stomachaches and dizziness, to fatigue, brain fog and mood changes – long after their initial infection. Long Covid can last anywhere from four weeks to months – although definitions vary – and, while it presents differently based on developmental stage, doctors say it can affect virtually any age, even infants. Of the more than 848,000 people who have died in the US from Covid during the pandemic, 727 have been under age 18, according to the CDC. Less than 1.5% of child Covid cases have resulted in hospitalization, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). However, vaccine availability and uptake for children has consistently lagged behind adults in the US. It wasn’t until May that the CDC recommended the Pfizer-BioNTech coronavirus vaccine for children ages 12 to 15, and then not until November that it recommended it for those ages five to 11. Children under the age of five are still not eligible. Only 20% of five- to 11-year-olds have been fully vaccinated, and 55% of 12-to-17-year-olds, while all adult age groups are at least 60%, according to the CDC. Plenty of questions surround pediatric long Covid, including exactly how common it is. One Danish study published online in the European Journal of Pediatrics in January included about 30,000 children aged 0 to 17, around half of whom had previously tested positive for Covid. For those ages six to 17, 0.8% more Covid-positive children recalled having symptoms lasting more than four weeks, compared with a control group. A report from April out of Italy that surveyed 129 children who tested positive for Covid found that about 43% experienced at least one symptom more than 60 days after their initial infection. In recent months, doctors at some pediatric Covid centers have reported an increase in referrals and patient load. Some have set about expanding clinics or restructuring schedules, while others have found themselves working their way through long waitlists. The reason for the increase is probably twofold, explained Laura Malone, a physician at the Kennedy Krieger Institute’s Pediatric Post-Covid-19 Rehabilitation Clinic. There is a lot more understanding and acceptance of the condition, leading more families to seek treatment. At the same time, there has also probably been an uptick in long Covid cases following the Delta-fueled surge, as it can take months before patients with the condition are diagnosed and treated after infection. “The larger the denominator, the more people you have that do have the infection, the more numbers or higher numbers you’re going to get with those with complications from it, like long Covid,” explained Malone, who said Kennedy Krieger’s clinic has had to expand twice over the last six to eight months due to an increase in cases. Over the past year, the clinic, which meets three half days a month, has seen 47 patients, with over one-third of those patients coming in September, October and November. Dr Alexandra Brugler Yonts, director of the Pediatric Post-Covid Program at the Children’s National hospital, said they are booked out until March. She explained that over half of the program’s 60 patients had come in just the last three months, despite opening in May 2021. “A lot of the thought is, ‘Oh it’s just a cold, you know, we get through that.’ But we don’t yet know why certain folks get long Covid and others do not,” she said. “And so you’re getting infected, you’re taking a gamble, rolling the dice that you might, hopefully won’t be one of the ones that has long-term complications.” The long Covid clinic at Texas Children’s hospital, which has seen a total of 62 patients, has been at its max of six patients or higher a month since September, according to Dr Kristen Sexson Tejtel, its co-director. It’s now in the process of increasing from half days to full days to double the number of patients it can see. Dr Sarah Risen, its co-director, said increased awareness of long Covid is probably causing at least part of the swell. “With this increased awareness and acceptance, it allows providers also to start to diagnose and treat and help support the child and the family earlier,” She said. Dr Carlos Oliveira, pediatric infectious diseases doctor at Yale Medicine, said the Yale New Haven children’s post-Covid care program received 6-8 long covid referrals per month between August and November. In January they received 18 referrals for post-covid evaluations in children under the age of 18. He said there are only theories about what causes long Covid. One hypothesis is that some of the virus proteins linger in the body and continually leak into the bloodstream, causing an immune system reaction. Another one is that it’s a type of autoimmune process in which antibodies made against the virus attack the host, leading to damage long after the virus is gone. There have been several studies launched in recent months into long Covid. In an especially large-scale effort, the US National Institutes of Health announced it was starting nationwide studies. The research will include children. In the meantime, Dr Frank Bell, pediatric infectious disease physician at Swedish medical center in Seattle and a member of the Washington Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics board of trustees, emphasized the importance of vaccination. “By being careful about your exposures … and by being immunized, and by your supporting kids in their recovery from Covid, we think we’ve got a good way to bring that small risk down to something that’s even less likely to happen and be a worry for an individual child or his or her family,” he said. Doctors have already begun to prepare for the impact the Omicron surge could have on the numbers of long Covid cases. “It’s hard for me to say what will happen, but we are preparing for a large wave of kids … because the numbers of adolescents and children who have been infected are so high,” said Oliveira. “It’s bound to lead to a higher number of long Covid based on the numbers alone.” For Haley, who recently turned 10, five months after her initial infection, her mother said virtually all of her symptoms have finally gone away. But the fear has not. Each time her daughter complains of a minor stomachache or headache, Hailey said she gets worried that the condition has returned. “It just takes me back in a flashback to everything that we went through,” she said. But Haley said she’s just happy to be feeling better so she can get back to her playdates and gymnastics. “I can have more playdates and have more fun on playdates. I can do arts and crafts and gymnastics and kind of just be silly and run around the stairs and stuff,” she said. When asked what her pain level is now, she said with little hesitation: “Zero!” This article was amended on 2 February 2022 to clarify the number of children involved in the Danish study, the proportion of those children who had tested positive for Covid, and their age groups.Steve Bruce is being seriously considered by the West Bromwich Albion hierarchy to replace the sacked Valérien Ismaël. The former Aston Villa and Birmingham manager suggested he would not return to the dugout after leaving Newcastle in October but has been identified as an ideal candidate to help the flagging Championship side. Ismaël’s remit was to win promotion this season but the club are fifth and in danger of dropping out of the play-offs. He has departed less than 12 months into a four-year contract after three defeats in the past four matches. Last month West Brom sanctioned the signing of Daryl Dike, who worked with Ismaël at Barnsley, but the striker has since been ruled out for two months with a hamstring injury. Last week Ismaël dropped the goalkeeper Sam Johnstone after a row, and other players were unconvinced by the Frenchman’s methods. Ismaël was appointed on 24 June after West Brom paid compensation to take him from Barnsley but supporters have been critical of results and the team’s direct style. Ismaël guided Barnsley to fifth in the Championship last season, after taking over in October 2020 with the club 21st. “West Bromwich Albion Football Club can confirm Valérien Ismaël has today left his position as head coach,” a statement said. “Assistant head coach Adam Murray has also departed.” Ismaël succeeded Sam Allardyce after West Brom’s relegation and won four and drew one of his first five league games. Andy Carroll was another forward signed in January but he played once before Ismaël’s exit. West Brom have restructured the top of the club, bringing in the former Chelsea CEO Ron Gourlay as chief executive in place of Xu Ke and announcing that the owner, Guochuan Lai, will take over as chairman from Li Piyue.At least 60 people, including 15 children, were killed during an attack in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on Wednesday, the latest in a series of violent assaults on civilians in the area. Armed men reportedly attacked the Plaine Savo camp in Ituri province, in the east of the country, with machetes and guns. Local sources who spoke to Reuters blamed the militia group Cooperative for the Development of Congo, or Codeco, for the attack. The camp is home to 24,000 people who had left their homes and sought safety from violence. Following the attack they moved to the nearby UN peacekeeping mission, Monusco. The Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) said two students at a school it supports in the camp were killed and called on Congolese authorities to ensure the safety of people in the area. “Plaine Savo is populated by families – vulnerable families – who have fled similar violence with their children and are seeking only the right to live in peace,” said Caitlin Brady, NRC’s country director. “There has never been and never will be any justification for attacks on civilians. Those responsible must be held to account.” Edouard Beigbeder, Unicef’s representative in DRC, added: “This pitiless atrocity is evidence of the brutal scale of violence in Ituri, which preys on already vulnerable children.” Monusco condemned the violence and sent peacekeepers to the camp. Violence has been escalating in Ituri province in recent months, with at least 68 people killed at five different camps in the area since November, according to NRC. Last week, Médecins Sans Frontières said it had scaled up its response in the region. The Famine Early Warning Systems Network (Fewsnet) said conflict in Ituri displaced more than 13,000 people in November and December, with most living on assistance from local communities. Violence in Ituri and neighbouring provinces was disrupting food security, it said. Kivu Security Tracker (KST), which monitors violence in the region, said “edged blades” were used in Wednesday’s attack and that Codeco was suspected of carrying it out. According to KST’s data, Codeco factions have been involved in 61 deadly attacks in the past three months. The group emerged in 2017 as a coalition of militias that has since split into several factions. The militias are considered to be linked to the Lendu agricultural community, which has clashed violently with the Hema pastoralist group in Ituri. “The communities fighting in the area have been neglected for too long and we will not solve their problems with bandages and medicines,” said Davide Occhipinti, MSF’s project coordinator in the Drodro area of Ituri. “The Congolese state and its international partners need to take responsibility for reversing the dynamics of this vicious cycle that leads to more and more deaths, injuries and displacement.”Britain’s cost of living crisis is likely to intensify from Thursday as the energy regulator prepares to raise the maximum price of home energy bills by up to 50% above current record highs. The price cap is expected to reach almost £2,000 a year, up from an average of £1,277 this winter, to reflect the recent surge in gas market prices that has inflated supplier costs – and caused many to go bust. Officials across Whitehall have been locked in talks with industry bosses for months and the watchdog Ofgem to draw together a set of measures which could cushion households against rocketing energy bills and a cost of living crisis. But what steps could the government take in the face of a global energy crisis? Here are the most popular options to emerge: A government-backed £200 off bills Industry sources believe the Treasury may be poised to help cut £200 from energy bills by offering suppliers government-backed loans that could be repaid over several years. The £5.4bn plan would protect household budgets from a breakneck increase in their average energy bill from 1 April when the new price cap takes effect. But it could mean energy bills remain higher for longer as suppliers charge more to pay back their loans in the years ahead. The plan, first reported in the Times, was described as “entirely plausible” by one industry source, who asked not to be named, and is seen as one of the most likely measures. More support for vulnerable households In addition to the Treasury’s broad-brush plans it is likely to also take a targeted approach to helping the most vulnerable households by doubling the payments offered by the warm home discount. The scheme provides a one-off annual payment of £140 towards electricity bills for households on low income or receive certain pension benefits between October and March. Currently 2.2 million households qualify for the support, but the government is expected to extend the scheme by making more households eligible and doubling the payment to help cover surging energy costs. It is usually paid for via a levy on standard energy bills, but industry bosses have warned the government against using better-off households to fund the expanded scheme. The top-up should instead come from the government’s coffers, they say. A VAT holiday Energy suppliers and consumer groups have called on the government to scrap the 5% VAT rate on energy bills for months. The quick fix is considered a simple way to knock around £100 a year off an annual energy bill of £2,000 and has won support from the Labour party too. But the proposal has failed to win the favour of Boris Johnson, who last month described the measure as a blunt instrument. The prime minister said cutting VAT would “end up also cutting fuel bills for a lot of people who perhaps don’t need the support in quite the direct way that we need to give it”. He is understood to favour plans to target support for hard-pressed families instead. Lower policy costs The cost of supporting government policies and green schemes currently adds about £159 to the average household energy bill, leading to calls for the Treasury to help households by shouldering the burden instead. Consumer rights campaigners have long argued against the “regressive” tax policy, which puts a disproportionate burden on fuel-poor households, and called for the government to pay for the schemes through general taxation. The Treasury is also reportedly considering scrapping some green policy levies, including the Eco scheme that pays for insulation improvements for fuel-poor homes. The proposals have triggered outrage from consumer groups, climate campaigners and the home insulation industry, which argue that the scheme adds only about £29 to the average household bill. A windfall tax on polluters Calls for the government to fund an energy bills cut from a windfall tax on the companies that have benefitted from the global gas crisis emerged shortly after the Spanish government set out plans to do so. Its plan targets oil and gas producers and fossil fuel generators, which have made booming profits from the surge in global market prices. It won favour with the Labour party and energy bosses including the founder of Ecotricity, Dale Vince. The business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, said at the time that all options were being considered, but the measure is understood to be a non-starter for the Treasury, which is wary about shaking business confidence after the Covid-19 economic slowdown and rising inflation.It’s time for Leonard Peltier to go home – to end his senseless suffering and 45 years of unjust imprisonment. Last Friday, after complaining of a “rough cough”, the 77-year-old Native elder tested positive for Covid-19. Peltier’s continued confinement at the United States penitentiary in Coleman, Florida, might be a death sentence, if the Biden administration doesn’t act quickly, and with conscience. Freedom for Peltier is one step towards addressing centuries of injustice facing Indigenous people as well as addressing the inhumane conditions of incarceration that have been exacerbated by the pandemic. Peltier, the longest-held Indigenous political prisoner in the United States, is facing a potentially life-threatening situation. He is an elderly Anishinaabe and Dakota man who suffers from several serious underlying conditions: his age, diabetes, hypertension, heart condition and abdominal aneurism make his health precarious in prison without Covid-19 – and ever more dire with it. Peltier is locked away in a prison Covid-19 isolation unit – which is not a medical unit – even though the man who helped put him there has called for his release. James Reynolds, one of the main federal prosecutors who put Peltier behind bars in 1977, wrote to Biden last year asking the president to commute Peltier’s sentence and to grant him executive clemency. Why? According to Reynolds, the government had lied, deceived, used racism and faked evidence to sentence Peltier for two consecutive life terms in prison. Peltier’s co-defendants were found not guilty by reason of self-defense for the 1975 killing of two FBI agents in Oglala on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in South Dakota during a shootout with members of the American Indian Movement. Law enforcement killed Joseph Stuntz, a young Native man whose killing was never investigated. Years of appeals processes have poked holes in the validity of the government’s theory. Peltier’s conviction in that case rests solely on the basis that he was present on the reservation with a weapon that day – not that he fired a fatal shot or had any hand in killing anyone. So why is he still in prison? It’s Leonard Peltier who now faces death. For months he, like many incarcerated people, has begged for a booster shot. Prison officials denied him one. Guards and staff have been observed improperly wearing masks or not wearing them at all. And now that he has Covid, it raises the question: who is to blame if the unthinkable happens? Certainly, those with the power to release Peltier must act soon or bear responsibility. Native people are building political power. The water protector movement that began at Standing Rock in 2016 was a watershed moment. Native people have made historic gains, such as the appointment of Deb Haaland as Secretary of the Interior, the first Native woman to hold a cabinet-level position. But still Native people face high rates of criminalization, incarceration and threats posed to their land, water and sovereignty. This is the chance to chart a new path, to reverse backwards and racist actions of the past. Millions have called for Peltier’s release since his incarceration. Nelson Mandela and Bishop Desmond Tutu before their deaths pleaded with the United States to free Peltier, joining Jesse Jackson, Rigoberta Menchu and Harry Belafonte and many more. Leaders in Indian Country have also chimed in. Last Fall, the National Caucus of Native American State Legislators unanimously passed a resolution calling for Peltier’s release, a movement led by Ruth Buffalo, a representative from North Dakota. The National Congress of American Indians has historically called for Leonard Peltier’s freedom. Many Tribal Nations have also continued to petition the White House. A movement on Capitol Hill is also growing. Numerous House Democrats have written to Biden. And Senator Brian Schatz from Hawaii, chair of the Senate committee that oversees Indian affairs, wrote a letter last week demanding Peltier’s release. Leonard Peltier’s defense committee is simply asking the Bureau of Prisons to follow its own policy. According to Department of Justice’s Covid-19 guidelines for elderly or immunocompromised inmates or those with co-morbidities, Peltier qualifies for release to home confinement. Any argument the government may put forward that he may pose a “threat” or “danger” to the community is absurd given the unjust nature of his imprisonment. Indian Country also wants their elder back. And the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa, where Peltier is enrolled, has offered to house and to take care of a respected member of their community upon his release. No more suffering, no more death, no more tragedy. It can end now. It’s time for Biden to free Leonard Peltier. Janene Yazzie is a Diné human rights and Indigenous rights advocate who works to advance the self-determination of Indigenous peoples. She has worked for more than nine years on the international level helping address the unjust criminalization of Indigenous human rights and land rights defenders. Nick Estes is a citizen of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe. He is a journalist, historian and host of The Red Nation Podcast. He is the author of Our History Is the Future: Standing Rock Versus the Dakota Access Pipeline, and the Long Tradition of Indigenous Resistance (Verso, 2019).Tesco is to stop selling music and films in its supermarkets by the end of this month as it reacts to changing shopping habits. Entertainment aisles have already been cleared in some stores, with Tesco expected to replace racks of CDs, DVDs and Blu-rays with home furnishings. Computer games will continue to be sold. The changes come amid a dramatic shift in how people buy entertainment, with the shift to streaming accelerated by the pandemic. Last year, UK sales of physical entertainment products dived 18.5% to just over £1bn as digital revenues rose by 8.3% to £8.7bn, more than the entire market was worth just two years ago, according to the Entertainment Retailers Association. A Tesco spokesperson said: “As more customers move towards digital entertainment, over the last month we have begun to phase out some products in our entertainment range, focusing instead on ranges where we see the highest demand from customers such as homeware and outdoor products.” Sainsbury’s made a similar move out of physical media last year, clearing out its final stocks of CDs, DVDs and Blu-rays over the festive period. It comes years after the likes of Woolworths, Blockbuster, Our Price and Virgin Megastores disappeared from high streets. HMV is now the UK’s only large-scale entertainment retailer, with more than 100 outlets after being rescued from administration in 2019, which led to the closure of about a fifth of its stores. Asda and Morrisons both said they had no plans to stop selling CDs and DVDs. Bryan Roberts, a retail analyst at Shopfloor Insights, said the changes were also linked to cost savings for retailers. “People are consuming entertainment in different ways – such as through streaming,” he said. “These products are a massive faff in terms of the supply chain and replenishing shelves and they are quite a low [profit margin] part of the store so homewares are viewed as a better bet.” The latest change comes as Tesco and other supermarkets tighten up their operations and strip out costs amid surging inflation on their main grocery goods. Rising energy bills, petrol costs and higher prices on all kinds of household goods have put increased focus on family budgets so that supermarkets are battling to hold down prices to win over shoppers. Tesco, already the UK’s biggest supermarket, won market share over the key Christmas period partly by matching the price of key items to discounter Aldi while offering a much broader choice of products. This week it has moved to cling on to that advantage with further cost cuts, including closing its nascent discounter chain Jack’s and ditching night shifts in dozens of stores, leading to the loss of 1,600 jobs. Tesco has also shut deli and meat counters to redeploy staff elsewhere.My son Robbie Gordon, who has died aged 37, due to uncontrolled seizure activity, had a unique personality, and distinctive strengths and abilities. Robbie had a very rare condition known as Dravet syndrome, with epilepsy, profound learning difficulties and autism. He experienced difficult times that would have floored many of us, but always came out smiling. His internal strength and robustness got him through the many tough days. Robbie’s mother, Ruth (nee Melton), and I were both working in London, in a special school for children with severe learning disabilities, when Robbie, the elder of our two sons, was born. When he was two, we moved to Hastings, where our younger son, Greg, was born – he grew up with a sense of great love and protection for his brother. Robbie’s early years were incredibly difficult and Ruth gave up her career as a nursery nurse to care for him. There were no support groups that fitted Robbie, so Ruth and Robbie were always on the outside, and it was very isolating. Dravet syndrome was first recognised, by Dr Charlotte Dravet, only in 1998; Robbie had an ever rarer sub-group (of the SCN2A gene) and his diagnosis was not made until he was 30. I had continued to work as a teacher, ending up as the head of a special school in Eastbourne that Robbie attended. Through my work, Ruth and I heard about Dr Dave Hewett and Intensive Interaction, the communication approach he had developed for parents and schools to use with profoundly disabled children, while also having fun. Intensive Interaction allowed Robbie to be Robbie, helping us to love and discover him, and allowing him to be relaxed and happy. Robbie learned not just to accept our presence, but to be able to receive and show love to us. He was in an environment not where we were always dictating what he should do, but encouraging him instead to be who he wanted to be, to seek us out, and to enjoy with us the sensory things that were his interests, at his level. He liked rubbing his hands through the leaves on bushes; feeling the bark of trees; touching a flower and grass. He loved beads and tinsel, the shinier the better, and sparkly lights, so in our house it was Christmas every day. Ruth and I wrote (under pseudonyms) a chapter in Interaction in Action (1998) about our early times with Robbie. He could not communicate with us, but he could express in his face and his eyes quite complex emotions – expressions apparently beyond his cognitive abilities. He was inquisitive, playful, affectionate and so loving. Robbie didn’t know how to carry a grudge, malice or jealousy – all he knew was how to give out affection and gentleness (not to say that he didn’t cause bumps and bruises as his ten stone landed when he threw himself onto you for a kiss, nose or forehead rub). In that respect, despite all his disabilities, Robbie was the perfect human being, with a pure soul, knowing only love and how to give it back. He brought out what was best in people. In return we wanted to make him happier. Robbie went everywhere – his family never hid him away – and, despite his actions sometimes appearing puzzling to some of the public around him, all who worked with him were always so proud of him. Robbie is missed by his many friends. He is survived by Ruth, Greg and me, and his niece, Elsie.Ronnie Fearn, Lord Fearn, who has died aged 90, was the former MP for Southport, Merseyside, and a most unusual politician. He succeeded in winning elections despite confounding almost all the expectations of modern formulaic politics and, without being a conventional intellectual Liberal, he was the ultimate party loyalist and committed activist. Before joining the Liberal party in Southport in early 1961, he had written to the local newspaper complaining about the Conservative council cutting grants to youth organisations – a cause to which he had a lifelong commitment – and he stated then that he only had “slight political leanings”. These nevertheless became enough to draw him into 60 years of Liberal campaigning. He won his local ward, Norwood, for the Southport council in 1963 and he held this seat through every change of name and local government reorganisation for 52 years. Fearn was born in Southport, the son of Martha (nee Hodge) and James Fearn, a painter and decorator. He attended the King George V grammar school, leaving at the age of 16 to work for Williams Deacon’s Bank (later merged to become Williams and Glyn’s Bank, and later still the Royal Bank of Scotland), a career he continued until elected to parliament in 1987. He married Joyce Dugan in 1955 and they had a daughter, Susan, and a son, Martin. He became a member of Southport council at a time when the Liberals controlled the council in coalition with Labour. At the 1970 general election, the prospective Liberal candidate in Southport withdrew at the last minute and Fearn was persuaded, without much difficulty, to stand. In a disastrous election for his party nationally, he managed to increase the Liberal vote by 10%. This was the first of four contests until, in 1983, in a contested selection, the Southport Liberals chose a more politically focused candidate who, despite increasing the party’s poll, failed to win the seat. Fearn stood again unsuccessfully three more times. In 1985 Fearn was appointed OBE for services to the community in Southport. When he returned once more for the 1987 election, he became the party’s only gain in England. At the 1992 election he lost, it being argued that the town’s traditional Conservative voters were determined to make sure that Labour’s Neil Kinnock did not become prime minister. Despite the anguished representations of his successor Conservative MP, his local telephone directory continued to list Fearn as Southport’s MP, and electors carried on coming to him with their concerns. In 1997 Fearn returned to the House of Commons. At an election when the Liberal Democrats’ poll fell slightly, he achieved a swing of 8% in Southport. He retired from the Commons in 2001, bequeathing enough of his personal vote to ensure the victory of his Liberal Democrat successor, John Pugh. The latter observed: “He was by no means a typical politician and if there is a book written about how to become an MP or a lord, Ronnie never read it.” Created a life peer on leaving the Commons, he retired from the Lords in 2018. Fearn maintained a lifelong involvement in amateur dramatics. He appeared in the annual All Souls Church group pantomimes throughout his time in parliament, though, with typical self-mockery, he switched from acting the dame to playing the baddie while he was the town’s MP. The productions played to packed audiences at the Arts Centre theatre. He was a natural performer and it seemed the usual politician’s need to be taken seriously simply did not apply to him. Unsurprisingly his appearances at the Liberal Democrats’ end of conference glee club entertainment were eagerly anticipated. He never moved from Norwood, the district in which his parents had lived and where he attended the primary school. He was the archetypal local MP, who understood what made the town tick and retained a real affinity with its residents. He is survived by Joyce, Susan and Martin, and five grandchildren. • Ronald Cyril Fearn, Lord Fearn, politician, born 6 February 1931; died 24 January 2022Although she was often described, perhaps with a touch of irony, as the “muse of incommunicability” for her dramatic roles in several of Michelangelo Antonioni’s films, Monica Vitti, who has died aged 90, always aspired to be a comic actor. In 1962, she had an offer to do a film for Agnès Varda, but turned it down; as she explained in an interview, “I want to remain loyal to Michelangelo, who has promised to make me the Carole Lombard of the second half of the century.” Though Vitti certainly had comparable looks and verve, and did eventually succeed in becoming a popular comedic star, she will probably remain in most film buffs’ minds as Giuliana, the complicated young blond woman in Antonioni’s Il Deserto Rosso (Red Desert, 1964), his first colour feature. Giuliana was perhaps Vitti’s most credible and identifiable characterisation. Her main concern is for her child’s neurosis, but she is not helped by her anguished attempt at a romantic relationship with an engineer, played by Richard Harris. The film contains one of world cinema’s most bizarre lines: “My hair hurts”, but it probably aroused merriment only when seen translated in a subtitle – Tonino Guerra, the film’s co-writer, pointed out that in Italian it sounds better. Vitti and Antonioni had begun living together as he prepared to work on the film in which she shot to fame, L’Avventura (1960), but he did not tell her much about the part she was to play, either before or during its prolonged and hazardous shoot. She later said: “What I’d learned in drama school wasn’t much use on the rocks of [the Sicilian island] Lisca Bianca, where we were shooting under such dramatic conditions. Michelangelo treats his actors as objects, and it is useless to ask him the meaning of a scene or a line of dialogue.” Like most of the cast and crew, she had faith in him and the film, in which she played Claudia, the best friend of a young woman who goes missing on a deserted volcanic island. While searching for her, Claudia becomes involved with the missing woman’s boyfriend. All their hopes were pinned on Cannes, where the film was in competition. It was Vitti’s first festival experience, and the hostile reception from some of the audience at the official screening was a shock, leaving her in tears. She soon found consolation in the film’s jury prize, awarded after a campaign led by the film-maker Roberto Rossellini, which opened the way to her stardom in Italy and internationally. L’Avventura was the first in a trilogy said by Antonioni to be about alienation in the modern world, of which the second, La Notte (The Night, 1961), was arguably the best. The female lead was Jeanne Moreau, playing the wife of a disillusioned novelist (Marcello Mastroianni). Vitti, on this occasion a brunette, had the significant role of Valentina, a carefree society girl, for which she won a best supporting actress award from the Italian film critics. In the final film of the trilogy, L’Eclisse (The Eclipse, 1962), Vitti was paired with Alain Delon and gave another convincing performance in a complex role. The film was also jeered at Cannes, but it too won the special prize in spite of François Truffaut’s opposition. In 1964, Vitti returned to the stage, chosen by Franco Zeffirelli to play the Marilyn Monroe character in Arthur Miller’s After the Fall. I was in Naples when Miller came to see the production there and praised Vitti’s performance. After Red Desert, she had a lead role in Modesty Blaise (1966), directed by Joseph Losey and based on Peter O’Donnell’s comic strip. Her relationship with Antonioni ended in 1967; the following year she won the hearts of audiences – in Italy, at least – in Mario Monicelli’s La Ragazza con la Pistola (The Girl With a Pistol), playing a Sicilian woman who goes to London to seek revenge against the fiance who has abandoned her. In Ettore Scola’s send-up of Italian stereotypes, Dramma della Gelosia (The Pizza Triangle, 1970), she held her own against Mastroianni and Giancarlo Giannini; she was becoming the only woman to be bracketed (also in salary terms) with the popular Italian male comic actors of the 70s, appearing in one commercial film after another. She often partnered Alberto Sordi, matching his over-the-top performances. One of their best, with him directing, was a sub-Fellini subject, Polvere di Stelle (Stardust, 1973), in which they played two delusional music-hall comics. By then, she was in a relationship with the Red Desert cinematographer, Carlo Di Palma. He directed her in three films, including Teresa la Ladra (Teresa the Thief, 1973), a comic saga of a waif who survives the second world war thanks to petty crime. In 1974, she appeared in Luis Buñuel’s The Phantom of Liberty. Born Maria Luisa to Adele (nee Vittilia) and Angelo Ceciarelli, she later said that her childhood was unhappy, and, when her family emigrated to the US when she was 18, she stayed in Rome and enrolled at the Academy of Dramatic Art there. Her stage name came from her mother’s maiden name. In the summer of her graduation in 1953 came her first theatrical engagement, in the chorus of a Greek tragedy. The first film in which she appeared was Ridere! Ridere! Ridere! (Laugh! Laugh! Laugh!, 1954). She had several small roles in films and plays before meeting Antonioni in a post-synchronisation studio in Rome, where she dubbed the actor Dorian Gray’s part in Il Grido (The Cry, 1957). Antonioni was also directing a theatre company, and he cast her as Sally Bowles in John van Druten’s play I Am a Camera, for which she received good reviews, before embarking on his trilogy. Throughout her film career and relationship with Di Palma, Antonioni and Vitti had remained close friends, and in 1980 he directed her for the last time in a TV film of Jean Cocteau’s play The Eagle Has Two Heads, which he called Il Mistero di Oberwald. Vitti had begun a relationship with the photographer Roberto Russo in 1975, and he directed her in the low-key comedies Flirt (1983) and Francesca è Mia (Francesca’s Mine, 1986), as well as a TV programme in which she compered a debate with film and drama students. She and Russo married in 1995. In 1990, Vitti directed herself in Scandalo Segreto (Secret Scandal), co-starring Elliott Gould, about a woman who, while keeping a video diary, discovers her husband’s affair. Disappointed when the film was tepidly received, she found a new creative outlet, publishing A Bed Is Like a Rose, a delightful semi-autobiographical book in which she said that nothing could be further from her own personality than the kind of alienation with which she had so often been associated. In 1995 Vitti was awarded a career Golden Lion award at the Venice film festival. She withdrew, Garbo-like, from public life during her last years and the Italian media respected her privacy as she reportedly suffered from Alzheimer’s disease. She is survived by Russo. • Monica Vitti (Maria Luisa Ceciarelli), actor, born 3 November 1931; died 2 February 2022 • John Francis Lane died in 2019Councillors in Padua have agreed to install the first statue honouring a woman in the city’s historic centre, but it remains to be seen if the monument will be placed among the dozens of statues dedicated to men in the prominent Prato della Valle square. The decision followed a fiery debate that further exposed the scarcity of statues celebrating women not only in Padua but across Italy. Margherita Colonnello and Simone Pillitteri, the two councillors who submitted the motion, had to backtrack on their original proposal to place a statue of Elena Lucrezia Cornaro Piscopia – the first woman in the world to earn a PhD – on one of the two empty pedestals nestled among 78 statues paying tribute to men in Prato della Valle, the second largest square in Europe. Piscopia, who received her doctorate degree in philosophy from the University of Padua in 1678, was not included when Padua officials devised a project in the late 18th century to adorn the central island of the 90,000-sq-metre square with statues of figures who were either from the city or who had links to it. Originally there were 88 statues, but 10 statues dedicated to Venetian doges were destroyed by Napoleon’s army after it conquered the republic of Venice. Eight were later replaced by obelisks, while two of the pedestals remained empty. Critics of the new proposal argued that it was out of context with the square’s history, and that the last two pedestals should remain empty as they were a symbol of the destruction by Napoleon’s troops. In order to overcome the opposition, Colonnello and Pillitteri removed the caveat that Prato della Valle should be the location and opened up to erecting a statue celebrating a female figure other than Piscopia. Alternative suggestions include the 19th-century painter Elisabetta Benato-Beltrami and the writer Gualberta Alaide Beccari. “The important thing is that we have raised the debate about the under-representation of women among monuments and it is now very clear to all politicians that we need a very good statue of a woman in a very good place,” said Colonnello. “We now need to decide where and who. But I think we will eventually settle on the square – it is very huge and there is lots of space.” The proposal was triggered after Mi Riconosci, an association of professionals working in the cultural heritage sector, undertook a census of all statues of Italian figures erected in public spaces across the country and found that only 148 were dedicated to women. “This is being presented as a victory in Padua but for us it isn’t,” said Federica Arcoraci, an art historian with Mi Riconosci. “The point is that there are 78 statues dedicated to men in Prato della Valle and there needs to be one of a woman.” • This article was amended on 3 February 2022 to correct misspellings of Prato della Valle as “Prato della Vella”.A Cambridge University college has denied that it is seeking to cancel the existence of one its most significant benefactors because of links to the slave trade while continuing to enjoy the benefits of his generosity. Jesus College has applied to church authorities to remove a memorial to Tobias Rustat from a prominent position on the west wall of its Grade I-listed college chapel. The move follows an inquiry by a legacy of slavery working party set up to review the college’s historical links to enslavement and its long term impact. During the first day of a hearing in a consistory court – an ecclesiastical court dealing with matters of law relating to the church – Mark Hill QC, appearing for the college, insisted the application was “nothing to do with erasing, cancelling or in some way nullifying the existence and the name of Rustat”. The issue the court had to decide, Hill said, was whether the memorial should remain in its current location or should be removed to a new permanent site elsewhere in the college where it would be a “significant and accessible exhibit”. According to the college, Rustat (1608-1694), who was one of Jesus’s most significant benefactors, “had financial and other involvement in the Royal African Company (RAC), a slave trading company, over a substantial period including at the time when he donated to the college”. The dean of the chapel, the Rev James Crockford, told the hearing that the marble memorial – described in court as “an internationally recognised monument – acted as a barrier to worship and participation in chapel life and that some undergraduates were “disturbed and upset” by it. He told the hearing on Wednesday that students felt uncomfortable about the memorial as it appeared to “celebrate” the man and his financial dealings, and warned that if it remained in the chapel they would be less likely to participate in the life of the chapel. Justin Gau, appearing on behalf of those opposed to the removal of the memorial, however challenged the characterisation of Rustat in emails sent by undergraduates objecting to the memorial. He said it was “not true” that Rustat had amassed “much of his wealth from the RAC” as had been claimed. He also challenged another email from an undergraduate who said it had been clearly demonstrated that Rustat “was a very active slave trader”. Gau said there was “no demonstration in any document that Tobias Rustat was any sort of slave trader”. Gau also raised concerns about a number of emails from different undergraduates which all appeared to use the same wording to express their opposition. The emails read: “It’s totally wrong for the statue of someone who was so heavily involved in the horrific crimes of slavery to be glorified in the heart of our community.” He asked the dean where the repeated phrase had come from and whether the college had made any effort to “correct” it, and said undergraduates “have not had a true view of Rustat’s life”. He also claimed the legacy of slavery working party did have more precise information about Rustat’s financial involvement but did not circulate it. Giving evidence later in the day, Sonita Alleyne, Master of Jesus College and the first black master of any Oxbridge college, was asked by Gau if she thought life was a “bed of roses”, and that students should not be confronted with uncomfortable subjects in church. She responded: “I’m the last person that believes life is a bed of roses … but we don’t set out to make life more difficult for people”. Responding to Gau’s suggestion that Rustat’s history should be “contextualised” through an explanatory plaque in the chapel, she said: “There is not enough space on the wall … how big would a plaque have to be? How will we fit the stories of all the people who were enslaved and who died in the process?” She said the chapel was “our sanctified space, our pastoral space … I have great faith and I’m here today because I have great faith that we are in an age where equality is paramount.” Gau said Rustat had been a “generous benefactor” of the college, and that “despite his very small involvement in the slave trade” there was now a black female Master of the college. Alleyne said: “Which murder, which lynching … how much sin do you need to have before you come off the wall? Rustat’s gift to Jesus College, made in 1671, was part of a wider philanthropy that began in the mid-1660s. Although he did not attend Jesus himself, his father did, and he donated £2,000 – a huge sum at the time – to fund scholarships for the children of Anglican priests. The court hearing, which is taking place in Cambridge, in the shadow of the Rustat memorial in the college chapel, is expected to last until Friday.Fruit Pastilles will be made in the Czech Republic and Toffee Crisp bars in Poland, under proposals by Nestlé to close a factory near Newcastle. The GMB trade union said the site at Fawdon, which has been making chocolate since 1958, was profitable and that plans to shift confectionery production offshore from 2023 – with the loss of 474 jobs – were “unacceptable”. “This will have a devastating impact on workers and their families,” said Ross Murdoch, a GMB national officer. “Meanwhile, transporting finished products from sites in Europe back to the UK – where they are consumed – will result in significant additional road and sea miles, increasing pollution and environmental damage. “GMB and Unite will now speak to members in Fawdon and find out what they want to do next. We will give them whatever support and resources they need to fight this.” Under Nestlé’s proposals, Fruit Pastilles and Jelly Tots will be made in the Czech Republic and Toffee Crisp bars will be made in Poland, while mini egg versions of brands such as Kit Kat and Milkybar will be made in Bulgaria. GMB said it had presented alternative plans drawn up by independent experts but they had been rejected by Nestlé. Boris Johnson was urged last year to intervene to save the Fawdon site, which began producing chocolate in 1958 for Rowntree. The British confectionery company was bought by Swiss-based Nestlé in 1988. Nestlé has previously said that brands produced in Fawdon were smaller and “low-growth” and that it would invest £29m in factories in York and Halifax that manufacture bigger brands. It is understood to have outlined its plans to close Fawdon on Wednesday. A Nestlé spokesperson said: “The consultation around the changes we proposed in April 2021 is still ongoing. “We said from the outset that we wanted to provide adequate time and space for these discussions and it is only right that they are held directly with our employees and trade unions and not in public. “It remains a priority to support our people and their families through this process and we thank everybody for their patience. We will provide an update once the consultation is complete.”On Tuesday, Whoopi Goldberg was suspended from The View for stating, with striking confidence, that the Holocaust was “not about race”. She made the statement just days after National Holocaust Remembrance Day, when celebrities and politicians around the world had remembered the darkest period in world history, the racist genocide of 6 million Jews, roughly two-thirds of European Jewry, by Nazi Germany. Most emphasized the importance of remembering this horrific part of history to ensure “never again”. Goldberg’s comments were also made a week after a Tennessee school board banned the Pulitzer-winning Holocaust graphic novel Maus from schools. While Goldberg’s ignorance of the Holocaust is painful, it is far from striking. Many Americans cannot even remember the Holocaust, because they don’t know what it is. For instance, a 2018 poll by the Pew Research Center found that just 62% of Americans know that the Holocaust refers to the extermination of Jews. Almost half (49%) know that 6 million Jews were killed. Although these numbers are up from 1993, where they were 54% and 35%, other polls confirm that knowledge remains limited at best. The 2020 Pew edition of “What Do Americans Know About the Holocaust?” finds that “most US adults know what the Holocaust was, and approximately when it happened, but fewer than half can correctly answer multiple-choice questions about the number of Jews who were murdered, or the way Adolf Hitler came to power”. There is little difference in terms of age, gender, partisanship or region, but “race” differences are quite big, with black people having on average 1.2 of the four questions correct, Hispanics 1.7, and white people 2.5. Obviously, this is strongly related to level of education, another important variable to explain differences – as is whether you know someone who is Jewish. Previous studies have reported equally disturbing findings, including a bigger gap between the (lack of) knowledge of older and younger Americans. For instance, a 2018 poll by Schoen Consulting found that 31% of Americans thought 2 million or fewer Jews died in the Holocaust, while the percentage was 41 among millennials. It also reported that 41% of Americans did not know that Auschwitz was a Nazi extermination camp, and just one-third of millennials did know. This shocking lack of knowledge is not without consequences. You can’t learn lessons from the past without knowledge of the past. Even if people know roughly what the Holocaust means, if they don’t know roughly what happened and why it happened, “never again” might become wishful thinking. In fact, 58% of Americans think “something like the Holocaust could happen again”. With antisemitism on the rise, in terms of verbal and physical violence, knowledge becomes even more crucial. Pew found that people with more knowledge about the Holocaust have “warmer feelings” towards Jewish people. This will hopefully help inoculate them against the antisemitism they encounter in the public debate, from such diverse voices as Nation of Islam leader Louis Farrakhan, to some of the critique of Israel, to, most problematically, the far right, including the former president. Interestingly, Americans agree wholeheartedly. A staggering 93% of Americans believe that “all Americans should learn about the Holocaust while at school”, and 80% say it is important to keep teaching about the Holocaust so it doesn’t happen again. A rare bipartisan consensus, which should make the implementation easier. There is already a wealth of excellent Holocaust educational material available from organizations like the Anti-Defamation League, the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance, the United Nations and the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. While most of these materials are aimed at the teachers, a new graphic adaptation of Anne Frank’s diary might be a particularly good tool to reach children from Generation Z (as well as millennials). Anne Frank’s Diary: the Graphic Adaptation is a beautifully illustrated graphic novel that conveys the key messages of the seminal text. While there are some problems with the depth and scope of the story, as well as with the representation of the writer Anne Frank, it might do a better job than the original in reaching generations that are more visually oriented. Whatever the book or movie chosen, it is crucial that the Holocaust is taught again at US schools. And not just the bare facts, but the process that led to this horrific event. While I disagree with the popular – and profitable – warnings of a new fascism, there is no doubt that antisemitism and the far right are challenging US democracy in an increasingly violent manner. If we don’t educate our young and our old, history might indeed repeat itself and “never again” will prove little more than wishful thinking. Cas Mudde is a Guardian US columnist and the Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor in the school of public and international affairs at the University of GeorgiaRoy Keane has emerged as Sunderland’s first choice to fill their managerial vacancy and could be set to make an emotional return to the Stadium of Light. Keane, who managed Sunderland from 2006 to 2008, looks likely to be offered the manager’s job at the League One club after they sacked Lee Johnson on Sunday. The former Manchester United midfielder led Sunderland into the Premier League in 2007 and kept them in the top flight before resigning following a disagreement with the former owner, Ellis Short. Although he subsequently assisted Martin O’Neill in coaching the Republic of Ireland, Keane has not been a club manager since his sacking by Ipswich in 2011. However the 50-year-old feels he has unfinished business at Sunderland and retains a deep affection for the club. Now he must decide whether to relinquish his role as an acerbic pundit with Sky Sports and ITV in order to return to the dugout, possibly in time for a third-tier match at home to Doncaster on Saturday. The prospect of Keane making a comeback more than 13 years after walking out on Sunderland would be guaranteed to fill the Stadium of Light to its near 50,000 capacity. How the infamously prickly former Manchester United captain might find working alongside Kristjaan Speakman, Sunderland’s sporting director, in the mud-on-boots environs of League One is anyone’s guess. But Kyril Louis-Dreyfus, Sunderland’s 25-year-old billionaire owner, wants to try. Louis-Dreyfus is determined to restore a club already capable of attracting 30,000-plus gates in League One to the Premier League but first he must find a manager to end their four-year stay in the third tier, preferably by securing automatic promotion. After talks with Keane in the last 48 hours proved positive there is a sense he may have identified the right man to breathe new life into Sunderland. Although the team are currently third in the table, Johnson was sacked on Sunday in the wake of a 6-0 defeat at Bolton 24 hours earlier. Louis-Dreyfus has said he has received applications from “all over the world” but seems minded to tempt Keane by offering him an initial short-term deal until the end of the season which would leave open the option of returning to television should things not work out as planned. If Keane decides against such an experiment and opts to remain in the studio, Louis-Dreyfus has strong backup options, most notably the former Middlesbrough managers Neil Warnock and Jonathan Woodgate, and Grant McCann, recently dismissed by Hull. Sunderland were impressed by McCann’s achievement in leading the Yorkshire team out of League One last season. Woodgate, too, did well as as caretaker manager at Championship Bournemouth last season and the former England defender has the added advantage of a friendship with Sunderland’s returning striker Jermaine Defoe. The 39-year-old Defoe re-signed for Sunderland from Rangers on transfer deadline day and would enjoy working with Woodgate as the team endeavour to secure promotion to the Championship. While Keane ponders what would represent a sensational return to this former habitat, a coaching team lead by Mike Dodds has been placed in temporary charge at the Stadium of Light.A former French soldier who admitted kidnapping and killing an eight-year-old girl he abducted from a wedding reception has insisted her death was “a mistake” but still refuses to give details of how she died. At his long-awaited trial Nordahl Lelandais, 38, apologised to the family of Maelys De Araujo, who disappeared near Chambery in the French Alps in August 2017 sparking a six-month police search that dominated the national headlines for weeks. During that time Lelandais, who was a military dog trainer in the army, denied having anything to do with the missing girl until forensic experts found a trace of blood in the boot of his car. He eventually confessed to killing Maelys but said it had been a “terrible mistake”. He has since been tried and sentenced to 20 years for beating to death another serviceman and is also on trial for the sexual assault of two girls aged five and six, shortly before Maelys was killed. Lelandais took the stand on the third day of the hearing, where he said that after being discharged from the army after an eye injury he had worked in a series of short-term jobs and became addicted to pornography. He was not on the original guest list at the wedding in 2017 but had spoken to the groom the day before and was given a last-minute invite. He showed up around midnight for dessert and to supply cocaine to two guests who had asked him to bring the drugs. Maelys got into his vehicle, an Audi A3, after he invited her to see his dogs. He then drove off. Video cameras spotted his car at 2.47am with what appeared to be a small passenger. Shortly afterwards Lelandais returned to the wedding, but left before the police arrived at approximately 4.15am. Around 3am, when Maelys’s mother, Jennifer, alerted wedding guests to the fact that her daughter was missing, a huge search was launched. Lelandais apologised tearfully to the De Araujo family when the trial opened on Monday. They sat in the front row holding photographs and paintings of the girl. “I want to offer my apologies. I did indeed cause her death, but I didn’t want to. I will explain during the trial,” he said. Lelandais had told investigators that she had started crying in the car and he punched her several times in the face but did not mean to kill her. During questioning he also mentioned another man, Arthur Noyer, a soldier who had disappeared earlier in the year from a gay nightclub. Detectives examined the case and after Noyer’s skull was found, Lelandais admitted he had accidentally killed him after getting into a fight. The trial is expected to last three weeks with a verdict on 18 February.It is a scene of little drama, yet says so much that it stays in my mind. A couple of years ago, I was reporting in Ashington, Northumberland, as Labour activists debated what to offer voters in the approaching mayoral elections. The meeting room was inside the library, which was inside the council’s gym, which was inside a shiny great glass and steel hulk knocked up by Carillion, the giant that used to hoover up those PFI contracts – until it went bust. A town built on coal, Ashington had been home to the Pitmen Painters – the extraordinary band of miners who turned themselves into artists – but that economy and its traditions were long gone. The morning had been spent on a fairly fruitless round of door-knocking nearby, the voters glaring at the Labour members as if they were bothersome Jehovahs, while the wind whipped in from the North Sea. On one side of the library stood a huge Asda, on the other a big Lidl, offering their customers cheap food and their workers low wages. This was today’s vista: a bombed-out economy, an electorate estranged from politics, and a visibly shrinking public sector getting picked over for cash by a parasitic private sector. You couldn’t ask for a clearer picture of austerity Britain. At the end, I was collared by a woman. She’d been a teacher nearby and she wanted me to understand that, for her kids, places such as the Guardian, parliament and the Natural History Museum were impossibly far away. Long hours on the coach required cash their parents didn’t have and days their schools couldn’t afford. “They’ve never been to central London,” she said. “They live in a different country.” Put those elements together and you have both catalyst for and cause of Boris Johnson’s levelling-up agenda. These are what Michael Gove calls the UK’s “overlooked and undervalued” communities. Punished by Margaret Thatcher, patronised by Tony Blair and cut adrift by the Westminster classes, they reacted in 2016 by voting in vast numbers for Brexit, then in 2019 turning swaths of the electoral map from red to blue. The MP for Ashington and the surrounding areas is ex-miner Ian Lavery, who in 2010 inherited a diehard Labour seat. At the last election, he won a majority of just 814. Which brings us to the crux of the Conservatives’ “levelling-up” problem. If Johnson is to win another election, he needs these voters to turn out again – especially given Tory vulnerability in previously true-blue seats such as Chesham and Amersham, which turned Lib Dem long before the public had ever heard the phrase “wine suitcase”. Yet ministers will not spend the billions, nor introduce the serious changes that could help places like Ashington. From infrastructure to education, all Johnson has to offer is old money and reheated policies. Everything else is in Rishi Sunak’s Treasury war chest, ready for his rainy-day tax cuts. Nor can the Tories prove any serious commitment to this agenda, least of all Gove, who has spent the past decade voting through cut after cut to local council funding. So what do they do instead? Two things. First, they divert some small change from London and the south-east towards the places the Tories won in 2019 – seats such as Darlington and Wolverhampton South West. Second, they follow Gove’s lead and unleash rhetorical bombast against the so-called elites in London. In short, they turn policy into posture and an economic problem into a culture war. Listen to Gove this week: the divide in this country, he says, is between “working people” and “metropolitan condescension”, singling out for attack residents of Notting Hill. Coming from a founder of the Tories’ Notting Hill set who is selling a £2m house in Kensington, that’s pretty rich. But he has chosen his target well: London is now a red metropolis. It is no country for old Tories. What makes Gove’s tale powerful is that it contains some truth. What makes it poisonous is that it purposely covers up the whole story. It talks about Notting Hill but ignores Grenfell. It bangs on about “the London media” but never asks why the media doesn’t then look more like ordinary Londoners – 40% of whom are black or brown or from an ethnic minority. (That might just liven up the comment pages of the Times.) On almost any measure, London does better than any other region in the UK, but much of this prosperity is enjoyed by a tiny minority. Factor in the sky-high cost of buying or renting in the capital, and as academic Jack Brown puts it in his recent book The London Problem, the truth is: “Londoners are working harder and longer for less and less reward, compared with the rest of the country.” Almost as many Londoners live in poverty as would make up the entire population of the north-east. You could clear the city of Manchester of every one of its residents and stuff it with children from London stuck below the poverty line and still need more room. Over the past 18 months, I have been visiting a primary school down the road from where I grew up in Edmonton, in the outskirts of north London. It is an area that played a huge part in the light-industrial revolution that swept the UK and the world, but now all those factories have gone and so has the economy – in a manner that the residents of Ashington would recognise. Teachers talk about how many of their kids leave because their parents have no proper housing. One girl aged about 10 spent a year riding with her mum on the top deck of night buses, because they had nowhere else to sleep. And they talk of how their pupils never visit the museums and attractions just half an hour away on the train. A teacher told me, “central London might as well be another planet”. The phrase sounded familiar. The data research firm CACI provided me with profiles of central Ashington and Edmonton Green. In many ways, they look alike. Household income is, if anything, higher in central Ashington, while private tenants in my old neighbourhood spend almost triple their counterparts in the north-east on rent. Overall, the Londoners, my Londoners, make do with half the disposable income of those in Ashington. The one big difference is that residents of Ashington are older and 98% white, whereas Edmonton has families from Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Somalia and south Asia. Whether from the north or the south, economically these people are in the same boat – which makes it vital for the Tories to harp on about their cultural differences. Rich remainers, citizens of nowhere … you know the rest. These towns and suburbs haven’t somehow failed to keep up with the country; the country has failed them. Capital has sucked all it can from Edmonton and Ashington and Newport and Dundee – and it has cut and run, to get its fuel and workers cheaper elsewhere. It is the same problem all over, albeit with varied expressions. The job is not to level up, but to change course entirely. • Aditya Chakrabortty is a Guardian columnistUkraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, has again insisted that Russia does not currently have enough troops in place to mount a further invasion of Ukraine, a day after Boris Johnson travelled to Kyiv and said there was a “clear and present danger” of an imminent military campaign. Even taken together, the troops currently massed on Ukraine’s border with Russia, on the annexed Crimea peninsula and in neighbouring Belarus, are “insufficient for a large-scale military operation”, said Kuleba in a briefing for foreign journalists on Wednesday. His words once again highlighted a notable difference between the rhetoric coming out of London and Washington, where officials say Putin could launch an attack imminently, and the government in Kyiv. On Wednesday, Kuleba tried to smooth over that difference. “The tone of voice of our messages may sound different but the actual content is the same. Everything is possible and we should be preparing for every possible scenario,” he said. He insisted Ukraine, which has been fighting a war with Russia-backed forces in the east of the country for the past eight years, knew very well that Moscow could attempt a further incursion. Also on Wednesday, the White House said it would stop referring to a Russian attack as imminent after Ukrainian complaints. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said using the word sent an “unintended message”. It comes after a period of mutual frustration between President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s team and US officials, with those in Kyiv repeatedly saying Washington is exaggerating the imminence of the threat. Much of any analysis of the current threat hinges on guesses about Putin’s psychological state and innermost thoughts. Is he only bluffing to win concessions, or does he really plan to launch an attack? Trying to answer that question, US and Ukrainian officials have weighed all the evidence and come up with the same answer: maybe. But Washington and Kyiv have chosen to accent that “maybe” in different ways. For the US, the prospect of possible conflict has been a chance to rally reluctant allies, particularly France and Germany, to make genuine commitments to Ukraine’s security. “Within the US government, there is a tendency to be a little bit coming down on the side of more alarm,” said Steven Pifer, a former US ambassador to Ukraine who was part of a delegation of former US ambassadors and military generals that travelled to Kyiv earlier this week. “The US is trying to martial allies and partners in Europe to do what they can to indicate to the Kremlin that the cost of an attack on Ukraine will be very significant … the goal here is to maximise pressure on the Kremlin,” said Pifer, speaking at a roundtable event in Kyiv. For Zelenskiy’s team, long-requested supplies of defensive weapons from Britain, the US and other countries are very welcome, as are numerous high-level visits to Kyiv and declarations of support. But the president fears that the repeated talk of an imminent war risks scaring off investors and adding to a sense of panic that will push the struggling Ukrainian economy to breaking point. “The weapons are very helpful, but we can’t feed weapons to our pensioners. If everyone thinks there will be war tomorrow, the economy will be in real trouble,” said a high-ranking government official. One factor which has particularly irked the Ukrainians is the decision by the US and Britain to remove some non-essential staff and dependents from their embassies and advise their citizens to leave the country. Images of the chaotic evacuation of Kabul after the city fell to the Taliban were lurking in the minds of decision makers as they pulled out staff, said a diplomatic source. But Kyiv is not Kabul, and Ukrainians feel the decision has helped reinforce an image of Ukraine as a country on the brink of collapse. At a press conference last Friday, Zelenskiy criticised that decision, and also said he judged the threat from Russia to be no higher than during a previous troop buildup in spring last year. “We don’t have any misunderstandings with President Biden. I just deeply understand what’s happening in my country, just as he does with the US,” he said. London and Washington insist there is a heightened risk now, and have even publicised specific intelligence they say shows Putin may be plotting either a coup, or a full-scale invasion. In the most striking public disagreement, US defence officials briefed CNN and Reuters last weekend that Russia had moved supplies of blood close to the border, seen as a sign of imminent military action. Ukraine’s deputy defence minister, Hanna Maliar, categorically denied the report. “The purpose of such information is to spread panic and fear in our society,” she said. Yuriy Vitrenko, the CEO of Naftogaz, Ukraine’s state gas company, said in an interview on Wednesday that while the risks were very real, making statements that could increase panic was extremely dangerous. “If we tell everybody stop working, go and dig some trenches, it may help if the invasion is tomorrow, but it will have a detrimental effect on the economy, and if there is no invasion tomorrow, then again in a couple of months we feel these very dire consequences for the economy,” said Vitrenko. This, he said, would be to give Putin just what he wants to intervene: “As soon as we have some economic problems, it increases the risk of social unrest, and social unrest is exactly the pretext Putin is looking for.”