Novelist Deborah Levy first discovered writing as a kind of therapy when her voice disappeared as a child, she has revealed. Appearing on BBC Radio 4’s Desert Island Discs, the popular British writer, acclaimed for her Booker Prize-shortlisted novels Swimming Home and Hot Milk, said her voice gradually got quieter during her schooldays in South Africa. Born there in 1959, Levy was the eldest child of anti-apartheid activists Norman and Philippa Levy and when her father was arrested five years later, she became almost silent in response to the stress. “It’s curious. I wasn’t exactly a mute; it was just the volume of my voice got lower and lower and lower until no one could hear me,” she said. “The kids at school used to say to me, ‘are you dumb?’, and I used to nod because they would leave me alone.” Her father was held in prison for four years and her silence became a habit. Levy, now 62, recalled: “It was really about being totally overwhelmed by everything, not believing that my thoughts were in any way valuable to anyone, probably very frightened thoughts, and so I just stopped speaking.” The breakthrough came when a school teacher encouraged her to write down her thoughts: “So I had a go and I discovered my thoughts were quite loud.” The therapeutic exercise, resulting in an essay called A Record of Things I Don’t Know, which covered her father’s plight, sparked a love of creative writing that has dominated her life. “Then I invented a cat that had yellow eyes, very lonely, and could fly and do summersaults, and of course the cat was myself and I began to understand at quite a young age that you could find an avatar to be you and give it your thoughts, problems and opinions, so really that was the beginning.” The family moved to Britain when she was nine, following her father’s release from prison, and settled in West Finchley, north London. Here, it was a chance encounter with a famous film director that inspired her early professional career. As a teenager Levy worked as a cinema usher and met the late experimental film maker Derek Jarman. His words of advice persuaded her to change her plans to study English Literature at university. Instead she learned how to write for the stage and performance at Dartington College of Arts in Devon. Pax, Levy’s first commissioned play in 1984, was followed by more than a dozen dramas, but in the late 1980s she switched to writing novels. Swimming Home, which was shortlisted for the 2012 Booker Prize, initially failed to find a publisher. Its eventual success marked a new era. “That changed my life. To be valued, respected and read is an incredible privilege, it is an extraordinary feeling,” she said, explaining it came at the time she divorced from her husband, playwright David Gale. “It had been a long relationship of 23 years and it is very hard to believe that a life you had made together is not going to continue.” Levy says from the first, she saw her novels as an “opportunity to walk female subjectivity right into the centre of the world”. Last spring Levy published Real Estate, the final instalment of her ‘living autobiography’ trilogy of memoir.Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.Click here to access the print version. Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.The purpose of this column is usually fairly clear: to look ahead at the biggest event in the coming week. But this time we are breaking with tradition to bring you the week’s biggest non-event: Davos. Every year the great and the good gather in the Swiss Alps at the grandly titled World Economic Forum to give their answers to the big questions. But Covid-19, running now into its fourth calendar year, has seen it called off again. In the absence of a real-life forum this month, the Observer is publishing, as a public service, a summary of the talks not given, the panels that remained ungathered, the roundtables not tabled. Inequality after Covid-19 As coronavirus spread around the world, it caused turmoil in financial markets, but they quickly snapped back and US equities have hit a series of new records. Broad measures of inequality are notoriously unreliable, but one obvious sign is seen right at the top, with 10 “centibillionaires” – people worth more than $100bn – according to Bloomberg’s daily league table. Hosted by Davos founder Klaus Schwab, engineer, economist and expert in getting the world’s richest people in the same room. Inflation Central bankers did manage to get to their own mountain resort working holiday in the summer at Jackson Hole, but since then inflation has really jumped up the agenda, thanks to surging global gas prices and disruption to supply chains. So are the Fed’s Jerome Powell and the Bank of England’s Andrew Bailey really willing to play the role of monetary hawks? Hosted by Jens Weidmann, the German economist who spent a decade crying wolf on inflation at the European Central Bank, only for price rises to arrive just after he left. China’s place in the world The pandemic originated in China, but as that country overtakes the US as the great global economic power, will the world fall into a “Thucydides trap” and tend inexorably towards war? Hosted by HSBC boss Noel Quinn, whose bet is on Beijing, if his company’s apparent willingness to overlook Chinese repression is any guide, along with JP Morgan boss Jamie Dimon, who managed an impressive two apologies after joking that his bank would outlast China’s Communist party. Crypto There is no shortage of people willing to go on about how cryptocurrencies will change the world. Just ask Kazakhstan, where bitcoin mining may or may not have been a factor in recent energy price protests. Candidates for a Davos panel might include El Salvador’s crypto-bro president Nayib Bukele, underwear tycoon/PPE connoisseur/bitcoin enthusiast Michelle Mone, and Twitter founder/payments boss/Victorian sage Jack Dorsey. Medicine after the pandemic The pandemic has proved a financial and public relations triumph for big pharma, which has (with honourable exceptions) firmly cashed in. So what next for biotech? Hosted by noted thought leader Elizabeth Holmes alongside Jacek Olczak, chief executive of cigarette maker Philip Morris International, which wants to move towards net zero dead customers by buying an inhaler company. Build Back Better Big economics had already quietly acknowledged that fiscal austerity was a bad idea after the financial crisis, but the pandemic has not so much opened the floodgates as destroyed them. Government investment is firmly back in vogue. Who better to talk us through the implications than Joe Biden, whose flagship economic policy is to “build back better” (just don’t ask how it will pass the US Senate), and Boris Johnson, whose flagship economic policy is to “build back better” (just don’t ask about new trains, parties, energy prices, tax rises, etc)?Anthony Martial has hit back at Ralf Rangnick’s suggestion that the forward had refused to be part of Manchester United’s squad for Saturday’s trip to Aston Villa. Rangnick, the interim Manchester United manager, named only eight substitutes for the match at Villa Park. After the game, which ended in a 2-2 draw, Rangnick claimed that Martial’s absence from the travelling party was the player’s choice. “He [Martial] didn’t want to be in the squad,” Rangnick said. “He would have been in the squad normally. He didn’t want to be and that’s the reason why he wasn’t with us.” The United bench was a player short of the nine allowed, with goalkeepers Tom Heaton and Dean Henderson both included. Martial refuted his manager’s claims in a post on his Instagram story on Saturday evening. “I will never refuse to play a match for Man United,” the French forward wrote. “I’ve been here for seven years and I never disrespected, and will never disrespect, the club and the fans.” In December, Martial’s agent said the player was intent on leaving Manchester United in January in order to gain more game time. “Anthony wishes to leave the club in January,” Philippe Lamboley told Sky Sports News. “He just needs to play. He doesn’t want to stay in January and I will speak to the club soon.” The 26-year-old has a contract until 2024 but has rarely featured this season, and has not started a game for United since the Champions League win over Villarreal in November. Rangnick has previously indicated he would consider allowing unsettled players to leave on loan in January, without naming Martial specifically.A woman was pushed to her death in front of a subway train at New York’s Times Square station. The man believed responsible for the incident on Saturday morning fled the scene but turned himself in to transit police a short time later, the police commissioner, Keechant Sewell, said at a news conference with the mayor, Eric Adams, at the station. The 40-year-old victim, a New York resident, was waiting for a southbound R train around 9.40am when she was apparently shoved, according to police. “This incident was unprovoked, and the victim does not appear to have had any interaction with the subject,” Sewell said. A second woman told police the man had approached her minutes earlier and she feared he would push her on to the tracks. “He approaches her and he gets in her space. She gets very, very alarmed,” assistant chief Jason Wilcox said. “She tries to move away from him and he gets close to her, and she feels that he was about to physically push her on to the train. As she’s walking away she witnesses the crime where he pushes our other victim in front of the train.” The suspect, whose name has not yet been released, has a criminal history and has been on parole, Wilcox said. “He does have in the past three emotionally disturbed encounters with us that we have documented,” he said. Charges against him in connection with the alleged subway attack were pending, Wilcox said. Subway conditions and safety have become a worry for some New Yorkers during the pandemic. Although police statistics show major felonies in the subways have dropped over the past two years, so has ridership, making it difficult to compare. Several riders were slashed and assaulted by a group of attackers on a train in lower Manhattan in May, and four separate stabbings, two of them fatal, happened within a few hours on a single subway line in February. In recent months, there have been several instances of people being stabbed, assaulted or shoved on to the tracks at stations in the Bronx, Brooklyn and at Times Square. Adams, who has been mayor for two weeks, has noted that a perception of danger could drive more people to eschew the subway, complicating the city’s economic recovery as it tries to draw people back to offices, tourist attractions and more. “We want to continue to highlight how imperative it is that people receive the right mental health services, particularly on our subway system,” the mayor said on Saturday. “To lose a New Yorker in this fashion will only continue to elevate the fears of individuals not using our subway system. Our recovery is dependent on the public safety in this city and in the subway system.” Under his predecessor, Bill de Blasio, the city repeatedly said it was deploying more police to subways after attacks last year and pressure from transit officials. The agency that runs the subway system, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, sped up work to install security cameras in all 472 subway stations citywide, finishing that project in September. With Associated PressThe violent unrest in Kazakhstan that began with peaceful protests in early January has left 225 people dead, authorities have said in a dramatic increase on previous tolls. “During the state of emergency, the bodies of 225 people were delivered to morgues, of which 19 were law enforcement officers and military personnel,” Serik Shalabayev, the head of criminal prosecution at the prosecutor’s office, told a briefing on Saturday. Others were “armed bandits who participated in terrorist attacks”, Shalabayev added. “Unfortunately, civilians have also become victims of acts of terrorism.” The unprecedented clashes between security forces and anti-government protesters in the energy-rich ex-Soviet state prompted the president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, to declare a state of emergency and call in help from a Russian-led military bloc. Shalabayev said 50,000 people joined the riots throughout the country at their peak on 5 January, when crowds stormed and torched government buildings, cars, banks and shops in several major cities. Kazakhstan had previously acknowledged fewer than 50 fatalities – 26 “armed criminals” and 18 security officers – from a conflict that exposed infighting at the top of the government. A higher death toll of 164 appeared on an official Telegram channel last week but was quickly retracted. Asel Artakshinova, a spokeswoman for the health ministry, said that more than 2,600 people had sought treatment at hospitals, with 67 remaining in a serious condition. Authorities in Kazakhstan have blamed the violence on bandits and international “terrorists” who they said hijacked the protests that saw the epicentre of unrest move from the west to the country’s largest city, Almaty. They have not provided evidence about who the alleged foreign bandits and terrorists were. The protests have been the biggest threat so far to the regime established by Kazakhstan’s founding president, Nursultan Nazarbayev, who stepped down in 2019 and handpicked Tokayev as his successor. Much of the popular anger has appeared directed at Nazarbayev, who is 81 and had ruled Kazakhstan since 1989 before handing over power. Tokayev this week launched an unprecedented attack on Nazarbayev, saying his mentor had failed to share the country’s vast wealth with ordinary Kazakhs. On Saturday, the sovereign wealth fund Samruk-Kazyna said two of Nazarbayev’s relatives, Dimash Dosanov and Kairat Sharipbayev, had lost their jobs at the helm of energy companies. The moves were made “in accordance with the decision of the board of directors”, the fund said. Sharipbayev, 58, is widely believed to be the husband of Nazarbayev’s oldest daughter, Dariga Nazarbayeva. He was in charge of the national gas company QazaqGaz, formerly KazTransGas. Dosanov, 40, is the husband of Nazarbayev’s youngest daughter, Aliya Nazarbayeva, 41, and was the head of the national oil transporter KazTransOil. Tokayev has in part blamed QazaqGaz for the historic crisis, which started with a spike in prices for liquified petroleum gas, a popular fuel, sparking the peaceful protests at the start of January. Nazarbayev has three daughters. Middle daughter Dinara Kulibayeva’s husband, Timur Kulibayev, is viewed as one of the country’s richest men with extensive interests in the energy sector. Together the pair control Kazakhstan’s largest commercial bank, Halyk. With Agence France-Presse and ReutersNovak Djokovic’s bid to stay in Australia and defend his Australian Open title will be decided in hours, as the full federal court adjourned to consider the world No. 1’s last-ditch legal challenge. On Sunday the court heard the Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, had failed to ask Djokovic his views on vaccination and to consider the impact of deporting him on anti-vaccination sentiment. Chief justice James Allsop adjourned the court at 2.40pm, indicating that a result would likely be given on Sunday evening, just hours before the Open tournament is due to start on Monday morning. Djokovic, the reigning champion, is slated to play his first round match in the tournament on Monday night in the schedule released Sunday afternoon. In his Friday decision Hawke concluded that Djokovic’s presence in Australia might risk “civil unrest” because he is a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment” because of his earlier statements and public perception of his views on vaccination. In amended submissions lodged overnight, Djokovic’s lawyers argued Hawke failed to consider that cancelling his visa will also have the effect of inciting anti-vax sentiment. The case is likely to hinge on whether Hawke had any evidence to conclude Djokovic’s presence could be harmful and whether the god-like powers of Australian migration law allowed him to cancel the visa without explicitly weighing the harm of the alternative: to deport Djokovic. Djokovic’s lawyers argued any unrest around Djokovic had only been sparked by the original decision by a home affairs delegate to cancel his visa, citing a BBC World story about backlash in the wake of that decision, later overturned by the federal circuit court. “It was irrational, illogical or unreasonable for the minister to fail to consider the influence of Mr Djokovic’s removal on anti-vaccination sentiment,” they submitted. Djokovic’s lawyers warned Hawke was not entitled to cancel Djokovic’s visa based on an “evidence-free figment of his imagination” about unrest if he stayed without considering the reverse. But chief justice James Allsop interrupted Djokovic’s barrister, Nicholas Wood, to note that use of the term “evidence” could “mislead” because the decision-maker is also entitled to use their “perception and common-sense”. Allsop later remarked that “common-sense and intuition” would suggest that “if Mr Djokovic won the Open – there’s an example, embedded in the minister’s reasons - for young and not so young fans of tennis”. Allsop also suggested the immigration minister might have been “alive to” problems in the future if he did cancel Djokovic’s visa without “finely balancing” the detriments. Djokovic’s lawyers disputed claims the tennis star is an anti-vaxxer, arguing this was based on one statement in April 2020 “well before Covid vaccines were available”. Djokovic later clarified his view when he said he was “no expert”, would keep an “open mind” but wanted to have “an option to choose what’s best for my body”, they said. “There was no evidence before the minister that Mr Djokovic has ever urged any others not to be vaccinated. Indeed, if anything, Mr Djokovic’s conduct over time reveals a zealous protection of his own privacy rather than any advocacy.” Hawke’s counsel, Stephen Lloyd, responded at the hearing that the minister was entitled to infer that Djokovic “could have been vaccinated if he had wanted to be”. In court documents also released on Sunday morning, Hawke submitted there was “insufficient basis for the court to make the finding” that he failed to consider unrest in the event Djokovic was deported, and that the onus lay with Djokovic to prove he hadn’t done so. They submitted that in his decision the minister noted support in Australia and abroad for Djokovic to stay, the risk to Australia’s global reputation, the risk to hosting the Australian Open and “the appearance of politically motivated decision-making”. This showed the minister had adequately considered the consequences of removing Djokovic, they submitted. Allsop asked how the court should decide if it was “plain to anyone with common-sense that cancelling the visa would cause overwhelming public discord and risks of transmission through very large public gatherings”. Lloyd replied that this would lead to the “surprising notion” that Australia could not exercise its sovereignty by deporting someone “because the cancellation might lead to adverse consequences”. Lloyd argued Australia “must not be bound to suffer the presence of an alien for fear of what might happen if they were removed”. “The minister was obviously aware his decision will result in some level of further unrest, but he was principally concerned that Mr Djokovic’s presence would encourage people to emulate his position, putting the health of Australians at risk,” Lloyd said. Lloyd said given the minister was aware of “the broad possibility of unrest, whatever his decision” – citing demonstrations after the first cancellation – it was “impossible to infer” Hawke hadn’t considered the risk of a second cancellation. Even if Hawke didn’t consider the risk of anti-vaxx sentiment if Djokovic was deported, the minister argued that didn’t make his decision illogical, irrational or unreasonable, and it was not a material error. Djokovic’s amended submissions criticised Hawke for not making “the obvious, critical and easy inquiry of Mr Djokovic as to what his sentiment [about vaccination] in fact was”. Hawke responded that this exercise would have made no difference, questioning “what Mr Djokovic could have said to the minister in response”. It argued this “would not have altered the fact of his previous public statements and the views of those in the Australian community as to what his views on vaccination were”. Sunday’s hearing began with a statement from Chief Justice James Allsop explaining while appeal is possible from a single judge, no appeal will be possible from the full court.All four hostages at a Texas synagogue have been released unharmed and the captor pronounced dead more than 10 hours after he disrupted a religious service and began a tense stand-off with police. The gunman had initially taken four people, including the rabbi, hostage at the Congregation Beth Israel in Colleyville, in the Dallas-Fort Worth metropolitan area. One hostage was released unharmed six hours later. Members of the FBI’s hostage rescue team stormed the synagogue to free the three remaining hostages. The gunman was pronounced dead, the Colleyville police chief, Michael Miller, said at a news conference. Local reporters said they heard the sound of explosions, possibly flashbangs, and the sound of gunfire shortly before the Texas governor, Greg Abbott, announced the crisis was over. “Prayers answered. All hostages are out alive and safe,” Abbott said on Twitter. The FBI said they have confirmed the identity of the gunman but said they would not yet disclose it. The FBI declined to confirm the cause of his death, saying it was still under investigation. It was not clear how the suspect might have armed himself. The police department said it first responded to the synagogue with Swat teams in response to emergency calls beginning at about 10.41am and police arrived at about 12.30pm. FBI negotiators soon opened contact with the man, who said he wanted to speak to a woman held in a federal prison. The incident took place during an online livestream of the Shabbat service at the synagogue. The livestream cut off at about 2pm local time. In the livestream the hostage-taker was heard demanding the release of Aafia Siddiqui, a Pakistani neuroscientist suspected of having ties to al-Qaida, who was convicted of trying to kill US military officers while in custody in Afghanistan, one of the law enforcement officials said. Siddiqui is in federal prison in Texas. Before the livestream was ended, a man could be heard ranting and talking about religion and his sister, the Fort Worth Star-Telegram reported. The man could be heard repeatedly saying he didn’t want to see anyone hurt and that he believed he was going to die, the newspaper said. Barry Klompus, 63, a member of the congregation since it opened in 1999, said he had been alerted to the situation by another member and quickly turned to the live feed until it was cut off. “It was horrible listening and watching, and it’s that much more horrible not knowing,” Klompus told Reuters. Texas resident Victoria Francis told the AP that she watched about an hour of the livestream before it cut out. She said she heard the man rant against America and claim he had a bomb. “He was just all over the map. He was pretty irritated and the more irritated he got, he’d make more threats, like ‘I’m the guy with the bomb. If you make a mistake, this is all on you.’ And he’d laugh at that,” she said. “He was clearly in extreme distress.” The Council on American-Islamic Relations, the nation’s largest Muslim advocacy group, condemned the attack on Saturday afternoon. “This latest antisemitic attack at a house of worship is an unacceptable act of evil,” the CAIR national deputy director, Edward Ahmed Mitchell, said in a statement. “We stand in solidarity with the Jewish community.” The FBI said the gunman was specifically focused on an issue not directly connected to the Jewish community. FBI special agent in charge Matt DeSarno told the Associated Press there was no immediate indication that the man had connections to any broader plan but that the agency’s investigation “will have global reach”. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said Joe Biden had been briefed, while the Israeli prime minister, Naftali Bennett, said he was monitoring the situation closely. Congregation Beth Israel began in 1998 as a chavurah, or a small group of Jewish people who gather for prayer services, its website states. This group established a synagogue in Colleyville in 1999 and moved to its current location in 2005. Colleyville is a city of about 23,000 people, located a short distance from the Dallas-Fort Worth international airport. With Reuters and Associated PressThe question You said in a previous column that “a person is not their job”, which really resonated with me, because why do we define people by what they do? I’m wondering whether this is limiting my life. Whenever we meet someone, the small talk inevitably turns to “And what do you do?” For now, I am ready for that question. I am a teacher. Although there is satisfaction from the work there is also the mental load of overseeing not only the education of pupils, but increasingly their welfare, and I struggle to juggle responsibilities of family and work. I regularly think about packing it in for something that does not take up so much headspace. Being a teacher is how I have defined myself for 20 years. How could I square it with myself, if I had to describe myself with a non-professional job? I can’t imagine saying “I stack shelves” or “I work in doggy daycare.” When I try to discuss it with my dad, he says he would be “disappointed because I like telling people you are a teacher”. I know I have asked my own children about what they would like to do when they are grown up and maybe I’ve unintentionally shown more approval when they lean towards something professional, but I now realise that all I want is for them to be happy. So, how do I find the courage to just be me, without a label? And how do I instil this into my daughters? Philippa’s answer So, if I understand the question, the problem is not who you are with yourself – you’d be happy working as a dog walker or stacking shelves – it is how you identify yourself to others and the weighty problem of your dad’s supply of small talk. I’m imagining you working at the supermarket, taking on colleagues’ problems. Or at doggy daycare worrying about a dog’s fleas that his owners don’t seem interested in. I can guess, in other words, you will be taking your work home, whatever it was, because you care, it’s what you’re like. I’m guessing you have a capacity to take on problems – probably quite efficiently – and that if you empty your head of some of them, you’d find others to fill up that headspace. We get into these habits that take awareness and willpower to shift. Now, you could stay in a profession that does afford you satisfaction, but learn how to be boundaried with yourself so you bring less of the headspace aspects of it home. But perhaps you are more fed up with it than that, and the only thing stopping you leaving is what other people might think. You say you can’t leave your job because your dad’s small talk would run dry. That is the best non-reason I’ve ever heard (and I’ve heard a lot). Thinking about you chatting with your dad about the possibility of changing jobs is making me smile. I think this is probably because, whatever your mental load, you also have a sense of fun. In terms of how others may see you, I reckon you get invited out a lot because people want you around as you are delightful and not because you are a professional person. If you really want a less responsible job, sure give up the teaching, you’ve done your time and duty, you can have a new adventure. Your experience and work to date will not be wasted – it has made you what you are today. It can still inform your small talk. Small talk is big talk in disguise. When we ask about the weather or what someone’s work is, what we are really saying is, “I’m friendly, are you friendly?” or “Can I get on with you?” but it’s too weird to say that, so “What do you do?” remains our stock phrase. And it’s not what we say in reply that matters – and I cannot stress this enough – but how we say it. I can imagine you at a party in a year’s time when you have given up teaching, being asked what you do and you replying something like, “I have the best job in the world. I’ve bought a jet washer and spend my days making people’s patios as good as new. It’s so satisfying, the only trouble is the work experience boy I’ve got working with me for a week is terribly unhappy as he is going through his first romantic breakup, I’m very worried about him…” I wonder how many of us are doing responsible, professional jobs when we’d rather be, say, taking people’s dogs for walkies. Not for financial reasons, but just because we worry what new people will think when we define ourselves in social situations. Remember small talk is the big question of “Are you friendly, can I get on with you?” and all you have to be is friendly when you reply. If you get really stuck, you can go, “You first…” If they tell you they are a teacher and are getting bogged down with all the changing rules and requirements, I’m sure you’ll be very simpatico. And how can you teach your own children to be happy? You can’t. But if you accept them and their ideas as they are, you will be helping to instil confidence and a capacity for happiness. However, if your attitude is more: I’ll accept you only if you are working towards a recognised, respectable profession and achieve that, well, maybe that might compromise their capacity for joy and I think you suspect as much. If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.uk“The border’s like our back door,” a concrete salesman named Chris told me in January 2017. “You leave it open, and anyone can walk right in.” It was the day of Trump’s presidential inauguration, and we were chatting on the exhibition floor of a trade show in Las Vegas, called World of Concrete. Circular saws, cement mixers, gleaming new trucks – it was an unusual place to talk about the politics of immigration. But the simple promise of a concrete wall between the US and Mexico had flung a business tycoon into the White House, and I wanted to understand what this was about. Chris was a millennial from a small town in western Ohio. With a trim beard and short, sandy hair, he projected an air of casual self-sufficiency. “I don’t really like neighbors,” he quipped, speaking with a dose of wry humor about how far he chose to live from other people. I was struck by the mismatch between the salesman’s genial manner and his suspiciousness, his sense of anyone beyond his home or country as a potential threat. I wondered, as we talked amid a sea of construction equipment, what it would take to build genuine warmth and concern for outsiders, rather than such walls. For the last five years, I’ve crisscrossed the United States as an anthropologist, pursuing conversation and debate between the coasts and heartland. I set out in 2016 to grasp the appeal of the border wall, the fantasy of sealing off the country with a stark, symbolic barrier. What I learned is that such barricades appeal to many Americans because they resonate with familiar boundaries in their daily lives. While Trump’s presidency has passed, the defensive thinking that drove his ascent remains a pervasive and powerful force. I think of the Gen Xer with a bushy beard and colorful tattoos down the length of his arms, whom I saw hawking a motion sensor lighting system with these words of advice: “I know it sounds cold, but you want to keep people away as best you can.” Or this motto and promise from the home security company ADT: “a line in the sand between your family and an uncertain world.” Time and again, I’ve heard such ideas expressed by Americans I’ve met and spoken with around the country in my job as an anthropologist: businessmen and truck drivers, police officers and media personalities. The give and take of neighbors has long been a foundation for our democracy, philosopher Nancy Rosenblum writes. But cultural and economic forces have worked stark distinctions – insider v outsider, familiar v stranger, safety v threat – deep into the texture of our daily lives. These hard lines and everyday divides fuel our political troubles in ways we don’t always realize. ••• To get to this gated community on Florida’s Treasure Coast, you have to drive through a continuous stretch of walled compounds, everything inside hidden from view by towering hedges and palms. I show my credentials at the guardhouse, and the railway gate swings open. As I drive with the security director past sprawling homes and unnervingly empty streets, Timothy tells me about a residential population – wealthy, mostly white – primed for disaster and desperate for repose. One out of every six American houses in a residential community is secured now by such community walls or fences, and I met Timothy to try to understand why. Residents who live here are mostly seeking psychological assurance, he admitted: “They like us smiling and waving at them.” Contemporary gated communities build on a century of intentional segregation and suburban white flight. Suburban interiors were designed as “escape capsules to enable their independence from the outside world”, architectural historian Andrea Vesentini has shown, built as shelters from the unpredictability of urban life. The pandemic has magnified the appeal of such distance and defense, with more features like security cameras, video doorbells and HEPA air filters built into new houses than ever before. These histories have profoundly reshaped how Americans live in relation to each other, as much as where. So much of everyday life and leisure now takes place in secluded spaces. The front porch sessions with neighbors and passersby that once epitomized American social life have given way to more private gatherings on the backyard deck, or time with the television and other screens indoors. These changes lessen the chance for happenstance conversation with neighbors and strangers. A realtor in Fargo, North Dakota, helped me understand the significance of these shifts. A fit man in his early 60s, Paul had worked in the Fargo-Moorhead metropolitan real estate market for more than 20 years. He took me one morning to a compact new house in a middle-class subdivision, the smell of fresh paint lingering in the cool air inside. Standing in the living room and looking to the front, I felt enclosed in the space, almost hemmed in: the house was fronted by a three-stall garage and one narrow window on to the street and sidewalk. Turn to the back though, and you were flooded with light from every direction, the rear of the house framed with big panes of glass instead of walls. “Doesn’t it bother people that there aren’t many windows in the front?” I asked Paul. “You can hardly see what’s happening on the street.” “The inside is what they care about,” he replied. “And,” he added, pointing out the sunroom at the rear of the house and the back patio beyond, “living on the back. This is where we engage socially with our neighbors.” The small patio was lodged between other private decks and yards, a place to socialize with others by choice rather than necessity. “This is my space, I’ll engage with who I want, when I want,” the realtor explained. “It’s a bit selfish,” he acknowledged. ••• Whether it comes to the climate emergency or systemic racism, the migrant crisis or the ongoing pandemic, so much turns on whether we can acknowledge and accept the intertwining of our separate lives. But it’s not just our homes that are styled now like defensive fortresses. Over the last decade, imposing vehicles like SUVs and trucks have come to dominate the American car market, far outpacing smaller sedans in sales. These are automobiles designed with aggressive profiles and built as defensive steel cocoons, often marketed as ways to survive an uncertain and even hostile world. As an automotive designer in Los Angeles told me, such vehicles appeal in a society that is “suffering a case of insecurity”. There is a political side to such choices: researchers have found that cities with more sedans than pickup trucks will probably vote Democratic in a presidential election, while those with more pickup trucks will probably vote Republican. But it isn’t simply a matter of signaling partisan affiliation through automotive choice. Vehicles say a lot about what people care most about. Consider an exchange I had one morning in Los Angeles with the driver of a Cadillac Escalade, a few years ago. He was an Asian American dad, like me, and we’d run into each other on the driveway of a cheery and progressive nursery school on the Westside. I’d walked my daughter there that morning; his daughter was buckled into one of the Escalade’s seats. I was struck by how tiny the child looked inside the three-ton vehicle, how challenging it would be for her to clamber down to the ground outside. The hulking white automobile was brand new, still without license plates. Why an Escalade? I asked. “It’s perceived to be safe,” he replied. “You know, more mass.” More mass. The phrase kept playing on my mind as I walked back home. Whose safety was secured by all the vehicular mass hurtling down American roads, and at whose expense? The rise of the SUV in global automotive markets is the second largest cause of increasing carbon emissions over the last decade, more significant than shipping, aviation and heavy industry. And at an everyday scale, there are serious consequences for those who encounter them in collisions. Because of their rigid and heavy frames, SUVs and trucks are far more dangerous than conventional sedans for the pedestrians, cyclists and children at play who share American streets with automobiles. Pedestrian deaths on roadways in the United States have soared by more than 50% over the last decade. Someone in an armored cockpit, someone else on their own two feet: this too is a polarized encounter. Low-income Americans and people of color are much more likely to be struck and killed while walking, which brings home another difficult truth in these developments. Indifference is a privilege. Some can afford to seal themselves off from the world beyond, while those left outside must fend for themselves as best they can. ••• The fortress mindset thrives on suspicion, and the urge to protect oneself can make shared spaces and resources seem more dangerous than they are. Take that necessity for life itself, the water we drink. American consumers now buy an astounding 75 billion disposable bottles of water each year, each a tiny enclosure of an essential resource, a shelter made for one. The bottled water industry has capitalized on widespread unease about the quality of public water supplies in the United States. Meanwhile, as interest and investment in shared public infrastructure lags, people are left with polluted and contaminated water, forced to rely on bottled alternatives. Two years before the pandemic began, I attended a bottled water trade show in Texas. Most everyone walked around with a small disposable bottle in hand, always closed, the little caps screwed back on after every sip. “I don’t drink public water,” people would avow, wrinkling their noses in distaste at the very idea of a drinking fountain. “Someone else’s mouth is on it and over it.” Water fountains were switched off across the country in 2020 when the pandemic struck. But they’d already been disappearing for years, and how many will return remains uncertain. Bottled water is regulated so loosely that its quality is difficult to judge. Yet many Americans have come to believe again in the purity of a resource untouched by the wrong people, a dark contemporary echo of the segregated fountains of the Jim Crow era. At the bottled water trade show, I spoke with a middle-aged white man in a brown suit who worked for a water conditioning company in west Texas. I noticed his habit of crumpling up each disposable bottle into a little ball when it was empty, and I asked him about this gesture. “I like to put things away,” he told me, describing how he’d throw these crinkled balls of plastic into the back of his SUV while he was driving. I imagined them piling up in heaps, a travelling signpost for the mountain of waste that all of us are building together. There’s a curious resonance between this faith in a sealed bottle, and a culture that celebrates the invulnerable body. Americans are often encouraged to imagine their own bodies as armored enclosures, to seal off against the outside world. Think of bottled sports drinks like BodyArmor or BioSteel. “Your body, your fortress,” their taglines read. The coronavirus pandemic has supercharged such ideas, setting off a boom in personal disinfectant products and touchless technology, making it easier to deny the truth that we depend on each other for our wellbeing. The deep resistance to face masks and vaccination in the United States also relies, quite often, on a highly individualized sense of bodily autonomy. I think of a middle-aged white businessman from Michigan with whom I’ve debated the pandemic for many months. A staunch libertarian, he considers compulsory public health precautions as tantamount to slavery. They deny, he says, “my feelings, my rights, my personal body”. ••• Regular exposure to different points of view could complicate such diehard convictions. But our fractured media have deepened the existing fissures of American society. Walls at home and on the road, shielding the body from exposure and the mind from uncomfortable ideas: these interlocking divides make it more difficult to take unfamiliar people and perspectives seriously; harder to acknowledge the needs of strangers, to trust their motives and empathize with their struggles. In an atomized society, others become phantoms all too easily, grist for the mill of resentment and mistrust. There’s a deep and pernicious history at work here. Longstanding patterns of neighborhood racial segregation have inflamed the prejudice against outgroups, bolstering stereotypes, as the political scientist Ryan Enos and others have shown. When such divisions are reproduced at an everyday scale, the gulf between self and other widens even further, and everyone becomes a potential outsider. But this isn’t all that is happening, or could yet happen. Around the country in 2020, the pandemic spurred a return to socializing with neighbors on front yards and porches. Cities and towns have carved out new places for walking, biking and outdoor life, new ways of sharing public space with people, known and unknown. It remains to be seen whether these are temporary adjustments or more enduring experiments. Movements for mutual aid, racial justice and cultural solidarity have also brought Americans together, spurring more radical commitments to collective care-taking, redrawing the line between stranger and kin. The vitality of such movements depends on adequate space and support. Calls abound to redesign our personal and public spaces for conviviality rather than isolation. Commons, parks and open streetscapes; living quarters and resources arranged to encourage social awareness, not solipsism; communication platforms that nurture contrary lines of thought: these spaces can nurture the capacity to live and thrive alongside others unlike oneself, working against the tendency to reject and retreat. Our feelings for others are structural realities as much as personal qualities. In a society built on walls of indifference, empathy will remain an elusive hope. For “the death of the heart” is one of the most tragic consequences of segregation, as James Baldwin observed: “You don’t know what’s happening on the other side of the wall.”Zahter, 30-32 Foubert’s Place, London W1F 7PS (zahter.co.uk). Hot and cold meze £9-£18, platters £18-£42, desserts £8-£9, wines from £29 The Instagram accounts I follow, like the gummy jars of condiments I collect in my fridge, are a hot mess: chefs showing off what they knocked up last night; carpetbagging food “influencers” whose brass neck enthrals but doesn’t influence me; jazz pianists offering useful tips; Grace Dent, because who wouldn’t want a window on her fabulous life? By far the most entertaining is @yemelerdeyizcom, a Turkish food and drink account, which posts endless videos of just two things: lamb kebabs being made, and portioned rounds of baklava being finished and boxed. The latter are always beautiful. There’s the ladling of the steaming syrup, the shiny golden curve of the filo pastry and the brilliant green of the crushed pistachios. Watching these videos is not the most embarrassing online displacement activity for a middle-aged man, but it’s bloody close. Best to have it out there. Like the tragic rainbow chaser that I am, I had always assumed this to be the very best baklava possible: the platonic ideal of the polyamorous marriage of pistachios, filo and syrup, and one that I should aspire to experience. Then I was served the baklava at Zahter, a new restaurant off London’s Carnaby Street which re-examines the Turkish repertoire. It’s not Instagram beautiful or it may be, but in the low light it’s impossible to see. (Go check my Insta where I am @jayrayner1, and I will have posted a picture.) But by God, it’s good; so good that its gorgeousness could not be relegated to the end of this column when I might be short on space. There is none of the mouth-drying, friable confetti of overbaked filo. It is soft and luscious. Too often baklava can be cloyingly oversweet, like the maker has some side hustle knocking out insulin and is looking to recruit new customers. This is perfectly balanced so the flavour of the pistachio is also allowed its voice and, just to be on the safe side, there is a quenelle of thick cream. It is quite simply the best baklava I have ever eaten. It is a massive symphonic coda, a big thump of brass and strings at the end of a meal which, to extend a metaphor until it snaps, was big on cheery melodies and harmonies. Zahter, the Turkish name for a variety of wild thyme, occupies a tottering corner site with a cheery view of the street life outside. It is the first standalone venture from Turkish chef Esra Muslu. After training in Australia, she ran a series of restaurants in Istanbul before being recruited as head chef of Soho House in the city. From there she moved to a similar role at the company’s outpost in London’s Shoreditch and then to Ottolenghi in Spitalfields. The menu, built around both a wood and a charcoal-burning oven, is a wandering journey across Turkey. From the south make sure to order the stuffed globe artichoke. Also make sure to bring an enthusiastic friend to help you eat it. The £16 price tag looks chunky in the extreme until it arrives. It is a very large, mature flower and a victory of a day’s preparation. After simmering in acidulated water, the choke is removed, the leaves put back in place on to the heart and trimmed. While it is still warm, it is bathed in a fragrant lemony dressing. Then comes a stuffing of rice, spiced with cinnamon and allspice, lemon juice and handfuls of fresh green herbs. The stuffing is pushed in between every leaf, into every nook and cranny. Finally, it’s piled with more chopped green herbs, toasted almonds and shiny pomegranate seeds. There is a still-warm wedge of roasted lemon on the top for an extra squeeze. It’s one of those utterly engrossing and formidable dishes, which draws you in one leaf at a time. That and the baklava would make a sustaining dinner, but I understand my responsibilities. There must be more. We have an ovenware dish of tiger prawns roasted in frothing lakes of garlic butter, hefty with Aleppo pepper, which leaves juices behind that demand to be mopped away with their airy breads. We have roasted and crusted chicken livers under bales of fresh green herbs. Only a fava bean purée with grape slices that have been doused in the anise-boosted spirit raki doesn’t quite hit the spot, being overly sweet. For balance, we turn to the section of the menu headed platters, and a quite magnificent dish of dense lamb kofta with white beans, fresh red chilli and further handfuls of flat leaf, all piled on to a flat bread cheerfully absorbing the very essence of what has been shovelled on top of it. Then comes half a roasted quince, and finally that baklava with a capital B. Zahter has been open only a few weeks when I visit, and is trading into difficult circumstances, but still has a youthful buzz and assuredness to it. It feels like a mature restaurant though not, it must be said, one aimed necessarily at a mature clientele. In this week’s Observer Food Monthly my regular column is a plea for new restaurants to employ someone who is at least in their 50s to help judge the environment they are building. I can’t pretend. Everything I whinge about in that column is present here at Zahter. I do have to use my iPhone torch to read the menu. The piped music and the hard surfaces make for a clattering acoustic. The upstairs dining room is reached via vertiginous stairs. For good measure the tables are too small for the way in which the kitchen sends out the dishes all at once. We end up with our wine and water bottle on the floor next to us. If Zahter doesn’t want older gits like me in their restaurant, whining about the lighting and the sound and the table size, then fine. But there’s an issue. Zahter’s food is great. There’s also value here, but it is not cheap. The short wine list starts at £29 a bottle before heading into the 30s and beyond. As the information at the top shows, the dishes are, shall we say, boldly priced. The final £150 bill does not feel extortionate for this food and this service and this location. But perhaps turn the music down and the lights up a little so you don’t risk excluding a whole demographic who may best be able to afford it. My motives are pure. I really do want as many people as possible to enjoy that fabulous baklava. News bites Nepalese chef Santosh Shah, who won a huge following when he made it to the finals of MasterChef: The Professionals in 2020, is releasing his first cookbook. Ayla: A Feast of Nepali Dishes from Terai, Hills and the Himalayas includes recipes for chicken momos with ginger and chilli, plantain curry, river fish with mustard and onion sauce as well as a host of spice mixes, pickles and chutneys. It’s published on 3 February. Find out more here. On 22 January the legendary jazz club Ronnie Scott’s is hosting a musical instrument amnesty. From 10am until 3pm anyone can drop off unloved or unwanted instruments to the club on London’s Frith Street; from plastic recorders through to violins, brass instruments and anything in between (but not pianos for storage reasons). In partnership with Julian Lloyd Webber’s charity, Sistema England and the Ronnie Scott’s Charitable Foundation, they will then be donated to school-age children both in the UK and elsewhere. Potential donors wanting more information should email ada@ronniescotts.co.uk. Only A Pavement Away, the charity offering hospitality skills and training to prison leavers, veterans and those facing homelessness, has announced it will be opening training cafés in 10 UK cities by the end of 2022. All those who staff them will receive qualifications, with the aim of getting 250 people into hospitality industry jobs by the end of the year. Visit onlyapavementaway.co.uk. Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1Alan Road reported on the return visit to Britain of the ‘graceful dancers of Korea’, having been a big hit in 1972 (‘East Side Story: Korea Brings on the Dancing Girls’, 4 September 1977) in an early example of its soft power, long before K-pop . The 45-strong National Dance Company had appeared in 50 other countries. Tongue in cheek, Road described them as ‘a Korean export that should meet with no tariff barriers in Europe’. ‘The posy of beautiful girls seen in Seoul’s Kyung-Bok Palace are releasing a flower dance for London audiences,’ he wrote. ‘With their feet hidden by long dresses they seem to glide across the stage in undulating ripples like colourful caterpillars.’ This was very much the traditional side of a rapidly changing country. ‘Traditional music is provided by flutes, drums like hour-glasses, a kind of harp that is a veritable cat’s cradle of strings and an instrument that sounds like someone opening and closing a door with a rusty hinge.’ Perhaps tariffs had prevented the export of WD-40 to Korea. Underneath all that polish lies years of hard work. Dancers began training from the age of six and would go on to study ‘the centuries-old mysteries of the three traditional forms – the court, religious and folk dances’. The performers at Sadler’s Wells had been rehearsing for five months. ‘Even in a practice room like a huge warehouse, where the temperature is in the high 80s and the taped music is inclined to hiccup, the graceful performers generate a certain magic with their hypnotic movements,’ wrote an enchanted Road. ‘European audiences may not catch the significance of every side-long flashing glance or the sadness in the outstretched fingertips,’ he concluded, ‘but the sheer beauty of the girls, the colour of their traditional costumes and the vitality of their dancing should not go unappreciated.’David Olusoga described his emotions on seeing his grandparents’ lives recorded in the 1921 census (“Time collapsed as I saw how my grandad lived a century ago. History turned intimate”, Comment). I too have wept while researching my family history through the censuses of 1841 onwards. My forebears lived in industrial Birmingham and experienced the hardships of those times, including overcrowding, infant mortality and low life expectancy. I have found my ancestors in orphanages and asylums and discovered the range of work they carried out in the “city of a thousand trades”. Their work was hard and often did not provide an income to cover decent housing, even if it had been available, though the goods they made were sold all over the world. This is history I never learned at school and rarely see dramatised on screen. During the pandemic, we have begun waking up to issues of historical and contemporary injustice but we are still a divided society and prepared to turn a blind eye to the fact that we benefit from the labour of people who cannot afford decent housing and healthy food, whether in this country or beyond. They are the key workers who have been so essential over the past two years. Susanne Wood Warwick Johnson’s time is up “Only levelling up can save Johnsonism from being little but a hollow creed” (Comment): the headline on Anne McElvoy’s thoughtful column was wrong on only one crucial point. There is no such thing as “Johnsonism” and never has been, only an unprincipled political shape-shifter driven by hubris, personal ambition and a delusional image of himself as a kind of Churchill reincarnate. From Brexit to Covid crisis blunders and an addiction to snappy slogans over coherent policy strategies, Boris Johnson epitomised a passing public appetite for the “celebrity politician” with hollow comedic flair substituted for serious, substantive ideas. The polls suggest the public is now ahead of much of the media in seeing through Johnson on several fronts, including Brexit where Buyers Remorse continues to gain momentum as reality replaces mis-sold fantasy. Combine that with the looming cost-of-living crisis and a sleaze and hypocrisy legacy that will refuse to go away and 2022 is the year when the Tory party’s ruthless self-survival instincts will seal Johnson’s fate. The May local election results could well prove breaking point when the men in blue suits conclude the prime minister’s time is up. As per the two words with which Ms McElvoy concluded: tick tock. Paul Connew St Albans, Hertfordshire Smart shopping? Hardly Supermarkets occupy a particular place in retailing, because everyone needs food (“Do smart supermarkets herald the end of shopping as we know it?”, Magazine). Large corporations (whether existing supermarkets or newcomers such as Amazon) tell us that “smart” shops are for our benefit, but really they’re cost-saving for the companies. And do those savings get returned to the customer in lower prices? No, they increase company profits and hence dividends to shareholders. And what happens to the checkout and other low-paid staff who lose their jobs? They’re likely to need state benefits. So automation of our shopping becomes yet another indirect route (alongside privatising or outsourcing public sector functions) for funnelling taxpayers’ money into shareholders’ pockets. But if too many people lose their jobs to “smart” automation, who will pay tax to fund the benefits to those left un- or under-employed? Pam Lunn Kenilworth, Warwickshire Stop striving. Start thinking “Can you think yourself young?” (the New Review) looks at the issue from the wrong side. Evolution and resource constraints dictate that the growth and numbers of all living things must be limited. For the vast number of species, this means death. Thus, it could be that thinking fatalistically about death makes the inevitable easier to face and faster to come. And to ensure future generations have a habitable planet, all of us of all ages must “rethink our perceptions” that we must forever be achieving something in order to be fulfilled. Constant striving can be exhausting to the individual and ruinous to the planet. A better question might be: “Can you think yourself at peace?” Jon Burden London W14 So much for going green A subheading to the article “What I’ve learned from my year with an electric car” (Focus) equates driving an electric car with going green. The huge carbon costs of manufacturing and transporting cars, the environmental and human costs of lithium mining, the enormous amount of electricity needed to enable mass electric car use, the damage to human health of particulate pollution caused by the friction between tyres and Tarmac: these do not add up to going green. We need to stop presenting electric cars as good for the environment. They are simply less damaging than petrol or diesel cars. Going green means walking, cycling and using public transport. Hazel Pennington Bath Science, but not as we know it In “Is this the dawn of post-theory science?” (the New Review), Laura Spinney paints a picture that should be familiar, but depressing, to many working in the human and life sciences. She asks whether the “classic methodology of hypothesise, predict and test” has been superseded by big data and machine learning. As she rightly notes, this is to replace the traditional scientific project of understanding the world with one of merely predicting it. But this is not to propose a new way of doing science, but to propose not doing science at all. One can understand why Facebook and Google might want to “stop looking for the causes of things and be satisfied with correlations”. But why should humanity? Gabe Dupre Macclesfield, Cheshire It’s simple, Simon Simon Reeve’s reflections on his travels (“I worry I’m a climate hypocrite”, News) should serve as a prompt for programme makers to consider their impact on the environment. There may be a case (as Reeve explains) for engaging the audience by capturing “honest stories about what’s happening to our planet” and thus shocking the viewer. However, such tactics have been claimed before and they may do more to induce inertia and feelings of helplessness than to spur people into positive action. Much harder to make a case for entertainment by “celebrities” clocking up air, land and sea miles in motorised vehicles. Do they do this on our behalf, so we don’t have to, thereby helping us all to minimise our own carbon footprint? Or are they about presenting themselves as having a jolly outing and inviting us to do likewise? The latter possibility is all the more worrying when it involves quests for ever new places to “discover” – places that have so far escaped the onslaught of tourism. The plethora of media messages asserting what we must do in order to combat climate change needs to translate into personal commitments of, I will do today, tomorrow and thereafter. Any programme and presenter of the world around us should be able to justify the associated environmental cost by bringing about this shift in attitude. In the absence of such justification, they really should face the charge of climate hypocrisy. Sibille Herdeis Frimley Green, Surrey I’m a (non-)believer As a Catholic, I disagree with Harlan Coben’s opinion that, unlike Jews, “you don’t see too many Catholics... saying, ‘Oh, I’m a Catholic, but I don’t buy a word of it’” (“This much I know”, Magazine). This prompted a two-minute rant to my long-suffering wife, also a Catholic who doesn’t buy a word of it. So I was delighted to read, again in the Magazine (“Sunday with…”), the musician Maverick Sabre’s comment that “I went to a Catholic school like most kids in Ireland, but we weren’t religious”. Peter Connolly Newcastle upon TyneNo 1 Douro Red, Douro, Portugal 2019 (£11.99, Waitrose) For many of us, Portuguese wine begins and ends with the Christmas port. This feels somewhat unjust. Quite apart from the fact that I reckon port is –or should be – a January wine par excellence (its force, sweetness and dark-fruited flavoury riches ideally suited to warming and brightening winter-darkened hearts and minds), Portugal is the source of some of the most deliciously different, good value table wines around at the moment. The Douro Valley, a couple of hours inland from the city of Porto and the home of port, is a logical first port of call. Red wines made from the same grape varieties as port – touriga nacional, trincadeira, tinta roriz and others – carry something of port’s forest- fruited bounty and ample full-bodied succulence, but are dry and significantly less powerfully alcoholic. Waitrose has a beautifully fragrant but deep, textured example from the excellent Quinta de la Rosa, a smaller producer that is also behind some of the region’s most refined ports. Niepoort NatCool Bairrada, Portugal 2020 (£19.50, 1 litre, buonvino.co.uk) Another Douro producer that is a dab hand at both the fortified intensity of port and wonderfully expressive table wines is the mercurial Dirk Niepoort. The scion of a port dynasty with Dutch heritage, Niepoort’s multifaceted portfolio of Douro wines ranges from the exceptional, citrus pithy, dry-herby, mineral, barrel-fermented, laser-guided dry white Redoma Branco 2019 (from £23.25, thewhiskyexchange.com; cambridgewine.com) to the seriously fine, feline-slinky, yet plumply fruited high-altitude red Batuta 2017 (£69.95, uncorked.co.uk) and the textbook vivaciously plummy and chocolatey Niepoort Late Bottled Vintage Port 2016 (£11.95 for a sensibly sized 37.5cl bottle, slurp.co.uk). As well as tending to his ever-growing Douro collection, the restless Niepoort’s interests have expanded across central Portugal, to the Dão and Bairrada regions. In the latter Niepoort has become a committed fan of the local red baga grape, which he uses to make his snazzy light, refreshing, berry-sappy and very pretty Nat Cool Bairrada: the kind of thirst-quenching red that goes so well with a plate of charcuterie. Geno Tinto, Alentejo, Portugal 2019 (from £7.99, ampswinemerchants.co.uk; morrishandbanham.com; partridges.co.uk) The sunny south of Portugal – like the sunny south of France and Italy’s Mezzogiorno – is a brilliant place for finding red wines filled with flavour and character at reasonable prices: just the thing for a week when those festive credit card bills bring their dreary, sobering news. In the Alentejo region, another influential winemaker with interests throughout the country, João Portugal Ramos, is behind the reliably rich, sweetly spiced, brambly fruited, roast meat-friendly Ramos Reserva Vinho Regional Aletejano 2019 (£8.99 or £7.49 as part of a mixed case of six bottles, majestic.co.uk), while Geno Tinto 2019 is a vivaciously fruity and gluggably fresh alternative. For white bargains, it’s better to head north, to the Atlantic-cooled green pleasantness and tinglingly snappy and aromatic wines of Vinho Verde. The Co-op’s nippy, light-on-its-feet (just 9.5% abv) Vale dos Pombos Vinho Verde (£6), for example, was very good with the kind of reviving but not-too-spicy, coriander-and-mint-laced Vietnamese-style salad that enliven dark evenings at this time of year. Follow David Williams on Twitter @Daveydaibach• An article about sexual assault claims against Prince Andrew said: “[Carolyn] Andriano told the Mail that [Virginia] Giuffre sent a picture of her with the prince by text.” Andriano actually said Giuffre had shown her the picture in person (Friend of Giuffre: ‘she told me she slept with prince’”, 9 January, p4). • The Covid-19 self-isolation period in Wales was seven days when an article was published, not 10 days (Ten days, seven or five... how long does the science say we should stay home?, 2 January, p13). It was reduced from 10 days to seven on 31 December. • Harlan Coben was misquoted as saying: “When I started my Harlan Coben series a lot of it was wish fulfilment.” The author was referring to his Myron Bolitar series (This much I know, 9 January, Magazine, p7). • The referendum on having a regional assembly for north-east England was held in 2004, not “more than 25 years ago” as a column said due to an error introduced during editing (It’s hard to ‘level up’ when No 10 is bearing down on us, 2 January, p53). Other recently amended articles include: I lost more than £12,000 in a scam and the Co-operative Bank won’t resolve it Restoring hope: ‘Why can’t we recreate the old energy of Sarajevo?’ As A-listers shun Golden Globes, have awards shows had their day? Lack of English speakers embarrasses Czech coalition Oxford Street buildings through time – photo essay Why the climate-wrecking craze for crypto art really is beyond satire It’s simple and takes 20 minutes… But learning to meditate could unlock your inner calm Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736Sue Perkins’ Big American Road Trip 9pm, Channel 4 Continuing the trend of packing off celebrities in a campervan for a couple of weeks, Sue Perkins embraces the nomad life in California and Colorado. From learning how to burlesque with fellow adventurers to taking a tearful moment to watch a deer prancing around in the wild, her first of two legs – Pacific Coast Highway to Yosemite – is highly enjoyable and will likely inspire a holiday booking or two tonight. Hollie Richardson Dancing on Ice 6.30pm, ITV It’s that time of year again – Phillip Schofield and Holly Willoughby return to the rink with the next cohort of icy celebrities. Lacing up their skates this time: Rachel Stevens, Bez, Brendan Cole, Regan Gascoigne, Ria Hebden and more. Plus, Oti Mabuse is a welcome addition to the judging panel, alongside Ashley Banjo, Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean. HR The Green Planet 7pm, BBC One Sir David Attenborough’s soothing exploration of all things green continues. This episode focuses on the world of fresh water – and the plant happenings within it. He ventures down a bubbling river in Brazil to investigate the problems these plants face while trying to thrive. HR The Great Pottery Throwdown 7.45pm, Channel 4 This week 10 clay-wranglers become nine as the crafts contest continues. Host Ellie Taylor sets tasks based on each contestant’s home town, with a bottle kiln surprise challenge before Potter of the Week is won. Everyone’s real aim, though, is to make judge Keith Brymer Jones suddenly, scarily cry. Jack Seale Vera 8pm, ITV More gloom up north tonight when a teacher’s body is found at the bottom of a cliffside walkway. “Fell, or was she pushed?” asks the ever-suspicious Vera (Brenda Blethyn). Sure enough, a murder investigation is soon under way. The victim’s family has already been plagued by tragedy, but will Vera discover something even darker? Henry Wong The Tourist 9pm, BBC One The headlong thriller featuring Jamie Dornan and his vast array of confused facial expressions continues. With likable Aussie constable Helen as his hostage, Dornan’s stressed amnesiac is still burning across the outback in search of answers. Meanwhile his ex Luci is confronted by bear-like assassin Billy in a static caravan. Graeme Virtue Film choices The Witch, 12.55am, Channel 4 In 1630s New England, a none-more-pious father, William (Ralph Ineson), is banished from his Puritan settler community and takes his family to farm on the fringes of a forest. There, his wife Katherine (Kate Dickie) gives birth to a son – but while her eldest child Thomasin (Anya Taylor-Joy, in her first starring role) is babysitting, the boy is abducted by a witch. Based on true accounts from the time, the debut film from Robert Eggers is a gloriously nightmarish horror, imaginative and brutal, as dark forces – and mutual suspicion – overwhelm the family. Simon Wardell Pig, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere In Michael Sarnoski’s deft drama, Nicolas Cage plays Rob, an Oregon forest-dwelling loner whose beloved pig – source of the truffles he sells – is abducted. Distraught, he heads into Portland with his young business contact, Amir (Alex Wolff), to find the lost porker. It’s the perfect recipe for a revenge thriller a la Point Blank – but this is the usually 11-on-the-dial Cage turned down to a two. Rob’s past in a quasi-criminal world of high-end dining, fight clubs and foodie philosophy is revealed slowly, with Cage simmering away nicely. SW Live sport Premier League Football: West Ham v Leeds 2pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Followed by Tottenham v Arsenal at 4pm. Women’s Super League Football: Arsenal v Reading 2.15pm, BBC One. Top-flight game at Meadow Park.Capitalism and democracy are compatible only if democracy is in the driver’s seat. That’s why I took some comfort just after the attack on the Capitol when many big corporations solemnly pledged they’d no longer finance the campaigns of the 147 lawmakers who voted to overturn election results. Well, those days are over. Turns out they were over the moment the public stopped paying attention. A report published last week by Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington shows that over the past year, 717 companies and industry groups have donated more than $18m to 143 of those seditious lawmakers. Businesses that pledged to stop or pause their donations have given nearly $2.4m directly to their campaigns or political action committees (Pacs). But there’s a deeper issue here. The whole question of whether corporations do or don’t bankroll the seditionist caucus is a distraction from a much larger problem. The tsunami of money now flowing from corporations into the swamp of American politics is larger than ever. And this money – bankrolling almost all politicians and financing attacks on their opponents – is undermining American democracy as much as did the 147 seditionist members of Congress. Maybe more. The Democratic senator Kyrsten Sinema – whose vocal opposition to any change in the filibuster is on the verge of dooming voting rights – received almost $2m in campaign donations in 2021 even though she is not up for re-election until 2024. Most of it came from corporate donors outside Arizona, some of which have a history of donating largely to Republicans. Has the money influenced Sinema? You decide. Besides sandbagging voting rights, she voted down the $15 minimum wage increase, opposed tax increases on corporations and the wealthy and stalled on drug price reform – policies supported by a majority of Democratic senators as well as a majority of Arizonans. Over the last four decades, corporate Pac spending on congressional elections has more than quadrupled, even adjusting for inflation. Labor unions no longer provide a counterweight. Forty years ago, union Pacs contributed about as much as corporate Pacs. Now, corporations are outspending labor by more than three to one. According to a landmark study published in 2014 by the Princeton professor Martin Gilens and Northwestern professor Benjamin Page, the preferences of the typical American have no influence at all on legislation emerging from Congress. Gilens and Page analyzed 1,799 policy issues in detail, determining the relative influence of economic elites, business groups, mass-based interest groups and average citizens. Their conclusion: “The preferences of the average American appear to have only a minuscule, near-zero, statistically non-significant impact upon public policy.” Lawmakers mainly listen to the policy demands of big business and wealthy individuals – those with the most lobbying prowess and deepest pockets to bankroll campaigns and promote their views. It’s probably far worse now. Gilens and Page’s data came from the period 1981 to 2002: before the supreme court opened the floodgates to big money in the Citizens United case, before Super Pacs, before “dark money” and before the Wall Street bailout. The corporate return on this mountain of money has been significant. Over the last 40 years, corporate tax rates have plunged. Regulatory protections for consumers, workers and the environment have been defanged. Antitrust has become so ineffectual that many big corporations face little or no competition. Corporations have fought off safety nets and public investments that are common in other advanced nations (most recently, Build Back Better). They’ve attacked labor laws, reducing the portion of private-sector workers belonging to a union from a third 40 years ago to just over 6% now. They’ve collected hundreds of billions in federal subsidies, bailouts, loan guarantees and sole-source contracts. Corporate welfare for big pharma, big oil, big tech, big ag, the largest military contractors and biggest banks now dwarfs the amount of welfare for people. The profits of big corporations just reached a 70-year high, even during a pandemic. The ratio of CEO pay in large companies to average workers has ballooned from 20-to-1 in the 1960s, to 320-to-1 now. Meanwhile, most Americans are going nowhere. The typical worker’s wage is only a bit higher today than it was 40 years ago, when adjusted for inflation. But the biggest casualty is public trust in democracy. In 1964, just 29% of voters believed government was “run by a few big interests looking out for themselves”. By 2013, 79% of Americans believed it. Corporate donations to seditious lawmakers are nothing compared with this 40-year record of corporate sedition. A large portion of the American public has become so frustrated and cynical about democracy they are willing to believe blatant lies of a self-described strongman, and willing to support a political party that no longer believes in democracy. As I said at the outset, capitalism is compatible with democracy only if democracy is in the driver’s seat. But the absence of democracy doesn’t strengthen capitalism. It fuels despotism. Despotism is bad for capitalism. Despots don’t respect property rights. They don’t honor the rule of law. They are arbitrary and unpredictable. All of this harms the owners of capital. Despotism also invites civil strife and conflict, which destabilize a society and an economy. My message to every CEO in America: you need democracy, but you’re actively undermining it. It’s time for you to join the pro-democracy movement. Get solidly behind voting rights. Actively lobby for the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. Use your lopsidedly large power in American democracy to protect American democracy – and do it soon. Otherwise, we may lose what’s left of it. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comNestled deep in the south Indian state of Tamil Nadu, cocooned from the world by a young forest, lies a community that wants to change the world. Ask the residents, of Auroville, who come from more than 60 countries, what they are doing there and the answer will be much the same as it has been for more than five decades: “The purpose of Auroville is to realise human unity.” Auroville was founded in 1968, with a vision to build an international city to upend rigid class and caste systems and be free of the pollution, traffic, chaos, rubbish, social isolation and suburban sprawl that have poisoned modern urban environments. But over the past few months, harmony has turned to discord over attempts to transform Auroville from a quiet eco-community into a pioneering utopian city. Lata, a resident of Auroville who first visited in the 1980s, said she had “never seen Auroville fractured like this”. “This is the first time such violence has entered the community,” she added. “What about the dream of unity that brought us all here?” Tensions came to a head last month, when JCBs rolled into Auroville’s forests to begin a controversial development that has created a schism unlike anything seen before in this peace-loving community. Dozens of residents threw themselves in front of the bulldozers, while others backed the demolitions. A case against the project is now being heard by India’s highest environmental court. “It’s not just valuable trees and buildings that have been bulldozed, it’s the community processes, the unity that holds Auroville together,” said Isa Prieto, 26, who was present. “I can’t believe they would go this far, sacrifice so much in order to get what they wanted.” The rupture is being blamed by many on an “outsider”. Since 1988, although the Indian government has had jurisdiction over Auroville, the community has been largely left to its own devices. But in July, Jayanti Ravi, a civil servant, arrived as the new secretary of the Auroville Foundation and immediately began enacting the polarising agenda of development. Ravi’s actions have sent the community into a tailspin; some feel she is giving Auroville the push it needs after years of stasis and dysfunction, others say she is riding roughshod over democratic community processes, and that her agenda is pulling the community apart at the seams. Many have questioned, too, whether her motives are mired in politics. Ravi has held high-profile positions in Gujarat, prime minister Narendra Modi’s home state, and in 2019, she authored a book that carried a recommendation from Modi on its cover. In recent years, there has been a renewed interest in Sri Aurobindo, Auroville’s founding guru, by India’s ruling Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Though Aurobindo’s teachings explicitly spoke against the communal politics that have become commonplace under the BJP, there has been a marked attempt by its leaders to champion Aurobindo as an early proponent of the Hindutva ideology, which believes India should be a Hindu rather than secular state. Modi paid a visit to Auroville in 2018. Many Auroville residents fear the sudden push for development, is entangled in a larger Hindu nationalist agenda to co-opt the legacy of Aurobindo, or to turn their home into a lucrative site for spiritual tourism. “It is high time Auroville moves forward,” Ravi told the Observer. “It is the 150th birth anniversary of Sri Aurobindo, which India is celebrating, and this development is something which is long overdue.” Auroville was first dreamed up in the 1920s by Sri Aurobindo, an Indian freedom fighter who became a leading Indian philosopher and guru, and his French devotee and collaborator, Mirra Alfassa, known as “the Mother”. Together in Aurobindo’s ashram in Puducherry they envisaged building a new city where humankind could reach unity. After Sri Aurobindo’s death, Alfassa inaugurated Auroville in 1968 on a barren piece of land a few miles from the ashram. Working with the French architect Roger Anger, Alfassa created the Galaxy Plan, a vision of how a perfect city should be built, designed along a layout of “sacred geometry”. She wanted Auroville to be a “city for humanity” home to 50,000 people, with 75% reserved as a green belt for farming and forest. This was later translated into an official masterplan, which was approved by Auroville residents and the Indian government. Today, Auroville is home to about 3,200 people, mostly from Europe, India and the US. They have enacted alternative models of currency, land ownership, education and governance, planted over three million trees to revitalise the land and their use of renewables and sustainable ways of living are world-leading. But in recent decades the city plans have been at a standstill, to the frustration of many. “Nothing has moved because for years we have been stuck between two factions,” said Gijs Spoor, a resident. On one side of the divide are residents who believe Auroville will succeed only if it is built exactly as envisaged in the masterplan, and that any revisions of the sacred geometry, or further delays, would obstruct the Mother’s “forward-thinking vision”. “This masterplan is more futuristic than we can even imagine, but unless we can build it, what are we here for?” said Anu Majumdar, who has lived in Auroville since 1979. “Trees alone will not solve all the problems of humanity. We are currently 3,200 people living on 3,300 acres of land, which is not sustainable. We need to build the city for 50,000.” But another group, predominately younger Aurovillians, view the utopian purpose through a different environmental lens and argue that the masterplan, which was last revised and voted on by the community 22 years ago, needs updating. “We are not anti-development, we are just pro-development in a way that really respects nature, respects the environment, the water, the millions of trees we have planted that are going to decide our survival on this land,” said Prieto, who was raised in Auroville. “To refuse to adapt the masterplan because it would be ‘blocking the Mother’s dream’ smacks of spiritual authoritarianism,” she added. “I don’t think it was the Mother’s dream to destroy the living environment around us.” It was into this impasse that Ravi arrived. Along with a new foundation governing board, also government appointed, a decision was made to begin building the masterplan immediately, starting with a circular road known as The Crown. They also applied for 10bn rupees (£98m) in government grants. “This place is something very beautiful that India has so magnanimously offered and we can not have decadence and stagnation any longer,” said Ravi. “The masterplan was already agreed by residents; it’s my mandate to implement it.” Alternatives were submitted by concerned residents, but then, without warning, on 4 December, bulldozers arrived in the forest, accompanied by police. That night dozens of protesting Aurovillians stood in their pathway and prevented any demolition. But five days later the JCBs returned and this time razed a 25-year-old youth centre and hundreds of trees. For many Aurovillians, the manner of demolition – including alleged manhandling of residents – was a violence and division unlike anything that had seen in their community, and the resounding response was one of devastation, shock and pain. Some residents filed a case against the Auroville Foundation to the Green Tribunal, India’s highest environmental court, which led to an interim halt on all tree felling. And after a petition was signed by more than 500 residents, a request for the development to be put on hold is being debated by the residents’ assembly, a process expected to take more than a month. The fractures in the community were on full display in a late December assembly meeting. It was the largest turnout in years and descended into chaos. Ravi’s attempt to address the residents prompted uproar. There were shouts of “can we all calm down”, calls for deep breathing and outbreaks of group-chanting of “Om” to try to bring things under control. Nonetheless, many believe that as splintered as the community is now, the Auroville project is not lost altogether. “The community is fractured but I think out of this darkness has come some good,” said Sandeep Vinod Sarah, a resident who filed the tribunal case. “We are finally energised and confronted with our own divisions. Now is the time for healing.”January for me is often melancholic. Deep midwinter. Yesterday was my birthday. Too close to Christmas. A time for taking stock. For giving thanks. For looking back as much as forward. Something I am prone to do anyway. We are still exiled from the allotments. So much gardening now is done in my head. How will it be with new soil on the old site? How to bring it to life? Will we need to garden it differently? How do we feel about no-dig? All to be decided. Exile was a constant in my early childhood. Being transplanted. New parents, new names, new places to live. Getting my family visa renewed. Putting down new roots. Gardening brought me comfort. New life from old land was the lesson. Spring always following winter. Needing to hold on longer. Christopher, my older brother, strayed. I stayed – though I loved walking alone along the river, searching for flashes of kingfisher. Listening for curlews. Land quickly connected me. Sowing my first flowers. Digging Dad’s new potatoes for Saturday or Sunday lunch. Watching butterflies swarming on the buddleia. I was fascinated by their almost anxious flight. Nasturtiums saved me. A perfect first flower: bright, transforming, super reliable. Their vines reached out. Needy, even greedy, like me. My first job in London aged 19 was at a plant nursery. A Kensington and Chelsea world of competitive window boxes, potted summer planting. I collected the misshapen and broken shrubs and plants. I rooted through skips. I gave unwanted shrubs and plants a home in our gardens. Front and back, indoors and out. Others I planted out along the street. It took me a long while to realise there was a reason other than the sheer joy in colour. Though there is always that, too… Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comScraped-back hair is not everyone’s cup of tea, but I love it. It is unapologetic and bold. As is the minimal approach to makeup. But it requires confidence. Hence, the latest foundations (try Lisa Eldridge and Charlotte Tilbury, as well as Nars and Dior Skin) are all about an easy finish that leaves you with the best, glowy version of your skin. Dot a few pea-sized amounts all over your face, add black liner, brush up brows and finish with a hint of gloss. Done. But not too done. 1. Nars Light Reflecting Foundation £37.50, narscosmetics.co.uk (available from 1 February) 2. Aveda Invati Thickening Brow Serum £56, aveda.com 3. Jillian Dempsey Khol Eyeliner £18.50, feelunique.com 4. Saie Lip Gloss £18, cultbeauty.co.uk 5. Dior Skin Forever Foundation £37, dior.com I can’t do without… A three-in-one creamy spray by a beauty insider A lot has been said about beauty lines from celebrities (long story short, there are far too many of them and 99.9% of them have no legitimate reason to exist). Beauty lines from beauty insiders/experts? Well, this is another kettle of fish. I mean, some of them also fall into the aforementioned category but, for the most part, they are created on the back of a lot of skin in the game. Such as Violette FR, which was founded by Violette Serrat, the much-adored French makeup artist who has also worked as a creative director and consultant to numerous big-name beauty brands. The concept of her range is built around the pared-down French-girl aesthetic except, for once, it feels wholly inclusive – so regardless of age or cultural heritage, you don’t feel marginalised. I am currently obsessed with the Boum-Boum Milk. This three-in-one creamy spray is at once a toner, serum and moisturiser. It is great for anyone who wants intense moisture, but can’t stand heavy textures. It’s also in keeping with the increasing popularity of skinminimalism – ie using fewer products in your skincare regime, which is better for the environment and for your skin. Boum-Boum Milk, which balances skin, injects intense hydration and leaves you with an impressive glow, is an absolute hit in my book. I find I need little else on my skin. Efficacious formulations like these are the future of skincare. Violette FR Boum-Boum Milk, £56, violettefr.com On my radar… Hardworking heroes for hair, face and body Quench your thirst If you’ve overdone it on exfoliating acids, or have parched or oily skin that loves moisture without the weight, look no further than this intensely hydrating gel mask. Vichy Quenching Mineral Face Mask, £15, feelunique.com Bouncing back Dull, brittle hair is one of the many joys of a cold winter and central heating. This conditioner, with vegan keratin and botanical ingredients, will nurse hair back to health. Lazartigue Intensive Repair Conditioner, £24, lookfantastic.com Body of evidence Bodycare products are increasingly being created with the kind of ingredients you’d expect in skincare for your face. This cult US brand, arguably a pioneer of the movement, is finally in the UK. Nécessaire Body Serum, £45, necessaire.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFettoWhat time are you up? Later when it’s darker and colder. I’ve got a bad habit of lolling and reaching for the TV. It’s bad if Andrew Marr is on, because then I’ve stayed lolling too long. It’s a sign I should be up and at my life. What’s for breakfast? I’m trying to get limber, so I’ve invested in a frightening PT who tells me not to eat breakfast until however long after the previous night’s supper. I always forget how many hours it is, so I’ve got these CBD gummies from the health food shop. They’re like fruit pastilles and they keep me going if I get a bit peckish. What were Sundays like growing up? We’d have a cooked breakfast, with a nice table cloth, and my sister, my mother and father and I would store up news so we’d have a very nice conversation. For Sunday roast, we’d have beef – I remember it always being tied up with string. There’d be homemade Yorkshire pudding and a jug of gravy, then at 4pm we’d have tea, with cake, followed by supper. It was a lot of food! A Sunday tipple? It’s a treat to allow myself a drink in the daytime, but if I’m having lunch with friends, I might have two vodkas, because I’m under the impression it’s healthier! At 7pm I might have a glass of cava with a bit of cassis, then I can half think it’s Ribena. In the old days it would be more, but my excess has been moderated. What makes Sunday special? My ideal is to be with nice people – people I like, who I hope like me, with a glass of something and some good food. I like it to be relaxed, not too full on. I had a lovely time at the Begging Bowl, a Thai place in Peckham. I was with two friends I hadn’t seen for ages and it was so nice I burst into tears. I was het up because I’d been working hard. Every time the waiter came over, we waved him away, because we had to wait until I stopped crying. It was quite jolly! Helen Lederer is performing in Proud Cabaret All Stars at Proud Embankment in January, February and March (proudcabaret.com)Labour will today announce ambitious plans to create a country that can “live well with Covid” without the need for future harsh restrictions, as it seeks to prevent Boris Johnson claiming credit for his record on the virus. Keir Starmer said he wanted people to be able to “live their lives as normal” and never again face “tough restrictions on our lives, our livelihoods and our liberties”. Shadow health secretary Wes Streeting’s 10-point plan includes measures to raise sick pay, improve testing, share vaccines worldwide and transform social care. It comes as Johnson and his ministers are desperately attempting to shore up the prime minister’s leadership, amid growing calls for him to resign over the “partygate” controversy, by talking up his handling of the pandemic and the vaccine programme at every opportunity. With the government preparing to ease many Covid restrictions when plan B measures are reviewed on 26 January, Labour is determined to remind people of the Tories’ “chaotic” performance over PPE, testing and other Covid issues, while positioning itself as ready to keep life as normal as possible in the event of future surges. In a speech to the Fabian Society yesterday, Starmer said he was “convinced that a swifter response” could have reduced the Covid death toll which has reached at least 150,000. He said Labour’s first task in government would be to “clear up the mess that Tories have made of the NHS”. Streeting’s 10-point plan would raise statutory sick pay, making it available to all workers, including the self-employed and those on low wages currently cut out by the lower-earnings limit for eligibility. The party says it will scrap the qualifying time for sick pay so that workers can access it immediately, reducing the pressure people feel to work while unwell or potentially unwell. Streeting says his party will also build a “sovereign capability” to ensure a supply of test kits made in Britain, to mitigate against any global shortage, and champion new ideas in testing technology. In addition, Labour plans to use NHS volunteers in a massive nationwide effort to reach the 650,000 as yet unvaccinated people at highest risk of severe disease from Covid with individual communication, in-person visits and mobile vaccination clinics. Streeting said: “We’re not out of the woods with Covid-19. The virus will change and adapt, and we need to learn to live well with it. For the government, living with Covid is just an empty slogan with no plan. For some of the fanatics on the Conservative backbenches, living with Covid means letting the virus rip. Both positions are highly irresponsible. “If we are to learn to live well with Covid, we need to be prepared. Labour’s plan will put Britain on the front foot and secure our lives, livelihoods and liberties.” Streeting added that the UK needed to play its part in vaccinating the rest of the world by sharing surplus vaccines. Also that it must protect education by shoring up testing supplies for children and fitting schools with ventilation systems. The latest phase of the pandemic has seen Covid-19 infections rising in the north of England but “plateauing” in the south, Susan Hopkins, the UK Health Security Agency’s chief medical adviser, said yesterday. About one in 15 people in England have the virus, Office for National Statistics figures show, and admissions to hospital are slowing down to just under 2,000 patients a day. Yet the NHS remains under “a lot of pressure”, Hopkins said, with more than 15,000 Covid patients in hospital in England – only slightly fewer than in the first 2020 wave – and many NHS trusts having halted elective surgery. Last week, the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) said there was likely to be a second Omicron wave in the early summer, with their modelling predicting up to 4,000 admissions to hospital a day, with other projections suggesting 1,000 admissions. Tomorrow, 16 and 17-year-olds will be able to book booster jabs online, in the latest phase of the vaccination campaign. Sajid Javid, England’s health secretary, is expected to recommend that the requirement for people to provide proof of vaccination or a negative test to enter large events or nightclubs in England ends when plan B restrictions are reviewed later this month. In addition, he is under pressure from MPs in his party to end the “work from home” guidance, which many believe is doing disproportionate damage to the economy and town and city centres. The requirement to wear masks in enclosed places may be left as the sole measure in place after the review. Last week, as Johnson faced a chorus of demands for his resignation from Tory MPs and opposition parties, cabinet ministers went out of their way to praise his “outstanding” leadership over the pandemic, insisting he had got all the “big calls” right, including resisting demands from many scientists at Christmas for tighter restrictions. He and the Tories received a huge bounce in the polls after the introduction of the vaccine programme, but Labour is determined to prevent a positive overall narrative developing about how the Johnson government dealt with Covid-19 in comparison with other countries in Europe and across the world.There’s no denying that last week was especially torrid for the prime minister, with news emerging of endless parties hosted at No 10 during the peak of the pandemic. It seems a drinking culture at the heart of government refuses to subside, even during a crisis. Boris Johnson’s critics say this culture was endemic under him, but as someone who also worked in the civil service under David Cameron and Theresa May as well, I know this isn’t the case. The prime minister doesn’t have a drinking problem; No 10 does. I had my first taste of this as a junior civil servant in Downing Street in 2015. I was prepared for the long hours, the low pay (No 10 jobs are poorly paid compared with other departments) and the caffeine addiction. But I wasn’t prepared for the drinking culture, which I experienced from the end of my first week. Contrary to recent reports, it wasn’t a daily knees-up with people getting blind drunk and projectile vomiting everywhere, but more a form of gentle day drinking. A drink or two between meetings, a quick trip to the local, the Red Lion, to celebrate the end of the week or see off a colleague, or a weekend commiseration for having been duped into agreeing to do the graveyard shift. If the week had started really badly, I remember one team had “prosecco Tuesdays” to drown their sorrows. It was never seen as a “party” because the drinking took place in the workplace or near it. The only exceptions were the notorious Christmas party and riotous trips abroad, where anecdotes of streaking and drunken midnight swims were common. Some of this might be expected in any high-powered and frenetic workplace, but the biggest surprise was the “gratitude drinks”. It wasn’t lost on the senior team in No 10 that people worked very long hours for less pay than their peers in other departments. A drinks party here and there wouldn’t plug that gap but it made staffers feel valued and kept them motivated enough to stay for a few more years. There were also advantages to this approach for No 10 staff, as drinks at work felt safe and inclusive. There was less of a chance of someone drunkenly blurting state secrets to a journalist at the local or being pictured comatose surrounded by bottles from the local supermarket. It was the easiest way to include everyone – by virtue of them being at work all the time – and seen as an effective way to prevent a “boys’ club” as everyone could get their “drink fix” at the office. (In my later years, this tactic was less effective as the boys’ club element became more prominent, with people coming together over sport – particularly American football – and often without women.) But broadly, this drinking culture never changed, regardless of who was in post, with the culture outliving even the most loyal of staff. It was often remarked how the culture in Whitehall had improved since the Blair/Brown days, when day drinking and mini fridges under desks were more commonplace. In recent times, the only change in No 10 was the poshness of the snacks, depending on who the PM brought in. This is one of the reasons why it doesn’t seem unusual to anyone who has worked in No 10 that there should be office drinks and that the prime minister would attend. Many question why intelligent people thought this behaviour was acceptable, but it’s partly because these drinks sessions are seen as routine and low risk. Before now, they were never picked up by the media and if it weren’t for Covid-19, no one would know about them. In any case, hosting and attending these parties during the peak of the pandemic was wrong, and it’s absolutely right that the prime minister apologise for attending that event, among the countless others that shouldn’t have taken place. But it’s also not sustainable for any workplace to compensate staff for high stress and relatively low pay through drinks. Nor should it be the example that the government sets for businesses across the country. But the bigger risk is that if No 10 doesn’t tackle this drinking culture, and if it isn’t addressed in the report by Sue Gray next week, Johnson and his successor risk more of the same problems emerging. The country won’t be able to move forward with life-changing policies and improve the outcomes for millions if we’re stuck discussing endless rule-breaking. Sonia Khan is a former special adviser to Sajid JavidFew reporters are synonymous with their craft. Bob Woodward of the Washington Post is one, his former partner, Carl Bernstein, another. Together, they broke open the Watergate scandal, helped send a president’s minions to prison and made Richard Nixon the only man to resign the office. On the big screen, Robert Redford played Woodward. Bernstein got Dustin Hoffman. These days, Bernstein is a CNN analyst and a contributing editor at Vanity Fair. Chasing History, his sixth book, is a warm and inviting read. Now 77, he writes with the benefit of hindsight and the luxury of self-imposed deadlines. His prose is dry and reflective even as it draws in the reader. This is his look back and valedictory, with a fitting subtitle: “A Kid in the Newsroom.” He describes life before the Post, in pages marked with politics – and haberdashery. “I needed a suit.” So the book begins. Shortly thereafter: “My mother and father, in the early 1950s, had taken me with them to join the sit-ins at Woodward &amp; Lothrop to desegregate its tea room.” “Woodies”, a department store, closed in 1995. In the 50s, rather than testify before the House Un-American Affairs Committee, Bernstein’s mother invoked her right against self-incrimination. His father suffered for past membership in the Communist party. The FBI of J Edgar Hoover was an unwelcome presence in the Bernsteins’ lives. Still in high school, Bernstein worked as a part-time copy boy for the Washington Star. “Now that I’d covered the inauguration of JFK, Mr Adelman’s chemistry class interested me even less,” he confesses. He barely scraped out of high school, flunked out of the University of Maryland and lost his deferment from the Vietnam draft. He found a spot in a national guard unit, removing the possibility of deployment and combat. Chasing History also includes a copy of Bernstein’s college transcript, which advertises a sea of Fs and the capitalized notation: “ACADEMICALLY DISMISSED 1-27-65.” On the other hand, before he was old enough to vote, Bernstein had covered or reported more than most journalists do in a lifetime. The 1960 presidential election, the Bay of Pigs invasion, the Kennedy assassination, desegregation and Martin Luther King’s March on Washington. All were part of his remit. The integration of DC’s barber shops, a race-fueled brawl at a high school football game, the death of a newspaper vendor. In a nation in upheaval, all captured Bernstein’s attention. He is one of the last of his breed, a national reporter without a degree. Chasing History reminds us that by the mid-1960s, newsrooms were no longer dominated by working-class inflections. Carbon paper, hot lead typesetting, ink-stained fingers and smocks would also give way, to computers and digitization. The Ivy League emerged as a training ground of choice. Television would outpace print. Rough edges would be smoothed and polished, a premium placed on facts. Hard-knocks, not so much. “A big generational change was occurring in the journalism trade,” Bernstein writes. “Editors wanted college graduates now. My view was that you might be better prepared by graduating from horticultural school than from Yale or Princeton.” The kicker: “At least that way you could write the gardening column.” Emphasis on the word “might”, though. Woodward went to Yale. To this day, they count each other as friends. Chasing History is more about gratitude than grievance. For 10 pages, Bernstein recalls the names of his “young friends”, their “remarkable paths”, his intersection with those who would emerge as “historical footnotes” and his “teachers and mentors”. Lance Morrow, formerly of Time and the Wall Street Journal, makes it on to the dedication page. They were housemates and worked at the Star. Later, their careers flourished. Morrow, according to Bernstein, “occupies a unique place in the journalism of our time” and has been an “incomparable joy” in the author’s life. Likewise, Ben Stein – and his appearance as an economics teacher in Ferris Bueller’s Day Off, in 1986 – earns more than a passing shoutout. The fact Stein and his father served in the Nixon administration did not dent Bernstein’s fondness. They grew up nextdoor to each other in the DC suburbs. In junior high, the boys founded a “lox-and-bagel/Sunday New York Times delivery service”. The two see each other yearly. Bernstein also pays his respects to David Broder, the late dean of the political press corps. On 23 November 1963, as a copy boy, Bernstein took dictation from Broder, who was in Dallas that fateful Friday. Years later, Broder provided a useful tip that helped shape the path and coverage of “Woodstein’s” Watergate reporting. One mentor of particular note was George Porter, a Star bureau chief to whom Bernstein refers respectfully as Mr Porter and who regularly gave Bernstein a ride to the office. During the Democratic primaries in 1964, Porter dispatched Bernstein to cover George Wallace, the segregationist Alabama governor. Wallace never had a chance but his candidacy was newsworthy. Think Donald Trump, prototype. Lyndon Johnson, a Democrat, was in the White House but Wallace got nearly 30% in Indiana. When Wallace turned to Maryland, Bernstein was there on the ground. It was the first time he’d “seen a demagogue inflame the emotions of American citizens who I’d thought were familiar to me”. Wallace lost but netted 40% and a majority of white votes. In defeat, he blamed Black voters, except he chose a word that began with “N”, and an “incompetent press”, for failing to recognize his appeal. The church, labor unions, Ted Kennedy and “every other Democratic senator from the north” were also subjects of Wallace’s scorn. Chasing History is part-autobiography, part-history lesson. Amid continued turbulence, Bernstein’s memoirs are more than mere reminiscence. Chasing History: A Kid in the Newsroom is published in the US by Henry Holt &amp; CompanyOne year ago on Thursday, Joe Biden took the oath of office as the 46th president at the US Capitol in an inauguration ceremony devoid of the usual crowds due to pandemic restrictions. Biden identified four crises facing America: the coronavirus, the climate, the economy and racial justice. He could have added a fifth: a crisis of democracy in a divided nation where, just two weeks earlier, the Capitol had been overrun by insurrectionists. How has he fared on all five counts? Coronavirus Biden took office pledging to lift the threat of the coronavirus pandemic, which he called “a raging virus” that “silently stalks the country”. And there was a period of his presidency when it appeared he had. Last summer vaccination rates soared as the virus receded and the economy rebounded. Touting the administration’s progress at an Independence Day celebration, Biden declared that the US was “closer than ever to declaring our independence from a deadly virus”. But then came the arrival of the Delta variant, followed by the extremely transmissible Omicron variant. Biden rushed once again to restrict travel but it did little to slow the spread. In recent weeks, Covid-19 cases have reached record levels. Deaths are rising nationally and the number of Americans hospitalized with the disease is higher now than at any previous point during the pandemic. Long lines to obtain Covid tests and low availability of at-home tests have sparked criticism of the White House’s preparedness, while shifting guidelines and muddled messaging from federal public health officials left a disease-weary public confused and frustrated. Public confidence in Biden’s handling of the pandemic has dropped significantly, weighing down his overall approval ratings. Biden responded by ordering 1bn at-home coronavirus tests and is requiring private insurance companies to cover the cost of up to eight of these tests a month. Biden also announced plans to make “high-quality” masks available to Americans free of charge and deployed military medical units to help hospitals overwhelmed by a shortage of staff and beds. Leveraging the Defense Production Act, the administration is working with pharmaceutical companies to increase the supply of antiviral pills. More than 200 million Americans are fully vaccinated, with nearly 77 million receiving a booster shot. Efforts to improve vaccination rates continue to be undermined by partisanship and misinformation. And a ruling by the supreme court this week blocked the Biden administration from enforcing a vaccine-or-test mandate for large businesses, though it allowed a vaccine mandate for most healthcare workers to take effect. In response to the latest wave, the Biden administration has shifted its rhetoric – and its expectations. Dr Anthony Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease specialist, said the Omicron variant would “find just about everybody”, warning that the unvaccinated risk far worse outcomes. Climate In his inaugural address, Biden promised to heed the planet’s “cry for survival” by marshalling an unprecedented response to the climate crisis. But his ambitious plans have since collided with the reality of an evenly divided Senate, where a coal-state senator’s opposition has thwarted major pieces of the president’s climate agenda, with potentially dire consequences for the planet. At the international talks in Glasgow last year, Biden pledged the US would slash its greenhouse gas emissions in half compared with 2005 levels by the end of this decade. But failure to enact the president’s Build Back Better legislation would make it nearly impossible for the US to meet that target. The roughly $2tn proposal would amount to the nation’s largest ever investment in combatting climate change and contains a suite of tax incentives, grants and other policies that would grow the green energy sector and invest in sustainable vehicles and public transport services. Without it, the Biden administration would be forced to rely on a raft of environmental regulations and rules that could be overturned by future presidents. Throughout the first year of his presidency, Biden has made climate change a priority, elevating climate advocates to key posts, creating a White House office of domestic policy, and appointing John Kerry as the special presidential envoy for climate, which he made a cabinet-level position. In April, he convened a summit to pressure world leaders to make stronger commitments to reducing greenhouse gas emissions and reassert US leadership on the global stage. Biden used his executive authority to quickly reverse many of former president Donald Trump’s energy and environmental policies, starting with his first day in office when he moved to rejoin the Paris climate accords. In November, Biden signed into law a $1tn bipartisan infrastructure bill that provides billions of dollars to make communities more resilient to climate-fueled disasters, but did little to reduce planet-warming emissions. At the international talks last year, the US played a major role in negotiations over global efforts to fight climate change, though the final agreement disappointed activists and some world leaders. “This is the challenge of our collective lifetimes, an existential threat to human existence as we know it and every day we delay the cost of inaction increases,” Biden said in Glasgow. Yet the coming weeks and months will be critical for Biden’s climate goals, and his legacy. The president’s Build Back Better legislation is doomed without Senator Joe Manchin’s support and it remains unclear if negotiations can be revived. Next month the supreme court will hear a case brought by Republican-led states and coal companies that could significantly restrict the administration’s power to regulate carbon emissions driving climate change. And if Republicans gain control of Congress in this year’s midterm elections, action on climate change could stall, potentially for years. Economy It is the best of times and the worst of times. The White House ended 2021 pointing to jobless claims at a 50-year low, a stock market smashing records and an economy among the fastest growing in the world. On the positive side, 6.4m jobs have been added under Biden, the most of any first-year president in history. When he took office the unemployment rate was 6.3%; today it is 3.9%, the lowest yet of the pandemic. Consumer demand is strong, helping the economy grow by an estimated 7% in the final quarter of 2021, although the Omicron variant, which has ravaged airlines and restaurants, is likely to cause a slowdown. Wages are also up. With a record wave of people quitting their jobs, often to seek work elsewhere, average hourly pay jumped 4.7% in December compared with a year ago. The stock market is thriving. In 2021 the Standard and Poor 500 index hit new records 70 times and finished up 29%. This beat Donald Trump’s first year as president when the S&amp;P 500 hit new records 62 times and finished up 17%. There is, of course, a “but” coming. The economy is still about 3.6m jobs short of its pre-pandemic level. Many employers are struggling to fill positions and many people are reluctant to return to the workforce. Most dauntingly, inflation climbed to 7% in 2021, the biggest 12-month gain for 40 years, while supply chain problems left some supermarket shelves bare. This prompted a barrage of Republican criticism and fed a feeling of economic malaise, whatever the reality. Allan Lichtman, a distinguished professor of history at American University in Washington, said: “The economy is actually better than the perception. Unemployment is down to 3.9%. Many millions of jobs were created and you’re going to get inflation under those circumstances. But the message hasn’t gotten out. Everybody thinks Biden’s done a poor job.” Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster and strategist, instead argues that Biden overpromised. “The entire economy is seizing up, and people do blame Biden because he was trumpeting how successful he had been,” he said. “Don’t do that.” Racial justice “President Biden met with some of the civil rights leadership and we reminded him …You said the night you won that Black America had your back and that you were going to have Black America’s back,” activist Al Sharpton told a voting rights rally in August. “Well, Mr President, they’re stabbing us in the back.” Biden is yet to fulfil his promise. But he has met some of his commitments to embed racial equity in policy. The early $1.9tn coronavirus relief package included $5bn for Black farmers, the most important legislation for this group since the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Biden named a historically diverse administration that includes, in interior secretary Deb Haaland, the first Native American to serve as a cabinet secretary. Kamala Harris is the first woman of colour to serve as vice-president, though she has been handed intractable problems to solve and her approval rating is even lower than Biden’s. But police reform efforts have stalled. Biden abandoned a campaign promise to create a national police oversight commission in his first hundred days. Talks in Congress over the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act, which aims to improve police training, curb use of excessive force and end techniques such as chokeholds, collapsed in September in what Jacari Harris, executive director of a foundation named after Floyd, described as “a devastating setback”. Most dramatically, the president’s lobbying efforts have failed to deliver on protecting voting rights for people of colour. National legislation aimed at blunting Republican-led state efforts to impose voter restrictions has stalled in the Senate, where a 50-50 split between Democrats and Republicans leaves no margin for error. Democrats Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema have declared their opposition to reform of a procedural rule known as the filibuster, a necessary step for passing the legislation. Biden is accused by critics of doing too little too late, failing to use his bully pulpit to give the issue the same priority as his bipartisan infrastructure law. In a sign of the disappointment and exasperation, when Biden travelled to Atlanta this week to make his most aggressive case yet for filibuster reform, some campaigners boycotted the event. Charles Blow, a columnist for the New York Times, wrote: “For a year, activists have been screaming and pleading and begging and getting arrested, trying to get the White House to put the full weight of the presidency behind protecting voting rights, only to be met by silence or soft-pedaling.” He added: “When Biden fully entered the battle, the other warriors were already bloody, bruised and exhausted.” Democracy In his inaugural address, Biden proclaimed: “We have learned again that democracy is precious. Democracy is fragile. And at this hour, my friends, democracy has prevailed.” Restoring the soul of the nation, he added, requires that most elusive of things in a democracy: “Unity.” Nearly a year later, back at the US Capitol, Biden struck a very different and more pugnacious tone. “I will allow no one to place a dagger at the throat of our democracy,” he vowed, signaling a belated realisation that instead of repairing the breach with Republicans, he must now stand in it and fight. Biden, who had run for election as an apostle of bipartisanship, and did get a win with Republican support for a $1tn infrastructure law. But the radicalised opposition party remains implacably opposed to legislation that would codify national protections for voting rights (see above). Republicans remain in the iron grip of Trump, his “big lie” that the 2020 presidential election was stolen from him and the delusion that the January 6 insurrection was inconsequential or even a righteous cause. Trump acolytes and election deniers are now seeking office as secretaries of state and other positions that would put them in charge of running of future elections. This could given them the power to overturn results they do not like. This year Biden has begun to speak out forcefully on the voting rights issue – “Do you want to be the side of Dr King or George Wallace? Do you want to be on the side of John Lewis or Bull Connor?” he demanded in Atlanta – but less so on the more insidious, precinct-by-precinct threat to the electoral process. Tony Evers, the Democratic governor of Wisconsin, told the Guardian last month: “At the state level we’re raising hell about it but the Democrats on the national level are talking about Build Back Better, the infrastructure bill, lots of other things.” Biden’s mission to heal divisions has crashed into polarisation that has only been accelerated by the pandemic and its battles over mask and vaccine mandates, as well as Republican-stoked culture wars over schools and critical race theory. Far from fading away, Trump is resuming campaign rallies ahead of a possible run for the White House in 2024.Spider-Man, Batman, Black Panther and Superman, stars of the strip cartoons printed in comics and at the bottom of newspaper pages, have gone on to inspire film franchises or, in the case of Little Orphan Annie, who started in a syndicated strip, a popular stage and film musical. Celebrated in popular culture across the world, these fictional characters are all children who lost their parents at an early age. It is a tried and tested, tragic narrative formula that efficiently releases them into the wider world, as well as exposing them to danger. This April, London’s Foundling Museum is to mount a major exhibition that delves into the lasting and powerful presence of orphans, adoptees and foster-children in comic-strip storytelling. “It’s a part of our society that we don’t think or talk about much, yet it’s hiding in plain sight all over popular culture,” said Caro Howell, director of the museum, first founded in 1739 as a shelter for abandoned children. “From little Annie onwards, the world is familiar with the way these characters survived without parents, but it is a lived reality for hundreds of thousands of children growing up away from their family or in care. Like these fictional orphans, they need immense resilience to get over the trauma and build an identity. How do they build a sense of self-worth?” said Howell. The exhibition, Superheroes, Orphans &amp; Origins: 125 Years in Comics, will cover the narrative threads laid out in mainstream comics, graphic novels and sequential art in different countries, and look at the bleak origins and complex identities of some of the most popular characters. DC Comics’ Superman was found by his adoptive parents, while Spider-Man’s mother and father die in a plane crash. Batman’s parents are killed in a street robbery and Black Panther is known as “the orphan king” after his mother dies soon after childbirth and his father is killed. Marvel’s X-Men also experience early discrimination and social ostracisation that later shape the stance they take on good and evil. But it is not all about traditional superheroes in garish outfits. The exhibition will look also at other characters from early newspaper strips, including Skeezix from Gasoline Alley, who was left on a doorstep in 1921. And among the original artwork displayed for the first time will be artist Robyn Smith’s 2021 recreation of Nubia, the black sister of Wonder Woman, for DC Comics. “These are people who have had to construct their identity against a background of huge social stigma. They are outsiders,” said Howell. “This is also the source of their power and what makes them special. But it keeps them alone, struggling to form permanent relationship sometimes.” Images of Superman and Batman from the 1940s and 1950s will be shown alongside early copies of Marvel’s Black Panther and special editions of X-Men from the 1970s and 1980s. Original drawings from Sunny and other historic comics, including Hogan’s Alley, are on display, as well as Sanmao, which translates as “three hairs” and was created in 1935 by revered Chinese cartoonist Zhang Leping. It goes on display in Britain for the first time. The exhibition has its origins in work from 2014 commissioned by the museum from poet and performer Lemn Sissay, who grew up in care. His poem Superman Was a Foundling was printed on the walls of the museum’s Study Studio and was intended to draw attention to the disparity between our admiration for fostered, adopted or orphaned fictional characters and what Sissay saw as a widespread disregard for their real-life counterparts. “For people who grew up without birth parents, the Foundling Museum is a place of visibility and even validation,” said Howell. “By exploring this overlooked aspect of the superhero origin story, we hope to raise awareness of the immense resilience needed to overcome separation, loss, stigma and society’s indifference.” Many of the other works going on display have been created by international artists inspired by their own experiences in care. Carlos Giménez, creator of Paracuellos (1976), spent much of his Spanish childhood moving between the “social aid” homes created during the Franco era. Lisa Wool-Rim Sjöblom’s 2019 work Palimpsest reflects on her status as an international adoptee. Born in Korea, she lived in an orphanage until the age of two and was then adopted, and lived in Sweden. Keiji Nakazawa survived the Hiroshima bombing, but his father, brother and sister died. His mother later died of related health issues, prompting him to create the manga series Barefoot Gen. Themes of abandonment and identity are traced through comic strips to the present day. Japanese manga characters from the 1990s and early 2000s, Kuro and Shiro from Tekkonkinkreet, appear alongside American comic Jesse “Street Angel” Sanchez and contemporary graphic-novel protagonists including Amina from Zenobia, who is a Syrian refugee.People will go to all sorts of lengths to move towards a more environmentally friendly lifestyle. Changing where and how they buy their clothes, cutting down on meat and dairy, and replacing trips in the car with journeys by foot. I’ve done all of those – but I’ve taken it further. Six months ago, I had my blood tested for 100 different persistent organic pollutants or POPs – chemicals such as pesticides and flame retardants that accumulate inside us and stick around for longer than we’d like. Scientists at a specialist lab in Norway found traces of chemicals that were taken off the market decades ago, such as low levels of a metabolite of the infamous pesticide DDT, alongside concerning levels of some of the less well-known “forever chemicals” known as PFAS (perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances – a class of chemicals that includes the likes of Teflon). Most surprisingly, my blood contained relatively high levels of a chemical called oxychlordane that comes from a pesticide known as chlordane that was banned by the EU in 1981, just a year after I was born, so exposure was probably via the womb. What struck me most is that some of these highly hazardous chemicals last more than a lifetime. And so began my mission to find out how we can better protect ourselves – and the next generation – from these legacy pollutants. Perhaps because toxic chemical pollution isn’t that obvious, it is often overlooked. So while public awareness of single-use plastic waste has soared in recent years – all of those bottles, straws and carrier bags are tangible symptoms of our disposable mindset and overconsumption – there’s much more to the story. So, in a bid to reduce my chemical footprint, and that of my family, I’ve scrubbed up on the science and distilled the latest research into practical and simple tips. Ultimately, it’s time that we joined the dots and made this invisible world much more visible. Avoid the greenwash Don’t be duped by clever marketing campaigns that aim to convince us we need the latest eco thingamajig. No product might be better than a less toxic one. If a label makes sustainability claims, look for proof – download a shopping app such as Giki, which allows you to scan supermarket products to see how sustainable they are. Beware of unregulated language such as “natural”, “eco-friendly”, “nature-inspired” and be suspicious of products that say they are “chemical free” (there is no such thing – everything is a chemical and not all chemicals are bad) or “free from”. Look for brands that are fully transparent about their supply chains and the ingredients they do use rather than distracting with mentions of things they don’t include. Ditch the disinfectant Think before you flush anything down the toilet or the plughole – most bottles of cleaning products that contain chlorine bleach have a picture of a dead fish on the back and for good reason. They poison aquatic wildlife but also act as irritants to us. Overuse of bleach leads to antimicrobial resistance and, in most cases, gentle cleaning products, such as bicarbonate of soda or vinegar mixed with lemon juice, plus a little elbow grease, do the job just fine. Our homes aren’t sterile places – save disinfectants for medical settings and look out for an emerging trend for probiotic cleaning products that fight germs by encouraging healthy bacteria. Bust the dust Advice to do more dusting may not be a tip you’re keen to follow, but actually it’s about more targeted dusting. Adults unwittingly ingest about 20mg of dust every day. Children and pets even more so. But many toxic chemicals released from products in our home accumulate in dust, from fragrances to PFASs, so it’s important to wipe it away regularly with a damp cloth – no polish required. Rather than concentrating your efforts on windowsills and shelves, make sure to clean electronics such as the wifi router, DVD player and game consoles, as flame retardants can transfer into dust settling on these items. Forget the fragrance Our homes shouldn’t smell of overpowering scents such as pine cones or sea spray. Air fresheners are a concentrated source of indoor air contaminants that can exacerbate conditions such as asthma. Residues of fragranced detergents stay on clothes and linen, too. While not all synthetic fragrances are harmful, their many ingredients are not usually listed in full and we might not be told enough about what’s in them. P is for persistent From school trousers lined with strengthening Teflon knee patches to non-stick cookware, food packaging and smudgeproof mascara, PFAS chemicals are added to so many everyday products. These super stable chemicals last for ever, in our bodies and in the environment. Many of them are endocrine-disrupting – which means they disrupt our hormone system – and some may be carcinogens. Things that claim they are waterproof, stain-resistant, wrinkle-free or grease-repellent probably contain PFASs. If you are unsure, there is a clever test you can do called the bead test. For this, you drop a tiny amount of olive oil on to a surface. If the oil repels into a bead shape, it is highly likely to contain PFAS chemicals. Then you can decide: do the alleged benefits of the product outweigh the potentially toxic cost? If you’re not happy, make a conscious effort to seek out PFAS-free alternatives. Toxic by design Pesticide residues remain on our fruit and veg, inside loaves of bread, on non-organic cotton bedding and even non-organic tampons. These agricultural chemicals, sprayed on crops to kill insects, weeds and fungi, are in every room of the home. Try streamlining your exposure by switching to organic for the foods you eat most of. There is a really helpful guide to how UK supermarkets are doing on this by the Pesticide Action Network (PAN). It ranks British supermarkets according to pesticide use. Perhaps underlining the adage you get what you pay for, M&amp;S and Waitrose come out top, but even these two have a way to go. Breathe easy The accumulation of indoor air pollutants and volatile organic compounds or VOCs (things such as formaldehyde and benzene) can be avoided by simply opening a window. Ventilate well if you are lighting an open fire (electric heating from renewable sources is cleaner all round) and use an extractor while cooking if you have one. The back hob rings are preferable if you have a cooker hood to capture more pollutants. At night, body heat increases the temperature in our beds so more VOCs can “off-gas” or be released from conventional polyurethane mattresses, so ventilate your bedroom or, better still, invest in a mattress topper made from natural materials. Buy secondhand That off-gassing of VOCs happens from a lot of furniture and medium-density fibreboard (MDF), more so when new, so search out vintage bargains, especially if you’re decorating a room for children. If you do buy new, unwrap it and let it air for a few days before you install. If you’re putting up shelves or other fixtures, use screws rather than glues and adhesives. And if you’re upcycling, use low-VOC paints and varnishes. Buy secondhand clothes and textiles – they will contain drastically reduced pesticide residues, if any, and you’ll be saving the need to make more new items. Detox your diet A high toxic load puts more strain on our body’s own natural detox mechanisms, mainly the liver and kidneys, just as smoking or drinking do. So eat plenty of antioxidants, which help to neutralise the free radicals that are produced after exposure to toxins and can damage DNA and lead to degenerative diseases. So plenty of leafy, green veg, nuts and berries – organic if possible! Anna Turns is the author of Go Toxic Free: Easy and Sustainable Ways to Reduce Chemical Pollution (published by Michael O’Mara on 20 January)Sometimes, Instagram feeds find a language of their own. Our editor came across Edgar Ortiz’s work while scrolling. Ortiz, 38, is a hobbyist photographer and musician. He specialises in streetscapes like this one, in which the city can seem on fire. He gives each of his pictures a moody soundtrack – this one comes with Better Believe as a backing, an epic rap by Belly, the Weeknd and Young Thug. Music came first for Ortiz – he’s been involved in that since he was 16. He has only been taking pictures seriously for a couple of years. You don’t really need the soundtrack to catch the emotion of this picture, though. It was taken from a train platform in downtown Chicago, the city in which Ortiz has always lived. Like nearly all of his pictures it is a lyrical hymn to the urban energy of his city. Sometimes, he focuses on faces, but these long drive-by vanishing points recur as backdrops, giving the pictures an ambiguous intensity and possibility, one part Mean Streets, one part Yellow Brick Road. His pictures are included in the feed of the influential street art community, BCNcollective, which showcases emerging talent. Ortiz is inspired by the neo-noir pictures of Billy Dinh and Nicolas Miller, all mist and night sky and neon reflection. He says he is always looking for external landscapes to match an image he has in his head. Some of his fiery aesthetic, he believes, comes from the fact that he is colourblind: “I love black-and-white photography,” he says, “but I have tried to challenge myself to do colour photography.” In his way of sensing the world, those car tail-lights bleeding beautifully over the rain slicked street, carry a particular resonance; in the fast-forward world of Instagram you don’t have to look at his pictures for long to sense Ortiz sees things slightly differently. • See more on InstagramZonked on patriotic zeal, Americans believe that their country is an exception to all historical rules. The land of the free, however, is currently hurtling towards a predetermined, apparently unavoidable crack-up. Its governmental institutions are paralysed, and a constitution devised for an agrarian society in the 18th century obstructs reform; its citizens, outnumbered by the guns they tote, have split into armed, antagonistic tribes. Given these conditions, the riot at the Capitol last January may have been the rehearsal for an imminent civil war. Looking down at this hot mess from chilly Toronto, the Canadian novelist and essayist Stephen Marche grimly predicts: “The United States is coming to an end.” Such a declaration could only be made by an outsider. To Americans, the idea of civil war remains unthinkable, the words unspeakable: at his inauguration Biden vowed to end “this uncivil war”, which implied that the only missiles being exchanged were harmlessly verbal. As Marche sees it, the impending war will be a continuation of the earlier one between Union and Confederacy, which broke off in 1865 without closing the gap between races, regions and economic prospects. To these human-made iniquities Marche adds the intemperance of nature: New York is likely to be inundated by a forthcoming hurricane, and Californian forests are already burning. In 1776 the founding fathers envisaged an egalitarian renewal of humanity. Now the decline of the US warns that the anthropocene era may be doomed. Marche, doubting that the walls erected by Fortress America can keep out refugees, the poor and the rising oceans, suspects that this is “how a species goes extinct”. The Next Civil War is fatalistic yet somehow elated as Marche vividly imagines the “incredibly intense events” that lie ahead. He has done the required historical research and conducted interviews with officials and academic experts, but he can’t resist elaborating scenarios for conflagration and collapse which he offers as examples of “the genre of future civil war fantasy”. One of these, narrated with sour amusement, concerns an explosive dispute in a western state where local protesters, riled up by a wily, cynical sheriff, do battle with federal bureaucrats who have closed down an unsafe bridge. Another, which resembles the plot of the disaster movie The Day After Tomorrow, follows an evacuee from flooded Brooklyn who pauses to reflect that a sunken highway looks “almost beautiful”. A third “thought experiment” tracks a nerdy loner who guns down the US president in a Jamba Juice outlet, after which a commentator solemnly describes the motive of misfits like this as a “desire for transcendence”. As Marche says, “the power of spectacle is driving American politics”, and his “cultural scripts” turn terror into lurid entertainment. He takes his cue from movies such as Independence Day or Olympus Has Fallen, which stage the apocalypse as an adventure ride; the difference is that this time no superhero flies or rides in to rescue the republic. Marche awards “iconic status” to the atrocities of 9/11 but mocks the agitators in his own fable about the bridge as “ludicrous fanatics” who seem to be dressed for Halloween or a rock festival: is he daring them to do better? There is a tempting, titillating danger to this, because sooner or later such prophecies will be fulfilled in action. Marche may be enjoying his novelistic nightmares a little too much, possibly even smirking from the safety of Canada as the US dismembers itself. A similarly excited anticipation of the end briefly disrupts Barbara Walter’s study, How Civil Wars Start and How to Stop Them. Walter teaches political science in San Diego, and she writes with dutiful academic sobriety as she compares her disintegrating country to failing states in the Balkans and the Middle East. She studies graphs, fiddles with data sets and deploys nonsensical jargon, classifying the US as an “anocracy” because it is midway between democracy and autocracy. But her droning lecture flares into life when she, like Marche, sets herself to imagine what an American civil war would look like. Projected ahead to 2028, the result resembles a hyped-up Hollywood pitch, with the synchronised detonation of dirty bombs in state legislatures, a botched presidential assassination bid, freelance militias patrolling the streets, and – worst of all! – assaults on big-box stores. Like Marche, Walter is aware that political warriors need the support of a “mythic narrative”, and she notices that some of the insurrectionists at the Capitol carried Bibles: in the absence of a sacred text, will the garbled synopsis of a disaster movie do just as well? After these dramatic flurries, Walter calms down as she suggests ways of averting conflict. Most of her proposals require constitutional change, which she must know will never happen or will come too late; she also recommends reintroducing the study of civics in American schools, as if those pious courses in communal engagement could be an antidote to civil war. Walter admits that following the last election, when Trump refused to concede defeat, she and her husband considered emigrating. They flicked through their flotilla of available passports – Swiss, German and Hungarian as well as American and Canadian – and decided on driving north to cross the border into British Columbia. Ultimately they chose to remain in California, as Walter announces after ritually reciting the national creed and thanking the US for “the gift to pursue our dreams”. Marche concludes his book with a more guarded tribute to the perhaps naive American “faith in human nature” and the constitution’s risky “openness to difference”. He then explains why he is glad to live in Toronto: Canadians, he says, “talk placidly and exchange endless nothings” rather than bragging, ranting and abusing each other like their southern neighbours, and they only have the weather’s “cold snaps” to contend with, not incendiary social convulsions. In times such as ours, to be snugly domiciled in a boring country is surely the best bet. • The Next Civil War: Dispatches from the American Future by Stephen Marche is published by Simon &amp; Schuster (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply • How Civil Wars Start and How to Stop Them by Barbara F Walter is published by Viking (£18.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyForget Annabel’s – the place to be for the professional “partygoer” is Downing Street, especially during a pandemic. But it is invitation-only for the “in crowd” of government advisers, civil servants and elected politicians prepared to bring their own booze. With every revelation, the nation recalls what it was doing on those nights that were filled with dancing for the Downing Street set. As people isolated, courageously risked their lives caring for the sick, or died from Covid-19, the revellers remained in their alternative universe where the wine flowed and the music played on. In May 2020, as Boris Johnson and his wife attended a “work event” where people were invited to bring alcohol, I was using alcohol of another kind. On my hands. They were raw, blistered and painful, but at least alcohol gel sterilises hands in between the constant flow of patients. Then there was my mask, which cut ridges so deep into my face they became sores. I recall the weather being good, as is mentioned in the Downing Street emails. I was sweating from the heat in full PPE in a contamination suite in the north Wales hospital where I worked, so hot I thought I was going to pass out. By this time, some colleagues had already lost their lives. Homerton hospital consultant urologist Abdul Mabud Chowdhury, aged only 53, died after pleading for PPE and then contracting Covid when it was not supplied appropriately. I spoke to his son, Intisar, then 18, when his grief was still raw. He could not comprehend back then the injustice. What will he make of it now? We had no vaccines at that point. PPE rules changed on a weekly basis relating to supply, not evidence. It was akin to going into war without a bulletproof vest. In April 2020, Johnson became unwell with Covid and required critical care. That same month, I caught Covid from my brother, also a doctor. He is immunocompromised from a health condition, but was sent to look after Covid patients without proper PPE, despite his health risks. I spent a terrifying month caring for him. As an ITU doctor at the time, he proned himself – lying on his front when oxygen levels dipped to try to oxygenate the base of his lungs. That experience cemented in me the importance of sticking to the emerging Covid advice. Yet the prime minister went in the opposite direction. Now we hear of a suitcase of alcohol smuggled into No 10 for a leaving party on the eve of the funeral of the Duke of Edinburgh, where the Queen would sit, mourning alone according to the Covid rules. These revelations set the scene for a government of diminished responsibility for people relying on it for safety. The Downing Street Christmas party coincided with the day my father was admitted to hospital with Covid, unable to breathe. He died a few days after the Downing Street revellers opened their secret Santa gifts. Dr Saleyha Ahsan is a practising emergency medicine doctor and director of the documentary Covid Critical: A Doctor’s StoryAfter another dreadful week for Boris Johnson that was dominated by news of yet more rule-breaking parties at No 10, the comedian Andy Zaltzman opened BBC Radio 4’s News Quiz at 6.30pm on Friday by announcing his two teams. One he named “team apologise” and the other “team pack of lies”. Zaltzman added: “This show is best listened to when not at work. If you are unsure whether you are at work or not at work, please check whether anyone you normally work with has turned up with a bottle of wine and is getting hammered.” What followed was 20 minutes of relentless ridicule of the prime minister for attempting to pass off a lockdown-busting bring-your-own-booze gathering for dozens of people in the garden of No 10 in May 2020 (which he attended with his wife), as a work event. Half an hour later, over on the Sky Sports’s Friday Night Football show, the pundits Gary Neville and Jamie Carragher were also getting in on the act. Asked about the rivalry between Brighton and Hove Albion and Crystal Palace, who were about to face each other on the pitch, Neville replied with a straight face that such derby games often seemed like a “massive party”. His somewhat awkward – though clearly prepared – allusion to political events in answer to a question about football allowed Carragher to carry on the gag. “This is not a party tonight. This is about work,” he said. “They’ve got to know the difference between work and a party,” he said. Across the media Johnson, the politician who used to make the jokes on shows like Have I Got News for You, has become a national laughing stock, and everyone is at it. Johnson’s descent is a story with mass appeal. The popular ITV show This Morning, which normally steers well clear of politics, cut straight to prime minister’s questions live on Wednesday to hear Johnson’s apology-cum-justification for attending the May 2020 party himself, such was the level of interest. The dizzying speed of the revelations, denials, admissions and apologies has left Tory MPs struggling to keep up. By Thursday evening many were already dreading returning to their constituencies. They knew that “partygate” was damaging because Johnson had lost respect. But they were also aware that it was much more serious than that for every Conservative: the stories about rule-breaking get-togethers had caused deep anger and – to thousands who had lost relatives or friends to Covid-19 – intense anguish and pain. The mix was, potentially, politically lethal for the entire Conservative party. * * * To their horror, however, there was even worse to come that evening. A report would surface in the Daily Telegraph saying that No 10 staff had also held two bashes in Downing Street, lasting into the early hours, the night before Prince Philip’s funeral last April. “When I heard that I thought when does it end? Does it ever?” said one former Conservative minister. “Just when you thought the latest awful episode might be behind us we are back on the same routine of trying to hide the truth.” When they had to confront their constituents and their inboxes on Friday, Conservative MPs were shaken by the backlash. “The fact that they had parties before the royal funeral was what really set a lot of people off,” said one southern Tory MP. “That is when my emails really flooded in. Many were from people I don’t normally hear from. One of my colleagues said he had 500 emails overnight and most were from constituents he had not heard from until now.” Another Tory, from a northern seat, said his local councillors, who had been Johnson supporters, had summoned him to a meeting on Friday to express their disgust. The Tory councillors had voted for Johnson to be leader and had voted for Brexit. But they had turned against him. “I can accurately say my councillors are very pissed off,” he said. “They had been confident before all of this that we would hold our local councils in the May local elections. Now they think we will lose because of his behaviour. They want Boris out. They are furious.” Peter Aldous, Tory MP for Waveney in Suffolk, many of whose constituents had been loyal Johnson and Brexit supporters, said the feedback from his constituents was “very largely very negative”. Where 10 days before Aldous had been ready to give Johnson another chance, he was now close to concluding that he should go. He would wait until the publication of a report by the senior civil servant Sue Gray before finally deciding. “As matters stand at the moment my view is that it would be best if he stood down, but I think we should wait for the report. An awful lot of people who voted Brexit do feel very badly let down.” Another Tory MP said that if working-class Brexit supporters – who had largely stayed loyal to Johnson over recent months – were now deserting, the PM was in real trouble. “Quite of few of my colleagues still take the view that Boris won us the election and delivered Brexit so they say we should stay loyal. But if that coalition cracks among 2019 voters, those MPs could start to crack too.” This weekend most Tory MPs and many Conservative ministers say they, too, will wait for the Gray report before they decide whether to call for Johnson to go. So far only a handful of backbenchers have done so. But privately many admit they are holding off more because they believe they have to be seen to be observing “due process” than because they believe he should continue at No 10. “I think we do have to wait for the process to run its course, but I am clear he should go,” said one former minister. * * * Gray, a former head of ethics in the civil service who was appointed by Johnson to establish the facts about the Downing Street parties, is expected to conclude her report and publish it towards the end of next week. While her job is to establish what happened and not to suggest punishment or remedies for individuals, the word in Whitehall is that she will not hold back in her judgments. One source who knows Gray well and has been in regular contact with her over recent days says suggestions that she will preside over any form of whitewash will prove wide of the mark. Rather, he expects her to make it clear that things went very wrong in No 10, that the government’s own Covid guidance was not adhered to, and that those responsible must take the blame. Gray, the source said, was dismayed last week at hearing of more parties – ones that she not been informed of but had heard of via the media. “She has very high standards. She is ruthless. She is disappointed in what she is finding but personally she is robust,” the source said. “She will give it both barrels to whoever deserves it, whether that is a special adviser or civil servant or the politicos. We will get the unvarnished truth. If she sees direct responsibility, she will be clear. That is why I think this is going to be uncomfortable for everyone. Everyone is going to take their share of the blame.” He added: “My sense is that there won’t be one killer moment with a video of the prime minister dancing or whatever. It will be more about what a shitshow that whole operation is and what it has led to, how they felt that they could do this sort of stuff when they were running the country.” There are worries among backbenchers, however, that the period immediately after Gray publishes will be messy and protracted, and that Johnson and No 10 will try to spin anything short of a conclusion of law-breaking, as a triumph. The Tory MP and former health minister Dr Dan Poulter said that, with this in mind, he would like Gray to refer the results of her inquiry on to an independent authority which could advise on what action should be taken. “We are in the extremely unusual situation where the prime minister is both under investigation and the arbitrator of that same investigation,” he said. “The prime minister would be poorly served in judging the final report himself, as it is very important for him and the high office he holds that the outcome of this process has credibility and cannot be brought into question. “It would be better for Sue Gray to hand the completed investigation to either Lord Geidt or a panel of senior constitutional judges to allow them to pass judgement and make appropriate recommendations.” But there is another school of thought developing both in the Tory party and in Whitehall, which is that it might all be over for Johnson before he even gets to see the Gray report: that events could spiral out of control for him very fast, perhaps within days. The way the leader of the Scottish Tories, Douglas Ross, called for Johnson to go last week, and was backed by Tory MSPs – only for cabinet minister Jacob Rees-Mogg to dismiss Ross as a “lightweight” – has triggered doubts about whether the party can hang together for much longer, with ministers straining to defend Johnson, and attracting more ridicule in the process. “You cannot have this in a unionist party,” said a senior Tory adviser. “What is Rees-Mogg doing for the sake of trying to save Boris Johnson? It is complete farce.” * * * Government is paralysed and the cracks are widening. Every movement of Chancellor Rishi Sunak, the favourite to succeed Johnson, and foreign secretary Liz Truss are being picked over for what they reveal about their leadership ambitions. Today’s Opinium poll for the Observer is devastating for Johnson and the Tories. The least surprising finding is that Labour is now 10 points ahead of the Conservatives, having enjoyed comfortable leads just three months ago. More striking is that Johnson’s personal ratings have nosedived to levels equivalent to those of Theresa May at her lowest point. Just 22% of people approve of the job Johnson is doing as prime minister. And 48% of Conservative voters at the 2019 election now say he should resign. Nor can he rely on Brexit supporters – 46% of Tory Leave voters say he should quit. Sonia Khan, a former Tory special adviser said: “For many Conservative MPs, the risk of ‘partygate’ has only felt real this week. MPs tell me they’ve had emails in their hundreds from voters in the most marginal parts of their constituencies telling them they will never vote Conservative again. “Worryingly, these are voters who lent their vote to the Conservatives in 2019 and hoped to see a ‘levelled-up’ country. These are voters who make up the blue wall and are critical the success in seats in the Midlands, the south of England and more. “Without these votes, no one can see how they hold on to their seats and secure another electoral victory in a general election. For the first time since the election, they see the risk that comes with these stories and the current prime minister. They saw the falling poll ratings but never saw what that meant for them directly and it’s this insecurity that will drive them to find a successor to Johnson.” Another former adviser to a Tory cabinet minister said he believed the script was already written and it would not end well for Boris Johnson. “They can talk about waiting for Sue Gray and they may do. But it is like watching one of those nature programmes where the animal is trapped and we know how it ends. They may as well just get on with it before more damage is done. “We all know it is over for Boris.”1. Johnson out within days Support for Johnson continues to haemorrhage away over the next 24 to 48 hours. Tory MPs despair as their party nosedives further in the polls and constituents flood their inboxes with furious emails. Tory councillors panic, fearing carnage in May’s local elections. Government is paralysed. More Conservative MPs call for Johnson to step down. The “men in grey suits” from the 1922 committee decide to strike before the civil servant Sue Gray reports and tell him to go. Like Theresa May before him, Johnson falls on his sword. Likelihood: moderate but increasing. 2. Johnson is ousted within two weeks, after Sue Gray’s report Gray reports at the end of this week. Johnson tries to spin her highly critical conclusions as little more than a rap over the knuckles for him and No 10. Rishi Sunak quits as chancellor, saying enough is enough and that he is ready to stand. At least 54 Tory MPs (the minimum needed) write to 1922 chair, Sir Graham Brady, triggering a vote of confidence in Johnson which the PM loses, bringing his premiership to a disastrous end. Likelihood: High. 3. Johnson survives until after the May local elections, only then to be dumped by his party The Gray report is critical but fails to deliver a “smoking gun”. Johnson and his team at No 10 somehow manage to limp on, after apologising again for their errors and saying the last thing the country needs is a Tory leadership contest. Tory MPs give the PM one more chance. But the electorate is seething. The May local elections deliver thumping Tory losses. Sunak resigns as does foreign secretary Liz Truss. Johnson suffers humiliating defeat in a confidence vote of his MPs, so has to quit under party rules. Likelihood: Moderate. 4. Johnson survives until the next election … and possibly beyond. Sue Gray’s report is a damp squib, full of Whitehall equivocation, letting the prime minister off the hook. The Tory party returns to the view that Johnson is a born survivor as well as a winner. Sunak and Truss pretend they had always been loyal. Covid all but disappears from the UK and Johnson claims credit. Keir Starmer and Labour seem to have missed their chance. Johnson remains prime minister and leads his party into the next election. Likelihood. Low and getting lower. Toby HelmThe copper-coloured afternoon light turns a deep blue as it streams through the stained-glass windows of All Saints’ church in Tudeley, near Tonbridge, Kent. Visitors come from all over the world to see these colours falling to the floor because All Saints’ is the only church in the world where all the windows are by the modernist artist Marc Chagall. But those heavy, aquatic blues sliced through by white figures could soon shine a little less if a new nearby “garden village” – a mile-long estate of 6,500 houses – gets the go-ahead. “I’m devastated. I’m appalled,” says campaigner Dave Lovell as he stands outside the church door and looks across the unspoilt countryside where the Tunbridge Wells garden village is proposed. “It’s a beautiful part of the countryside and to lose this historic landscape is a tragedy.” Tudeley is far from alone. A series of garden villages and towns – and one “garden city” at Ebbsfleet – is being proposed on greenfield sites and protected areas of outstanding natural beauty (AONB) across Kent. In a county known as the garden of England, this has caused uproar. Garden developments attract special funding from the government so developers often attach the label to projects. But Lovell, a former officer with the National Crime Agency who lives in the nearby village of Capel, dismisses the bucolic moniker. “There’s nothing organic about them,” he says. “They’re artificial and imposed on us. And I’m not sure how they can evolve a sense of community.” There are at least seven more garden developments proposed. If the housebuilders get their way, Otterpool Park near Folkestone, will have 10,000 homes, Highstead Park near Sittingbourne will have 9,250, five schools and a health centre, and Borough Green near Tonbridge, will have 3,000 homes built on green belt land and an AONB. Planning authorities say their hands are being forced by the government’s target of building 300,000 homes a year. The Tunbridge Wells project is split into three parts and Lovell’s village of Capel will be subsumed by the largest section. “There are 950 houses in the parish at the moment and that will be swallowed up by nearly 5,000,” he says. “Local life will completely change. It’s really an existential threat.” Protest groups have sprung up across the county. Lovell’s idea was to bring them together under an umbrella group: Save Kent’s Green Spaces, which organised a “day of action” on 28 November last year, when the activists marched and rallied. “As far as we can see, there’s no official count on how much land is even being lost,” says Lovell. “We have an estimate but it’s only based on what the 30-odd campaign groups that became involved in the day of action have told us, and what we’ve picked up through newspaper reports. So we’re looking at over 18,000 acres at the moment.” He says they estimate 7.5 houses per acre, though some of that will go on schools and other social infrastructure. Like much of Britain, Kent has a shortage of housing and social housing. In Tunbridge Wells there were 897 families on the waiting list in 2021. According to Paul Cheshire, professor of economic geography at the LSE, “It’s almost impossible to provide land for new homes [around Tunbridge Wells] without releasing some green belt land. So much of the area is either green belt or AONB.” There are 17 MPs in Kent – 16 Conservative and Labour’s Rosie Duffield in Canterbury. And there is nothing like housing developments on greenfield sites to provoke a backlash from Tory heartland voters. In last June’s Chesham and Amersham byelection, for instance, the Liberal Democrats overturned a 16,000 majority in a Buckinghamshire seat that has always voted Conservative, with a 25.2% swing, largely on the back of local opposition to HS2 and housing development. With an identical swing, all 16 of Kent’s Tory MPs would be looking for new jobs. Tom Tugendhat, Tory MP for Tonbridge and Malling, says that developments such as Tunbridge Wells garden village undermine some of the most important policies of the government. “Of course we need new homes for young people in our community and to give people somewhere for their families,” he says. “But the government’s climate change commitments make some of these decisions pretty strange. We can’t go around bulldozing fields when we need to maintain our green spaces to meet our climate commitments.” Local protests against the garden villages have made some strange bedfellows. In Faversham, for example, those addressing the marches against the developments on the day of action included local resident Bob Geldof from one end of the political spectrum, and the local Tory MPs Helen Whately and Rehman Chishti from the other. Geldof, who lives in the 12th-century Davington Priory on the edge of the town, told the rally: “I have lived in Kent for 40-odd years and to see what amounts to a full-scale attack on the county and its people by the central government planners gives a lie to … Boris Johnson’s promise that they would not build on green fields.” Vicky Castle, content editor for news site Kent Live, says the issue is turning previously quiescent people into activists. “These are angry, knowledgeable people and they’re quite loud,” she explains. “The local Tory MPs are saying, ‘We don’t want this’. And central government turns around and says, ‘Tough, you’re having it’.” “It’s radicalising local people because they care about these things. You drive around the county for one day and it looks completely different to how it did five years ago. People notice that and they’re worried.” Duffield wants a new approach. “It’s really disappointing because it’s so unimaginative,” she says. “There are brownfield sites, there are loads of other places. It seems like a developer just has their eye on a lovely area of land. And we’re not going to get it back if it’s full of houses.” An hour’s drive across Kent from All Saints’ church to Faversham, and the light has faded, turning a field of winter-bare blackberry bushes into dark fingers. They lie on farmland owned by the Duchy of Cornwall, Prince Charles’s business empire, but the duchy has applied for planning permission to build 2,500 homes on 320 acres of countryside. A duchy spokesman said: “Swale council identified the Duchy of Cornwall’s land as a highly sustainable location for an urban extension of the town, providing 2,500 homes and around 2,500 jobs. Since the initial allocation, the duchy has been engaging with the Faversham community to help shape a vision for a mixed use community that meets local housing needs. “The plan is being designed from the ground up to improve soils, increase biodiversity, and achieve water neutrality on site with its own waste water treatment plant.” As evening birds chatter, Carol Goatham walks beside the silhouetted fruit bushes and points out a line of yellow markers that show the path of proposed gas lines to the houses that will replace them. “The pears for the Queen’s wedding breakfast came from this farm,” says Goatham, a retired occupational therapist who founded a group to oppose the development. “And my father worked here when I was young. We are only self-sufficient for 16% of the fruit we eat in this country and this is the highest grade of agricultural land. If we lose these fields, we lose food security. “I’ve always been a royalist and I’m really pleased about Prince Charles’s green credentials but now I feel that if he sanctions this, then … ” She shakes her head. She looks from the lines of skeletal blackberry bushes to rows of spring greens pushing through the soil nearby. That soil will also soon be covered if the duchy’s application is granted. “We’re only a small rural town and they’re going to obliterate our beautiful green fields,” she says. “Kent’s supposed to be the Garden of England and we’re going to become a concrete county.” A Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities spokesperson said: “Making the most of previously developed land is a government priority to protect our cherished countryside. Councils are ultimately responsible for setting housing targets in their area.”Perhaps bravely, the BBC is making a drama series about Jimmy Savile, exploring how its former favourite managed a double life as a star and paedophile, dying before being unmasked in an ITV documentary. Savile’s victims have, it’s reported, been involved in a production likely to show how his extraordinary status, giving him opportunities for years of attacks, derived from a doting state broadcaster. The series will inevitably remind audiences how BBC executives subsequently suppressed their journalists’ attempts to expose his crimes. Given this historical but probably indelible association with one of the UK’s most infamous paedophiles, it’s unfortunate the corporation’s flagship building should still double as a monument to another notorious British pervert, Eric Gill. Last week, Gill’s most famous public sculpture, Prospero and Ariel, was badly vandalised in front of an audience including various police officers and spectators from the BBC. In hindsight, the BBC may be wondering if it could have done more to protect a sculpture that is so public, so accessible and so controversial. Maybe by using protective wire, like Cecil Rhodes at Oriel College, with a similarly contextualising, Oliver Dowden-mollifying plaque. “Retain and explain”, according to the former culture secretary, is the correct way to reconcile a statue’s critics with the object of their understandable revulsion. Although it’s hard to see, as with the Edward Colston statue, what inscription would answer here. Gill’s work ornaments a key national building. What, in his case, justifies continued public display of a piece whose revised but still monumental message is “made by a famous child abuser”? As for the “leftwing snowflakes” who, according to Dowden’s successor, Nadine Dorries, enjoy “tearing down statues”, does that define everyone who recoils from Gill’s behaviour and, along with it, his work? Like the nude studies of the daughters he was raping? To complicate matters, the way Gill harmed these children belongs, thankfully, to no tradition sacred to earlier generations, not in 1933, not in 1633 or 1033. After last week’s distressing but not wholly surprising attack, the BBC informed the public that Shakespeare’s Ariel “as the spirit of the air, was seen as an appropriate symbol for the new dawn of broadcasting”. Supposing this notion ever really worked – the novelist Penelope Fitzgerald pointed out that Ariel was a liar, “pretending that someone’s father had died full fathom five, when in point of fact he was safe and well” – metaphorical difficulties seem unlikely to have provoked the vandalism. Though it’s a reminder that Two Little Boys was once a sweet song loved by Margaret Thatcher. “The BBC,” the statement continued, “doesn’t condone the views or actions of Eric Gill. Clearly there are debates about whether you can separate the work of an artist from the art itself. We think the right thing to do is for people to have those discussions. We don’t think the right approach is to damage the artwork itself.” But who thinks the BBC does condone Gill’s offences or that damaging his artwork is a great idea? There’s no response, however, to a reasonable proposal that it be moved, given that survivors have called its current prominence an insult, mocking, “intolerable”. With the further difficulty, in this specific case, of separating the artist from the art being elevated. At least one art critic has reported feeling “aesthetic revulsion” from Gill’s sculptures, including Prospero and Ariel. It was carved in 1932, with Gill adding to a Tempest theme he seems never to have grasped some godly content of his own. For Gill, religion and sex were indivisible (“we are fucked by Christ, and bear children to him”). Both the sculptor and the statues created a stir, in relation to Ariel’s penis size, but nothing approaching the reaction when, in 1989, his biographer, the late Fiona MacCarthy, disclosed that the pious Gill was a child abuser. There were diary entries, previously ignored, in which Gill recorded furtive sexual encounters with two of his daughters, as well as with his dog. Though women of all ages were targeted by the married Gill, a superficially droll figure in his monk’s habit and “girdle of chastity”. And some criticisms of his Ariel were probably not, it emerged, vexatious. Gill liked causing trouble. He was also, MacCarthy found, phallically obsessed. His own dimensions were scrupulously recorded, sometimes with female assistance. In one tract, Trousers &amp; the Most Precious Ornament, the saintly penis liberator rails against modern containment: “All sidewise, dishonoured, neglected, ridiculed and ridiculous – no longer the virile member.” Gill was certainly blessed in both his biographer, since MacCarthy did not allow his “strange urge for the sordid” to qualify her appreciation of his work, and in the timing of these revelations, not long before Savile was knighted. Being inflicted long before survivors began to be heard on what had been done to them by priests, by teachers and inside children’s homes, and before the evidence of Savile, Gary Glitter and Rolf Harris, Gill’s initial reputational damage was strikingly limited. Even 10 years later, a Guardian obituary of one of Gill’s daughters could depict the incestuous rapes, since these could hardly be ignored, as paternal encouragement: “He introduced Betty and Petra to the mysteries of sex and recorded the occasions in his diaries.” Gill apologists liked to stress that neither girl had publicly complained of abuse. But their father, keeping it secret, was in no doubt. “This must stop,” he wrote. Outside the BBC, Gill’s abuse is finally catching up with his artistic legacy. Save the Children is going to stop using his typeface Gill sans. The Ditchling Museum of Art + Craft, in which Gill’s work is central, is committed to showing his work without separating it from his abuse. A still greater sensitivity, given the feelings of survivors about its far more prominent collection, might have been expected from the BBC. Instead, in an uncanny echo of Savile, it seems again to be struggling with plain sight. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnistThere are lots of reasons that I’m happy I’m not famous but right up there is a deep gratitude that no one has ever paid close attention to my parenting. It’s hard enough being a mother, without having to be observed, and I’m glad that I never had to worry about being photographed looking bored while pushing my son, Matt, on the swings, or miserable when I was watching him come last on sports day. Not everyone has the luxury of anonymous parenting. Years ago, back when I still drank alcohol and before anyone worried about social distancing, I was crammed into a pub by the Thames watching Andy Murray play tennis. I can’t remember what the match was, but it was a big deal and the crowd swelled and roared as we all dared to hope for a British champion. Between points, the camera lingered on his mother, Judy, and much of the commentary focused on her role in his success. How nice, I thought, finishing another pint. “She looks tough,” said a man at the next table, “I bet she’s a lesbian.” “He’s too much of a mother’s boy,” said his mate. “Maybe that’s why he never wins.” Andy Murray did lose that day but went on to triumph in multiple grand slams and I always remembered that overheard conversation as people continued to speculate about Judy Murray, who said last week that being labelled as “pushy” and the way photos always showed her with her teeth bared, or in mid fist pump, was all to do with her being a woman. I ask Matt about it when he comes home from school. “I think she’s right,” he says. “They wouldn’t treat her like that if she was a man, would they?” “Probably not,” I say, restraining myself from a little celebratory fist pump of my own at having raised a feminist boy. “If she was a man she could jump up and down and shout, ‘Go on, my son,’ and no one would care.” “True,” I say. “How would you like me to react? If you won Wimbledon, should I stay cool or jump about?” He rolls his eyes. “Me winning Wimbledon is less likely than a zombie apocalypse.” “PE isn’t too bad these days, is it?” “Only because I’m in the shittiest group. I can’t ever improve because if I go up to a less shit group, life will be horrible again.” “Ah,” I say, with a flicker of shame because, as a sporty kid myself, I was usually a captain and didn’t think about what it was like to be one of the kids who always got picked last until I had one of my own. “But,” Matt says, “If we imagine what it would be like, I think it would be OK for you to get a bit excited. I bet Andy likes it that his mum is proud. He wouldn’t want her to look bored.” I feel a frisson of maternal guilt. “Sorry for all the times I looked bored when we were at the swings,” I say. “I’m not sure you did,” he says. “You might have been a bit hungover. It’s good you stopped drinking.” “Thank you,” I say, “I am proud about that. And proud of you. Maybe even more than Judy Murray is of Andy. It takes a lot of courage to not be good at stuff.” “Don’t get soppy, Mum,” Matt says, and goes off to play Minecraft and I think about how easy it is as a mother to think that we can never win on the maternal rollercoaster of love, worry and guilt. We’re either too into our kids, or not enough. Too pushy or too soft. If even Judy Murray gets criticised for what she does and how she does it then how can the rest of us ever measure up? This is the parenting trap; to be so scared of getting it wrong that we can’t enjoy the miracle of having created another human being. Wouldn’t it be nice instead if we could relax a bit and enjoy our children for the unique little people they are, whether that means they are winning championships or just doing their best to navigate PE lessons as they grow into their own sweet selves. I think back to those horrible hot sports days, to watching Matt struggle to follow instructions or fail to keep his egg on the spoon. I’m sure my face was a portrait of anguished anxiety. Perhaps, with a different child, I’d have been doing a fist pump. Either way, I am relieved that there was no photographer there to record it.Two years ago, Qi Jiayao visited his mother’s hometown of Shaoxing in eastern China. When he tried to speak to his cousin’s children in the local dialect, Qi was surprised. “None of them was able to,” recalls the 38-year-old linguist, who now teaches Mandarin in the Mexican state of Oaxaca. The decline in local dialects among the younger generation has become more apparent in recent years as China’s president, Xi Jinping, has sought to strengthen a uniform Chinese identity. Mandarin is now being spoken by more than 80% of China’s population, up from 70% a decade ago. Last month, China’s state council vowed to increase the figure to 85% within the next four years. But the popularisation of a standard national language is often at the expense of regional languages, including dialects of the Han majority and ethnic languages such as Mongolian and Uyghur. In Inner Mongolia, for example, local regulations in 2016 allowed ethnic schools to use their own language for teaching. This policy was aimed at developing students’ linguistic skills and cultivating bilingualism. But four years later it was reversed to favour Mandarin, a move that sparked protests from the ethnic population. It is not just ethnic languages that are being affected. In 2017, a survey circulated online showed that among the 10 dialect groups, Wu Chinese, which includes the Shanghai dialect and is spoken by about 80 million people in the eastern part of the country, has the smallest number of active users aged between six and 20. It prompted concern among linguists in the region. In Shanghai, where Qi grew up, activists have campaigned to encourage use of their dialect for many years. In 2020, a local political representative urged the Shanghai government to invest in promoting the local dialect. The government responded by upgrading the local Huju opera annual festival to a municipality-level activity. This success encouraged Qi. But he is realistic about how much activists can accomplish. In 2014, the TV programme Shanghai Dialect Talk on Shanghai Doco TV was taken off air after the government insisted on the use of standard Mandarin for the channel to be broadcast nationally. Chinese laws prevent satellite TV channels from broadcasting in local dialects. Activists are turning to social media and local events. A new group of volunteers has been making a recording of Blossoms, by Jin Yucheng, winner of the prestigious Mao Dun literature prize and one of the few novels written in the Shanghainese dialect of Wu. Every few weeks, the organisers upload chapters to WeChat and Himalaya, a Chinese podcast site. Qi is now compiling a Shanghai dialect dictionary. In 2000, China passed laws to standardise spoken and written language. In each province, a language committee advises, monitors and polices the use of Mandarin. The strength of the implementation varies, but it is not difficult for a determined government to enforce its policy. In September, the south-western province of Sichuan banned civil servants and party cadres from using the local dialect in the workplace, a language once used on national TV by Deng Xiaoping, the former supreme leader, before his death in 1997. “The state has been telling people there are visible and tangible benefits from speaking standard Mandarin Chinese,” says Fang Xu, an urban sociologist at the University of California, Berkeley, and author of Silencing Shanghai: Language and Identity in Urban China. “Since then, many regional languages – including Shanghainese – have suffered the same fate.” A 2010 study by Beijing Union University found that nearly half of local Beijing residents born after 1980 prefer using Mandarin Chinese over the Beijing dialect. But it is not all bad news, she adds. In the past, internal migrants from outside Shanghai often felt discriminated against and excluded by being unable to speak the local dialect. Today social exclusion no longer hinges on speech or residential status but wealth. “The richest in Shanghai today are not even Shanghainese.” Qi began noticing the change when studying in the north-eastern city of Harbin in 2002. “Looking from a local Shanghai perspective, the marginalisation of the dialect is alarming. But thinking nationally, it may be inevitable at a time when a uniform Chinese identity trumps everything,” he says. “The diminishing of dialects seems only to be the price we pay for it.”When the country was in lockdown in late March 2020 and members of parliament had returned to their constituencies for an early Easter recess, the then business minister Nadhim Zahawi set out the rules for businesses around the country to fight the pandemic. He urged them to help prevent the spread of disease by avoiding unnecessary mixing. “Workers should try to minimise all meetings and gatherings in the workplace,” he said in a written parliamentary answer. Across the country, businesses, charities and public organisations heeded the message. It now appears there was one address that was a notable exception to these guidelines: No 10 Downing Street. From the national lockdown announced by Boris Johnson on 23 March 2020 until April last year, there were at least 14 parties, leaving dos, quizzes and meetings-with-drinks at Downing Street, as well as other Whitehall offices. “It was ‘party on’ and nobody was saying ‘don’t do this’,” said Lord Kerslake, a former head of the civil service, last week. “Once it started, it just got worse and worse. There was a lack of moral awareness. “It’s an appallingly undisciplined, irresponsible and tone-deaf behaviour which showed a complete lack of empathy for the way in which the country was having to suffer from lockdown at the time.” It was alleged last week that one of the events last May spilled into the garden in the late hours and a reveller broke a child’s swing belonging to Wilf Johnson, the prime minister’s son. It is also claimed a suitcase was used on at least one occasion for a supermarket run to stock up on alcohol, and a £142 drinks fridge was installed in the ground-floor press office for “wine-time Fridays”. The “partygate” scandal is vying to be the biggest political mess of Johnson’s career. Sue Gray, the second permanent secretary at the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, who was the head of propriety and ethics in the Cabinet Office for six years, has the unenviable task of unpicking it. She has a reputation for being fair, independent and tough-minded, but there is a growing consensus that her inquiry is no longer fit for purpose. Kerslake said: “When the inquiry started, it was about one event and we didn’t know that the prime minister was involved. Now we find that there were over a dozen events and not only is the prime minister implicated but he is front, back and centre of what happened. “You cannot have a situation where a civil servant will make a pronouncement that could end the office of a prime minister. The consequence is that Sue Gray will inevitably have to stop short of that.” Jonathan Powell, Tony Blair’s former chief of staff, who served in Downing Street for a decade, said Gray would set out the facts and the matter would be decided in the “court of public opinion”. He said Downing Street was spinning the report as a “get out of jail” card because officials were confident there would be no finding of the prime minister breaching lockdown laws, since the matter was not in the inquiry’s remit. Powell said he had high regard for Gray, but it was “totally inappropriate” for the inquiry to be conducted by a civil servant reporting to the prime minister. He said it would be “career-shortening” for her to deliver a judgment that the prime minister had potentially broken the law or breached the ministerial code and it would be better to have an independent non-judicial inquiry conducted in the space of a few weeks. Powell also said Johnson’s staff appeared to have held more staff parties in a period of months than Blair’s team had held in a decade. “It’s pretty extraordinary,” he said. “I don’t know what time was left for work.” He said his experience of Downing Street was that it had been extremely difficult to take in any food or drink without exhaustive checks by the police. He said: “I am amazed they could send someone out and come back with a suitcase full of booze. Imagine putting that through the scanner.” Jolyon Maugham, director of the Good Law Project, a non-profit organisation that campaigns on legal issues, said the investigation into the parties should now be led by the police. He said: “The key question is whether the prime minister, civil servants or special advisers have committed a criminal offence. This inquiry by Sue Gray is not asked to answer that question. The whole thing feels like a smokescreen for what should be happening – an investigation by the Metropolitan police.” Under the terms of reference of Gray’s inquiry, if any evidence is found that potentially involves a criminal offence, it will be passed to the police. If that happened, the government investigation might be put on hold. The Metropolitan police said on Saturday that it has “ongoing contact” with the Cabinet Office in relation to the inquiry, but would not comment on whether it had received any material involving potential offences. Adam Wagner, a barrister and expert in Covid law, said Gray had a conflict of interest because she was investigating more senior figures in government. “It is clearly compromised,” he said. “It wouldn’t pass muster as an independent investigation in any legal setting.”You don’t need to be Sigmund Freud to understand that ornaments can become symbols of emotion. But now research into a curious decorative object that Freud himself once cherished has shed fresh light on the darker corners of his own psyche. A tiny Chinese screen, made of jade and placed in the centre of his consulting desk, was one of only two items salvaged from his former apartment in Vienna in 1938. The intricate ornament, which still stands in position in his last home in Hampstead, north London, is not particularly valuable and had no obvious connection to the life of the founding father of psychoanalysis. Yet it was deliberately smuggled out of his apartment by a close friend when the Nazis threatened to confiscate the large collection of artefacts and antiques Freud had left behind in Austria. The significance of the jade screen has puzzled historians of his work ever since. Now, curators of an exhibition that opens next month inside his London house are to present the screen as the key to unlocking Freud’s fascination with China in the last years of his life. Made from pierced jade and wood, it was designed for a scholar’s desk and depicts the Chinese character of “shou”, meaning “long life”. To a Daoist mind, the accompanying flower decoration was an aid to the contemplation of the simplicity of the natural world. Yet for Freud it held another significance. “Freud seems to have used the screen as a reminder of the unknown,” said curator Professor Craig Clunas, an expert on Chinese culture. “For him, the Orient was like the dark area of hidden significance in the human mind. There is also a strong argument that he associated it with the psychology of women, something he regarded as a shifting and mysterious thing.” The jade screen was directly in front of Freud as he worked and consulted with patients and Clunas believes it represented all that Freud felt his theories could not explain. At that time the shadowy world of an imagined “Orient” to the east was widely set in contrast to the western tradition of logical thought and classical culture. So, while Freud studied both Greek and Roman philosophy in depth, Clunas notes that he avoided serious research into Chinese customs and schools of thinking. Instead, Freud used Chinese artefacts as potent emblems of mystery. “Freud’s little understood interest in China is something that came to him in his last decade, so it was very fresh in his mind at the end,” said Clunas, a professor emeritus of the history of art at the University of Oxford, where he was a specialist in China until 2018. “Before then, Freud had collected other things, especially items from the classical world. He was usually a voracious reader, but it seems as if he chose to leave China as an area of the unknown.” Freud came to London as a refugee with his adult daughter Anna, the pioneering child psychoanalyst, when they escaped the Nazi annexation of Austria in March 1938. The pair set up house together in Maresfield Gardens, Hampstead, where Freud saw patients in the study that would also be the scene of his death from cancer a year later. Freud and China, the exhibition opening on 12 February at the Freud Museum, will be the first to look at this element of Freud’s life and to examine the Chinese objects he began to collect, often positioning them in the eyeline of his patients as they lay on his famous couch. “The beautiful little jade ornament was clearly treasured by Freud and a significant object for him. Our exhibition will attempt to work out why,” said Carol Seigel, director of the Freud Museum. As the second world war approached, Freud had been forced to select a couple of objects to be brought to England from Vienna, asking his well-connected friend Marie Bonaparte to take them secretly from his apartment. “She put the jade screen and a small Greek bronze inside her handbag so they would not be spotted by the stormtroopers waiting outside,” said Clunas. “The bronze dates from the beginning of Freud’s collecting career and the screen from his new interest in China. Maybe this is why they were both chosen.” Freud used the Chinese language as an analogy in his influential writing on interpreting dreams, but as Clunas points out, this was based on a common misunderstanding. “He picked up on the idea that the Chinese language system has a certain vagueness and relies on context for meaning. “This is not quite right and later the Chinese interpreter of his autobiography queried the suggestion and asked where Freud had sourced it. He said he had taken it from the Encyclopaedia Britannica.” Freud’s enthusiasm for collecting artefacts followed the death of his father and academics have seen this as an emotional reaction to mourning. His later interest in China followed his mother’s death and so, at one level, it does seem to be attached to gender, suggests Clunas. The psychoanalyst also had a fondness for chows, dogs linked with China in the western imagination. Jofi, his favourite, was by Freud’s side while he saw patients and Freud’s dog Lun was brought with the family to London after they left Vienna. Lun’s release after six months of quarantine was celebrated across the British media.Tsunami waves caused by an undersea volcano have flooded the Pacific Island country of Tonga, where entire towns have been inundated with water and scientists warn the main island could be blanketed in volcanic ash. Videos shared on social media after the eruption showed people running for higher ground as the one metre high floods hit coastal areas and made their way farther inland while the sky darkened with ash. There were no official reports of injuries or deaths by Monday morning, with communications limited. Jacinda Ardern, the prime minister of New Zealand, told a news conference on Sunday that contact had not been established with coastal areas beyond the capital, Nuku’alofa. “Nuku’alofa is covered in thick plumes of volcanic dust but otherwise conditions are calm and stable,” Ardern said. “We have not yet received news from other coastal areas,” she said. Ardern said the main undersea communications cable was affected, likely due to loss of power. Power was being restored in some areas on the islands and local mobile phones were slowly starting to work, she added. The New Zealand high commission in Nuku’alofa had said the tsunami has damaged boats, shops and other infrastructure. As the tsunami struck on Saturday, a video shot from the roof of a building on the coast showed large waves breaching the coastal wall seconds apart, while a video shot from the New Zealand high commission in Nuku’alofa, where people ran for shelter, showed the downtown area of Patangata had been completely submerged, including the Royal Palace and Tonga’s largest bank. Another video, shot inside a church, showed children crying out as water surrounded the building and waves begin lapping up against the windows. In a video posted to YouTube after the eruption, Abraham Leilua begins by telling his followers that “it’s not that bad” but within minutes, as the water rises, saying: “I have to run for my life” before ending the video. Blake Smith-Tatafu, a Tongan-Australian based in Australia, said they were praying and in fear. “If you don’t know, the island of Tonga is flat. This leaves their people with nowhere of realistic safety to evacuate. Villages completely underwater. We haven’t had contact for hours now. This is a crisis,” he said. Pita Taufatoua, a Tongan Olympian based in Australia, said he had not heard from his father or family in Ha’apai, the lowest lying islands in Tonga. “Initial reports of damage have been catastrophic and all communications with Tonga have been wiped out,” he said. “Whilst I can’t assist family at this moment I will focus on country as more information comes out.” Southern Cross Cable Network said on Sunday that it had been able to confirm contact with a communications centre in Tonga and work was under way to have internet and phone links restored. An internet post on Sunday morning stated that the Tongan prime minister, Siaosi Sovaleni, said the tsunami warning remained in place and much of the country had sustained serious damage. Australia’s foreign affairs department said its high commission had received no reports of casualties. Ardern said the situation in Tonga was “hugely concerning”. “Communication, as a result of the eruption, has been difficult, but our defence force team and ministry of foreign affairs are working as we speak to establish what’s needed and how we can help,” she said. New Zealand has made an initial NZ$500,000 available to Tonga and has dispatched an aerial surveillance aircraft to assess the damage. Ardern said she had been in touch with Scott Morrison, the Australian PM, and that both governments stood ready to respond to Tonga’s needs. But conditions were not immediately safe for aircraft. “There’s an urgency here. We want to make sure we’re on the ground as soon as possible, but for our navy vessels it will take several days to reach Tonga, and we need to finely balance the need to get there quickly but to make sure we also get the people and resources they need there as well, and in some cases we have parts of Tonga where we just haven’t been able to establish communication.” The US secretary of state, Anthony Blinken, said he was “deeply concerned” for the people of Tonga as they recover and that the United States stood prepared to provide support. The volcano, Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai, at 1,800m high and 20km wide, is 65km north of Tonga’s capital, Nuku’alofa. US Storm Watch said the eruption was one of the most violent ever captured on satellite, while the Tonga geological service said the gas, smoke and ash from the eruption reached 20km into the sky. The eruption could be heard as far away as 2,300km away in New Zealand, while tsunami warnings were in force at various times across the Pacific, including in Australia, Japan and the US. Some coastal communities in Fiji and Vanuatu were damaged by large waves, while tidal surges were reported to have damaged harbours and coastal parks along the US west coast. Satellite imagery appeared to show Tonga’s uninhabited Nuku and Tau islands completely eroded. Tonga has also been hit by two category five cyclones in the last five years: Cyclone Harold in April 2020 and Cyclone Gita in 2018. In Japan, around 230,000 people were advised to evacuate across eight prefectures as waves of more than a metre hit coastal areas, the public broadcaster NHK reported. The alert included areas hit by the deadly 2011 tsunami. Ten boats were capsized in Kochi prefecture on Shikoku island in southern Japan, NHK said, and Japan Airlines cancelled 27 flights at airports across the country. There were delays to rail and postal services in some areas, Kyodo News reported, with some residents passing a cold night after evacuating to higher ground. A red tsunami warning – the second-highest in Japan’s domestic scale – for Iwate prefecture in northern Japan was lifted on Sunday morning, NHK reported, although a less severe yellow tsunami advisory remained in place along Japan’s eastern coast, with authorities continuing to urge caution. With ReutersAustralia has pledged to send humanitarian and technical assistance to Tonga in the wake of the tsunami that struck the country after a nearby underwater volcanic eruption. The minister for the Pacific, Zed Seselja, said Australians and officials living in Tonga had all been accounted for, but it was a rapidly unfolding situation. “We have no particular concerns about Australians at this stage … that’s subject to some communications difficulties,” Seseja told reporters in Canberra on Sunday. He said the prime minister, Scott Morrison, had spoken with his New Zealand counterpart, Jacinda Ardern, earlier on Sunday to put in place a coordinated response. He said both countries were sending surveillance aircraft to help gather as much information as possible on the situation. Australia was aiming to send its plane on Monday to reach Tongan airspace by 9am. “This is subject to weather conditions, particularly issues around the ash cloud. There are no guarantee we will be taking off tomorrow morning,” the minister said. Australia was also preparing to provide humanitarian assistance though a flight from Brisbane which should be ready to go on Monday, but again subject to flight conditions and the ability to get on the ground. The Bureau of Meteorology said the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano erupted at 3.10pm AEDT on Saturday, and tsunami waves have been observed as a result of the eruption. The eruption – captured in satellite images that show a huge plume of ash, steam and gas rising from the ocean – was heard and felt as far away as in Fiji and Vanuatu, where people reported feeling the ground and buildings shaking for hours. There were no immediate reports of injuries or the extent of the damage in Tonga, but online videos showed huge waves in coastal areas, swirling around homes and buildings. Beaches on Australia’s east coast were closed Sunday morning due to the tsunami warning. The warning for Queensland, Victoria and Tasmania beaches was lifted late on Sunday morning, but swimmers were urged to take caution. All beaches were closed to swimmers in NSW, where the warning remains in place, according to the bureau’s latest advice. The bureau said impacts of the tsunami were detected on Saturday at Lord Howe Island, where unusual currents and waves were observed at Ned’s Beach, and about 45 minutes later in the River Derwent in Hobart, where a half-metre tidal surge was recorded in the marina. Land warnings were issued earlier for Norfolk Island and Lord Howe Island, however by 10.30am on Sunday these were downgraded to marine warnings. “In areas with a threat to the marine environment only, emergency authorities advise people to get out of the water and move away from the immediate water’s edge of harbours, coastal estuaries, rock platforms and beaches,” the bureau said in a statement. BoM meteorologist Sarah Scully said these warnings would remain in place until there were “no significant observations for six hours”. “We’re waiting to be really sure that the impacts and the energy from the volcanic eruption has dispersed and it’s no longer a danger to any people out of the water,” she told ABC News. Earlier, the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, urged people to follow the rules on Sunday, saying the beaches would remain closed until the state received updated information from the BoM. “These rules are in place to protect you and to keep you safe,” he said.Stefanos Tsitsipas learned to listen to Covid science the hard way. Not the really hard way, of course. Not the hard way that more unfortunate vaccine-resisters have experienced, after they’ve ingested conspiracy theories about side effects and regurgitated social media promises that there’s no risk to the young and healthy. The world’s No 4-ranked tennis player didn’t, mercifully, find himself laid low by the virus or on a ventilator in hospital – he just found himself publicly rebuked by his own government. While Tsitsipas’s father-cum-coach, Apostolos, gave interviews claiming that “athletes have a strong enough immune system to deal with any challenge”, Greece’s government spokesman was pointing out that a 23-year-old tennis player, however successful in his field, had “neither the knowledge, nor the studies, nor the research work” to offer valid opinions on vaccination. The story had a happy ending, though: Tsitsipas did indeed stop spouting poorly informed conjecture and got himself jabbed. On Friday, just three days before the Australian Open was due to begin, he was one of the many players sharing their views on Novak Djokovic’s visa-related trials, before the world No 1 was told he would be deported on Sunday, with the full federal court dismissing Djokovic’s bid to restore his visa. “There are two ways to look at it,” said Tsitsipas. “One side of it is that almost every single player is fully vaccinated… and has followed the protocols to play in Australia. On the other hand, it seems not everyone is playing by the rules.” These words sounded less like opposing perspectives and more like a single, pointed, point. “A very small [minority] chose to follow their own way,” said Tsitsipas, “which kind of makes the majority look like fools.” And so, for the second time on the subject of Covid, Tsitsipas was again in the wrong. Because Djokovic’s stand hasn’t made his peers look foolish at all. In the midst of what Rafael Nadal has accurately dubbed “a circus” – a procedural farce of legal miasma, medical obfuscation and crowd-playing politics – his fellow tennis players are the ones who have emerged looking the least like clowns. It is they, rather than the sport’s administrators, or the Australian prime minister, or even Djokovic himself, who have responded to the situation surrounding their fellow competitor in the most measured and thoughtful way. Take Nadal, widely agreed to be one of the tour’s natural diplomats, whose initial summary of the mess his rival found himself in was devastatingly simple. “If he wanted he would definitely be playing here without a problem,” said Nadal, with a not unfeeling shrug. “Everybody is free to take their own decision – but there are some consequences, no?” At a time when much of what was flying around was invective, here was a quiet helping of truth. And while it was clear where he stood on the subject, it was also clear this wasn’t personal and that he felt sorry for the tough situation Novak had ended up in. When the reigning Australian Open champion was finally freed to enter the draw, Nadal backed the process that had got him there and wished him luck, because “whether or not I agree with Djokovic on some things, justice has spoken”. Most players questioned about Djokovic showed a similar willingness to blend sympathy for what a friend and fellow athlete was going through with an equally strong message about the importance of being vaccinated. Andy Murray, always one to speak his mind, saved his waspish observations for Nigel Farage, who was visiting Djokovic’s family: “Please record the awkward moment when you tell them you’ve spent most of your career campaigning to have people from eastern Europe deported.” For the world No 1, however, there was genuine concern – “it’s positive that he’s not in detention any more” – alongside a typically expressive sigh. Murray refused to offer any opinion until Djokovic had had the opportunity to answer questions surrounding his Covid tests and Murray’s brother, Jamie, was only a little more wry. “If it was me that wasn’t vaccinated I wouldn’t be getting an exemption,” he said, while his GB teammate Liam Broady failed to hide his laughter behind his hands. “But well done to him for getting cleared to come to Australia and compete”. The locker room on the tennis circuit is a truly unique sporting, working and living environment. Often, it gives the impression that it’s peopled with frenemies, rivals bent on learning and exposing each other’s weaknesses, while forced to spend time together to the extent that they become an intermittent but not altogether comfortable family. It is a place where you must fend for yourself and the only people who can empathise with your circumstances are the very ones challenging you. While outsiders have been quick to use Djokovic as a totem, whether for personal freedoms or border control, it’s those who actually play against the man who can best fathom what he’s going through right now. This episode has shone a light on the kind of respect and patience that helps their community to function. To them, Djokovic is neither an abstract representation of the age of disinformation nor a vegan super-saviour fighting injustice one tennis tournament at time (although his own father has called him Spartacus). He is an athlete who pushes himself hard, loves his sport, enjoys their company. They can like, admire and feel for him while maintaining a firm belief that Covid safety matters. Unlike team sports, where coaches, managers and captains can (and arguably should) impose some leadership on their players to ensure everyone’s safety, the worlds of individual sports such as tennis, golf or snooker or athletics rely on peer-to-peer relationship. Djokovic is, in fact, an outlier on the ATP tour; 97 of the top 100 players are vaccinated and vaccination take-up across professional tennis improved dramatically after the Australian Open made it mandatory. What his fellow athletes have done, in effect, is to model the way to deal with this issue in our own communities – with personal generosity towards those who can’t or won’t share our views, while we maintain an open, unexasperated commitment to science and fact. Every one of us has friends, family or colleagues with their own intransigent views on why they won’t take the vaccine. Everybody is free to take their own decision – but there are some consequences, no? • Emma John’s book, Self Contained: Scenes From a Single Life, is out nowScientists have uncovered the world’s oldest social network, a web of connections that flourished 50,000 years ago and stretched for thousands of miles across Africa. But unlike its modern electronic equivalent, this ancient web of social bonds used a far more prosaic medium. It relied on the sharing and trading of beads made of ostrich eggshells – one of humanity’s oldest forms of personal adornment. The research by scientists in Germany involved the study of more than 1,500 of these beads, which were dug up at more than 30 sites across southern and east Africa. Careful analysis suggests that people who made the beads – which are still manufactured and worn by hunter-gatherers in Africa today – were exchanging them over vast distances, helping to share symbolic messages and to strengthen alliances. “It’s like following a trail of breadcrumbs,” said the study’s lead author, Jennifer Miller, of the Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History in the city of Jena. “The beads are clues, scattered across time and space, just waiting to be noticed.” The study, published in Nature last week, compared beads found at 31 sites in southern and eastern Africa, spanning more than 1,800 miles. By comparing the outside diameter of a shell, the diameter of the holes inside them, and the thickness of the walls of the eggshell, the scientists learned that about 50,000 years ago people in eastern and southern Africa started to make nearly identical beads out of ostrich eggs. Yet these groups and communities were separated by vast distances, which suggests the existence of a long-distance social network that stretched over thousands of miles, connecting people in far-flung regions. “The result is surprising, but the pattern is clear,” said the study’s other author, Yiming Wang, who is also based at the Max Planck. Ostrich eggshell beads are some of the oldest forms of self-decoration found in the archaeological record, although they were not the first to be adopted by Homo sapiens. Scientists believe men and women started daubing themselves with the reddish pigment ochre about 200,000 years ago, before starting to wear beads 75,000 years ago. However, the ornament industry really took off about 50,000 years ago in Africa, with the manufacture of the first ostrich eggshell beads – the earliest standardised form of jewellery known to archaeology. This was the world’s first “bling” and its use represents one of humanity’s longest-running cultural traditions, involving the expression of identity and relationships. As Miller put it: “These tiny beads have the power to reveal big stories about our past.” Or as archaeologist Michelle Langley of Griffith University in Queensland, Australia, has said: “Bling is valuable: it tells us something about the person who wore it. More bling in the archaeological record indicates more interactions. Traded bling tells us who was talking to whom.” The crucial point about ostrich eggshell jewellery is, instead of relying on an item’s natural size or shape, humans began to shape the shells directly and create opportunities for variations in style to develop. The resulting patterns gave the researchers a route through which they could trace cultural connections, though it is unclear if the ostrich eggshell beads studied by Miller and Wang were traded between groups or if it was the knowledge of how to manufacture them that was exchanged. Most evidence points to the latter. The world’s first social network did not last. About 33,000 years ago, the pattern of bead-wearing abruptly changed: while continuing in east Africa they virtually disappeared from southern Africa and did not re-emerge there until 19,000 years ago. Miller and Wang suggest climatic changes lay behind this, bringing an end to the planet’s oldest social network – albeit after 17,000 years. • This article was amended on 20 January 2022. An earlier version said of the beads that, about 33,000 years ago “they disappeared from southern Africa”. To clarify: the study reported that they virtually disappeared from southern Africa and did not re-emerge there until 19,000 years ago.The recent decision by regulators to approve the antiviral agent Paxlovid for use in the UK adds a formidable new weapon to the arsenal of treatments for Covid-19. Pfizer says the drug has almost 90% success in preventing severe illness in vulnerable adults if taken soon after infection occurs. Paxlovid is one of a growing repertoire of antiviral medicines – which also includes Merck’s agent molnupiravir – that can be given to people who have contracted the disease. Crucially, antivirals – which disrupt a virus’s ability to replicate inside an infected cell – provide hope that infected vulnerable individuals, including the very elderly and those with compromised immune systems, can be kept out of hospital. It has taken two years of research for the first antivirals to be approved, with drugs becoming available more than a year after the first Covid vaccines were given in the UK. So why has it taken so long, comparatively, for effective antivirals to be developed? And what role will they play in the UK, which now has broad vaccine protection against Covid? Vaccines come first and antivirals afterwards when most predictions suggested it would be the other way around. Why? “I expected antivirals would be in use before vaccines, I admit,” says Tom Fletcher of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine. “What actually happened reflects the unbelievable speed of the vaccine research and the failure of the first tranche of antivirals that were tested.” At the start of the pandemic, most effort went on considering repurposed drugs – ones used to treat other illnesses but which had established safety profiles – in order to treat Covid-19. “However, none of these repurposed antivirals have worked,” added Fletcher, who is also a member of the UK Agile trial that tries to find new Covid treatments. “After that, scientists focused on new antivirals specifically designed for Covid-19. Normally, drug development pipelines take five to 10 years at best. These timelines have been accelerated but it has still taken two years to get to this point.” How will the new antiviral drugs be used? Doctors have learned a great deal about treating Covid-19 patients in hospitals. “They have greatly improved outcomes for seriously ill patients – through knowing when to turn them, administer dexamethasone or give them intravenous antibodies,” said Ruth McKernan, chair of the BioIndustry Association. “But prevention is better than cure. So keeping people out of hospital is the real goal here and the new oral antivirals should be invaluable in achieving that.” Once a vulnerable person – someone who is old or has a compromised immune system – becomes infected, they will be given Paxlovid or molnupiravir and that, it is hoped, will prevent them becoming so sick that they need to go to hospital, which is good news for the patient and for the NHS. What still needs to be discovered about antivirals? “Clinical trials of antivirals began shortly after Covid first arrived, so they were tested almost totally on non-vaccinated patients,” said Eddie Gray, chair of the UK government’s antivirals taskforce. “Today, we have a population that is largely vaccinated. So we need to show that antivirals still have real benefits for these people.” This data will be provided by an Oxford University study, called Panoramic, which is assessing the impact of antivirals on vulnerable but vaccinated people in the UK. “Panoramic is very important,” added Gray. “It’s the mechanism by which we will work out the magnitude of the benefit our vaccinated population gets from antivirals. We expect results next month.” What lessons are there for treating Covid from other use of antivirals? “These drugs operate by disrupting the way that a virus produces copies of itself inside our cells and we have seen this process being deployed in antivirals that deal with other diseases,” added Gray. “One implication is that they are likely to be very effective in tackling new variants of Covid.” • This article was amended on 18 January 2022 to correct the spelling of molnupiravir.At the end of 2021, Rylan had his teeth knocked out. During two operations under general anaesthetic, then a third under local, his teeth, £25,000 veneers which had become both a trademark and a punchline, were hammered, then chiselled away. “New teeth,” he smiles, his grin now modest, “New hair, new start,” and then he frowns, “New me.” Neither of us were expecting the interview to go like this. Rylan (born Ross Clark in east London – his mother moved the family to Essex after homophobic bullies fractured his skull when he was in his early teens) was intending to talk about his charming new podcast, Ry-Union, his latest project in a series of jolly presenting gigs that began after his appearance on X Factor 10 years ago and really never stopped. “I started off as the joke,” he glitters, “and I’m still laughing.” We were expecting a hoot, is what I mean. We were expecting to chuckle through stories of his unlikely stardom, the cosy place he holds in the heart of the British public, the way he ascended from comedy figure to national treasure over the course of a decade, but he’s had a very bad, no-good year, and though he was not expecting to talk about it, having not yet explained its depths to most of his friends, suddenly there we are. But first, an introduction, for readers unfamiliar with Big Brother or his Radio 2 show or Gogglebox, or his used-car adverts on telly that recently provoked an outraged stranger to tweet the car dealer, “I will never buy a car from you whilst that complete buck tooth ignoramus @Rylan is advertising your company! Illiterate, talentless, council nobody!” and Rylan to reply, “THEN WALK, MATE.” His early career plan was to “get famous”, and it’s almost despite this that Rylan, now 33, has become the star he is today. In 2012 he was a joke contestant on X Factor, destined surely for a life having beer thrown at him at club appearances just outside the M25 – at the end of that year he and Jimmy Savile were battling for bad press, with death threats leading to 24-hour security. But the public grew to adore him, seeing a brightness, wit and authenticity beneath the tan. “The first six months of my career,” he says, explaining why he’s always got time for fans wielding cameras, “were a public vote.” In 2014, after winning Celebrity Big Brother, he appeared in Grayson Perry’s Channel 4 series on identity, and Perry tells me that he still has a “great affection” for Rylan. When they met, says Perry, “He was going through a rapid, very 21st-century transition to fame. I describe him as looking like a ‘computer-generated Tudor nobleman’ but in stark contrast his personality is a very warm Essex man of the people.” As they walked through a shopping centre together, mothers handed him their babies for photos. He’s easy and funny, Perry adds, and crucially, “aware of his own ridiculousness”. It was this self-awareness that led to Ross creating Rylan, his professional persona – “which I think was the healthiest thing I ever chose to do,” he nods. He’s wearing a tracksuit so white it’s almost blue, and a black cap that he adjusts at times of unease. “It’s how I actually got through all the shit in the beginning, because I was like, it’s fine – they’re talking about Rylan. They’re not talking about Ross. Ross sits in tracksuits and watches reruns of Keeping Up Appearances.” And Rylan? “Rylan is always smiling.” And then our conversation shifts. Last summer Rylan split up with Dan, his husband of six years, an ex-Big Brother contestant he met while interviewing him post-eviction. Soon after their split it was announced that Rylan would be taking some time off his presenting duties, and he went quiet for four months. “I’d got to the point where I didn’t know if I wanted to come back. Or whether I would be able to do this job again. I’d got… quite ill,” he says, cautiously. He stopped eating. “I went down to just over 9st and I’m 6ft 4in. It got bad. Like, very bad. And I didn’t think it would get better. I needed help.” He pauses. Believe it or not, he says, “I’m very private, really, and I want to remain that way. But there were points then when it was like Where’s Wally, people flying drones over my house asking, ‘Where the fuck is he?’ They knew something was really wrong when I didn’t turn up to present Eurovision!” A dark laugh. He loves Eurovision. “Everyone feels like I’m their mate. I was probably talking to five million people a night. But last summer for the first time, I literally felt alone.” He leans in. “I’ve always been strong. I’ve always taken a lot of shit. And this is where Rylan and Ross come into play. Because when it’s Rylan I’m a brick wall. You can take the piss out of my teeth, call me a cunt, and I’ll just go, that’s fine. This is what I get paid for. But when it’s Ross, I don’t deal with that well. And when you find out something you always wanted isn’t what you thought it was…” He shakes his head as if confused. “I didn’t think I’d be here. I didn’t think I could continue.” Could continue to work, I ask, or to live? “Both. I didn’t think I’d actually come back. I was very… gone.” He looks surprised to be sharing this, and a little embarrassed, too, because this is not the Rylan brand fans have come to know – the cheeky jokes, the laughing it off, the silver linings found at the bottom of a crisp packet. “I’m the last person that my friends would ever believe could feel as low as I did. Superficially, on paper, I can look after myself, but actually in that moment and for months after, none of the money or the fame mattered. I did not know myself at certain points. I was having thoughts and doing things that made me… fucked up, for want of a better word. I didn’t understand why I was doing that to myself. So, I went away for a bit.” To hospital? “Yes. For safety reasons.” He coughs gently. “It’s really strange talking about this, because I’ve not even spoken about it to my friends. I just never thought I could get that ill.” The trigger was the divorce, but he’s realising now that there was more to his breakdown, that alongside his success, something else had been building. The space between his two lives had become swampish, hungry. His identity was wobbling. “It’s 10 years that I’ve been doing this job. And I think that whole decade slapped me around the arse and stabbed me in the stomach. Maybe I needed it to happen. I just wish it hadn’t happened as hard as it did.” He holds eye contact, and we sit for a second. “I think I’m finding a new ‘me’ now. I’m so good at being Rylan. I know my job – what’s right, what’s wrong, what works, what doesn’t – I do Rylan really well. But actually, I didn’t realise how much Ross I’d lost.” What did he learn in hospital? “That I always say yes to everything and I nod and smile. But now if there’s something I really don’t want to do, I’m going to say no. I’ve learned to be more in control. I’ve not had control for so long, I feel like Britney!” Why hasn’t he had control? “Because my life was really my job. I feel like I lost a lot of me. I’ve learned that fame is something that I wanted, but not necessarily the thing I want still. And don’t get me wrong, it’s always lovely meeting people and being treated certain ways. But sometimes it’s important to stand in the queue. Sometimes you want to just fuck off over the garden centre to buy a plant.” As somebody who has looked at fame from inside and out, reaching for it, respecting the parts other people sniff at, enjoying its frillier thrills, it’s fitting that he’s choosing to question it, too. An ex-reality TV star who still talks about Big Brother with affectionate reverence (“That show was like my baby. And as much as I love working on everything I’ve done since, I don’t think I’ll ever find that bubble again,”) he holds a unique position on primetime TV, a kind of expert witness. After the deaths of former Love Island contestants, “I was asked a lot about my views on aftercare in reality TV,” he says, “But I was the worst person to ask, because for me it never stopped. I was never in that position where I had to go back to work in a shop. But this year, all of my employers were brilliant. And when I say I disappeared, I literally disappeared. I think they knew how bad I was.” There were reports he’d been crying during songs while presenting his Radio 2 show. “There were a select few people that needed to know that I was a danger to myself.” Behind him, shuffling through her bag, his makeup artist and best friend Bernice is trying not to cry. “Strange situations do very strange things to people. If it wasn’t for my mum, and my family and close friends I genuinely have no idea if I’d be here.” He is shocking himself with every sentence, his hat coming off and going back on, his cigarette smoking itself. “I learned I’m worth something. That I should be proud of myself, not embarrassed of Rylan. I should be proud that I can build my mum a house. I should be proud that I can employ my family. I learned that.” He hurries away the beginnings of a tear with his hand. “Oof, sorry. Anyway!” A few weeks after he’d come off X Factor, Rylan was in Selfridges buying pants when he heard someone call his name. Turning round, he saw Barbara Windsor. They’d met in a green room a month earlier, and they greeted each other with appropriate delight. “Then she introduced me to her husband and I was like, ‘Hello, Scott. Lovely to meet you!’ She said, ‘No, darling. You said hello to him a few weeks back at X Factor’. I was so sorry. Like, all over the place. And she said, ‘Let me give you the best piece of advice you’ll ever need. Never say, “Nice to meet you.” It’s always, “Lovely to see you.”’ And for the past 10 years, Barbara Windsor has got me out of so many awkward scrapes. If she was still with us today I would give her the biggest kiss. Meeting Madonna, Britney, pah, they just pale in comparison.” Jo Brand, though, he liked her. A few weeks before we speak she had presented Have I Got News For You, and it was Rylan’s first time as a panellist. He was a hit, inviting Brand to Ibiza, teasing Ian Hislop about hanging around Essex. “I’ve said it before and I’ll say it again,” tweeted radio presenter James O’Brien that night. “Rylan is a huge talent. A born storyteller with exceptional comic timing and a beautifully rare streak of self-awareness.” And someone, too, it was clear, who is deeply engaged with politics. “You know,” he cackles elegantly, “whenever I talk about politics publicly, you’ll get all the idiots going, ‘What the fuck does he know, X Factor reject?’ But it’s probably a lot more than they do.” In the past he’s admitted his love of Prime Minister’s Questions and obsession with the horrors of Brexit. “I need to be careful because I work for the BBC and someone might shoot me,” he says, “but I feel our country needs to be run by people that live in this world. It’s very opinionated to say, but I think it’s time for party-less politics, don’t you? I think it’s time for one government to run this country and for politicians to start working together, rather than sitting there like children and having rows in the House of Commons. I just think it’s ridiculous.” Could he see himself getting into politics? “If I weren’t Rylan, maybe!” Might Rylan stop at some point? Might he make way for Ross, and a slower life, and a still dimmer smile? “If I did, then yes – that’s something that I’d love to get into. Rylan for PM!” He grins. “But come on, really, would you vote for me?” In a heartbeat. Listen to Ry-Union on all podcast platforms. Stylist Hope Lawrie; photographer’s assistant Joe Stone; grooming Bernice Cole; shot at Luma studios. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org. You can contact the UK mental health charity Mind by calling 0300 123 3393 or visiting mind.org.ukThings are not looking good for Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor, the Queen’s second son formerly known as His Royal Highness. Last week, a judge in New York rejected his attempt to get the sexual abuse lawsuit Virginia Giuffre has filed against him thrown out. Giuffre is suing him for damages, claiming that she was forced to have sex with him three times in 2001 by the late convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein, and his sex trafficker accomplice, Ghislaine Maxwell, allegations that Andrew denies. The royal family responded by announcing that he has been stripped of his military honours, royal patronages and the use of his HRH title. Any praise for the monarchy for depriving him of his titles is misplaced. The royal family left it until the last possible moment to act. Andrew has brought them into far graver disrepute than Prince Harry, who lost his titles for what, by comparison, is the laughably inconsequential transgression of walking away. The raging debate about the consequences for the monarchy is a distraction from the sexual abuse allegations at stake and accountability for the men complicit in the crimes of Epstein and Maxwell. It should not take a man of Andrew’s obviously questionable character to expose the absurdities of a constitutional hereditary monarchy in a modern democracy. Strip away the yachts, the private jets and the glamorous locations from Epstein and Maxwell’s crimes and what is left is a depressingly familiar story of sex trafficking: vulnerable women and girls, some as young as 14, abused by men who feel entitled to their bodies and so do not bother to ask themselves why these girls are at their disposal. There is little to separate these nameless but powerful men and the men who visit seedy brothels housing girls who have been trafficked and exploited, or who get off on online violent porn in which women are hurt and abused. All may lighten their consciences by telling themselves it is all consenting, but who are they kidding? Andrew has been implicated in the crimes of his friends since Giuffre alleged several years ago that he sexually assaulted her three times when she was 17, in London, in New York and at an “orgy” on Epstein’s private Caribbean island. The judge’s decision last week means that he may well find himself being deposed to give evidence to a New York court. Everyone is owed due process, Andrew included, but he must face some extremely inconvenient truths. After hosting Epstein and Maxwell at Windsor Castle and Sandringham, he invited them to his daughter’s 18th birthday party even after Florida police had issued an arrest warrant for him. He chose to stay with Epstein in New York in 2010 after the latter had already been imprisoned for sex offences with children, in a residence where Epstein kept a “massage room” where he abused and photographed girls. Andrew had previously stayed in Epstein’s Florida house, where the financier had on display a photo of himself with a semi-naked prepubescent girl in a sexualised pose; one witness claims it was “full” of nude pictures of women and girls and that there were naked girls by the pool when Andrew was visiting. Despite Andrew saying he cannot remember meeting Giuffre, there is a photo of them together in Maxwell’s London house, where she says he assaulted her, with his hand around her bare midriff. Witnesses have put them together on more than one occasion; one says he saw Andrew kissing a topless Giuffre by the pool. Andrew has not yet been able to produce any evidence that he took his daughter to a party at Pizza Express in Woking on the day Giuffre says he assaulted her in London or of the medical condition that he says casts doubt on her account that he sweated profusely while with her in a nightclub. US prosecutors say that he has refused requests to assist their investigations into Epstein and Maxwell. Faced with allegations like these, men like Andrew have various strategies. One is to cooperate with the authorities, to tell the truth and refrain from throwing mud at a woman who, before she turned 18, was the victim of sex trafficking and sexual abuse by two of your acquaintances. Another is to do anything to undermine your alleged victim. The guilty cannot do the first and so often resort to the latter playbook, drawn on by powerful men such as Harvey Weinstein who feel entitled to use women decades their junior for their own sexual gratification. Andrew’s former spin doctor tried to suggest that the photo with Giuffre was doctored. His lawyers have deployed every tactic possible in submissions on his behalf: accusing Giuffre of being a gold digger seeking a “payday at his expense”; arguing that despite being a child when she was trafficked, she is more offender than victim; accusing her of making unintelligible and vague revelations; arguing that the New York law under which she is bringing the lawsuit is unconstitutional; claiming Andrew was protected by a clause in Epstein’s 2009 financial settlement with Giuffre. Some of these arguments have already been tossed out by the judge. And there is always the implicit warning from men like Andrew or, in a different abuse-of-power context, Bill Clinton: undermine me and you undermine the institution, handing victory to republicans of one sort or another. The intended result is to jack up the price that women such as Giuffre must pay for seeking accountability to unbearable. It is no coincidence that the only living person to be serving time in prison for her terrible crimes is Epstein’s female accomplice, Maxwell: what of the men who helped themselves to the vulnerable women and girls they trafficked? Those men wield a great power – the threat of ruined reputations, of hounding by tabloid – in service of their own protection. We may never know which of the rich old men who fraternised with Epstein, flew in his jet and enjoyed his hospitality were complicit in his crimes. But all hail Virginia Giuffre for her bravery and tenacity in the pursuit of justice. • Sonia Sodha is an Observer columnistIn December my daughter brought Covid home from school as if a folded permission slip. The feeling, on seeing the two pink lines come up on her test, was complicated and raw, containing both bad memories and relief. Finally (a part of me thought, a part of me quite low down and bloodied), finally the thing we have been waiting for has arrived. I breathed out a breath I had been holding for two years. There were six or seven other feelings, too, including a now-familiar sense of doom brought on by the realisation that for us, lockdown was to begin again. A gentle PTSD crawled in and made itself comfortable on my lap as I briefly mapped out the next two months of arguments and pasta in my mind. Of course, with rude inevitability, the virus took its time spreading through the house, lingering on our daughter, only taking up residence with our boy toddler when her isolation was nearing its end. He stopped sleeping, his temperature leaping up and down like a cat when the doorbell goes. Midway through our son’s isolation my partner looked at me and regretfully said, “I feel odd.” He had it, I did not, on we went, greyly. On Christmas Day, having tested relentlessly, I took the children to my parents’ house where the five of us had a token celebration, but at some point after the crackers I started to feel not good. By the time I got home I was feverish and slightly wild, my throat swollen, my mood vile. Had a faulty test meant I’d put my parents at risk? I went to bed. I’m used to pain. I can deal with migraines, even those that are clattery and awful or must be taken personally. I’m used to grimly carrying on, one eye shut. But I’m unaccustomed to illness like this, where, wheezing and achy, I have no choice but to pass over all caregiving duties in order to lie down and doze through the new series of Sex and the City, on which I formed many sharp yet neurologically suspect opinions. I slept for days, getting up only to eat muesli and do lateral flow tests, all negative. The lack of a positive result made me feel a little mad, as if I had somehow slipped through reality’s fine gauze to another timeline where Wuhan’s animal market had been closed that day. That week I’d been reading Hanya Yanagihara’s new novel, To Paradise, the final third of which is set in New York at the end of the 21st century, a place where increasingly deadly pandemics have ushered in totalitarianism. It was a bad time, I see now, to read a story about a future defined by sickness, to read about sterilisation, state surveillance, where a mother isolates her immuno-compromised twins for their entire life as yet another virus threatens their society, and how, when she catches it, leaving them without care, the two boys leave their compound for the first time and die in the garden, “their lives becoming glorious – for once – even as they ended”. A bad time. Lying in the linen darkness of a winter afternoon while the government blustered its way through unprecedented levels of Covid infections and my baby coughed downstairs. A bad time, Hanya! When my second PCR test came back negative, too, I left the house, shakily but with intent. If I wasn’t going to have Covid then I sure as hell wasn’t going to stay inside that germ-thick house one second longer. I didn’t last long; outside there was mostly mud. When I got back to bed I read about a case of “flurona”, a rare new double infection of coronavirus and influenza that’s been discovered in a young, pregnant, unvaccinated Israeli woman. “Lol,” I croaked, to nobody. I’m much better now, thank you for asking. My cough, while rancid, no longer rattles the cutlery, and my limbs, while still aching, are now entirely capable of navigating at least a staircase. My mood, though, remains in limbo, vigilant to the slightest interior shift. It’s a strange feeling to be ill with the wrong thing. To live in a state immersed in a single virus – a sickness that provokes outrage and dry coughs, and shuts down schools and burns out the NHS, and inspires protesters to storm testing centres in a selection of quite bad jeans – but to be struck down by another one altogether, one with similar symptoms but fewer culture wars. Here I found the modern version of Fomo, less bothered by smoky parties and the potential of sex, more concerned with missing out on the hottest new variant, especially when the rest of your family are now happily immune for at least a fortnight. Why did everyone else in the house get it and not me, I mutter into a tissue – had I been such a bad wife and mother that I hadn’t been within their breathing spaces all month? What was the point of the night sweats, the hacking cough, the headaches and breathlessness if not to have been a brave little soldier and survived a pandemic? Honestly. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWisemanOn the eve of what would have been David Bowie’s 75th birthday, Tilda Swinton told me that she had always considered him to be her spiritual “cousin”. Nowhere is this connection clearer than in Floria Sigismondi’s 2013 video for The Stars (Are Out Tonight), in which Bowie and Swinton play a suburban couple haunted by their alien-like alter egos – the ghosts of fame. Significant, too, that one of Swinton’s early starring roles saw her playing an extraterrestrial visitor in Friendship’s Death (1987), a film that could easily have been titled The Woman Who Fell to Earth. Like Bowie, Swinton has always possessed an uncanny ability to meld the natural and the supernatural – the down-to-earth and the out-of-this-world. That’s a quality put to perfect use in the latest film from the Thai maestro Apichatpong Weerasethakul. Indefinable in terms of plot, this Cannes jury prize winner (which became Colombia’s submission for the 94th Oscars this year) is a dreamlike cocktail that brings together human sensory experience, disrupted natural order, canine curses, exploding head syndrome, viral growths, ancient bones, modern machines, improvised jazz, geopolitical upheavals and the “invisible people” of the Amazon, all tinged by “the perfume of decay… a fermented wound”. Swinton plays Jessica, a flower trader who, like Bowie’s Thomas Jerome Newton, is an anxious outsider, her face touched by the shadow of lonely desperation and the merest hint of horror. When Jessica hears a strange booming noise, she assumes it’s just building works. Out in the street, a cacophony of car alarms implies some unseen visitation. Yet this particular sound (“like a big concrete ball that falls into a metal well which is surrounded by seawater”) seems to be for Jessica’s ears only. We are in Bogotá, where Jessica’s sister Karen (Agnes Brekke) is in hospital. Early scenes quietly establish a bond and a distance between these two – shared experience fractured by divergent perspectives. As the “rumble from the core of the Earth” continues to unsettle Jessica, she turns to a sound engineer whom she enlists to reproduce the noise, but who then disappears without trace, as if he were never there. Was he, like that enigmatic boom, a figment of her imagination? Or is Jessica somehow slipping between despoiled worlds, caught in the crossfire of contradictory narratives (she’s assured that someone she thought was dead is in fact alive and well)? It says much about the strangely hypnotic nature of Memoria’s “slow cinema” aesthetic that we are willing to let possible answers simply hang in the air. From the extended opening shot that lingers long before Jessica wakes, to an eerily held closeup of an unblinking face caught in a death-like, dreamless sleep, the film is in no hurry to reveal its mysteries. As with his 2010 Palme d’Or winner Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives, Weerasethakul leaves us trembling on the edge of uncertainty, providing just enough terra firma to keep the viewer engaged while leading them deeper into the realms of the unknown. At times, Memoria felt to me like an unironic riposte to Barbet Schroeder’s 1972 pop-culture oddity La Vallée (AKA Obscured by Clouds), in which Bulle Ogier ventures into the New Guinean mountains in search of ecstatic truth. There’s certainly a powerful element of transcendence in Jessica’s encounter with a solitary time-slipped soul in whose company she faces quietly stunning revelations about life, the universe and everything. It’s at this point that the film takes a fantastical leap that viewers will find either breathtaking or ridiculous – probably a bit of both. In the US, distributors Neon made much of programming Memoria to play “in front of only one solitary audience at any given time”, like a travelling roadshow exhibition (“Let’s embrace the darkness and dream, one at a time,” said Weerasethakul). That strategy isn’t being repeated here, but it tells us something about the installation-like nature of the movie, a trancey quality epitomised by a scene in which Jessica wanders through a gallery as the lights go out, eerily mirroring the experience of those mesmerised cinema-goers for whom it was so clearly intended.Vulnerable pregnant women are being imprisoned for non-violent offences, in some cases within just a few weeks of their babies’ due date, according to new research set to be published on Monday. It comes as a woman whose baby was stillborn in a prison toilet told the Observer that she will bring a lawsuit for breaches of human rights and discrimination because she did not receive the same standard of care as she could have expected in the community. Academics who examined the experiences of 22 women who were pregnant while serving time in English prisons have called for alternatives to custodial sentences to avoid putting expectant mothers and unborn babies at risk. The women were sentenced for offences including robbery, drug offences, burglary, fraud and shoplifting. All but two of the offences were non-violent. Six of the women were sent to prison at 28 weeks pregnant or later and three were 36 weeks pregnant. The lead author, Rona Epstein of Coventry University, said the imprisonment of pregnant women was “unnecessary” and called for the use of community orders or suspended sentences instead. “The women we surveyed arrived in prison with a variety of complex needs stemming from poverty, homelessness, domestic violence and substance misuse,” she said. “The prison environment only adds another layer of trauma for these women and can be dangerous for the unborn child.” Naomi Delap, director of the charity Birth Companions, said: “This vital research shows, despite repeated assurances, prison should only be used as a last resort, pregnant women are being incarcerated for non-violent offences, sometimes very close to their babies’ due dates. “Many sentences are short enough to warrant a community sentence but long enough to destroy a woman’s life and expose her and her unborn baby to the risks of the prison system.” About 600 pregnant women enter UK prisons each year and about 50 are in prison at any one time. The authors of Why are Pregnant Women in Prison? began their study following the death of a baby at HMP Bronzefield in Ashford, Middlesex, in 2019. Their findings come days after a report into a second baby death at HMP Styal in Cheshire. Louise Powell, who did not know she was pregnant, spent several hours in labour “begging” for help on 18 June 2020. But a prison nurse failed to visit her despite three emergency calls, including one from a guard saying she “looked six months pregnant”. Her baby girl was unresponsive after a breech birth in a prison toilet. The prisons and probation ombudsman (PPO) Sue McAllister found there were missed opportunities to establish she needed urgent clinical attention. A nurse has been referred to the Nursing and Midwifery Council. Speaking for the first time following the report, Powell told the Observer: “There were missed opportunities from prison staff… not thinking it was an emergency when I was begging for help. The health block was a 15-second walk away – they could have taken me there.” Her lawyer, Jane Ryan of Bhatt Murphy Solicitors, said expert evidence suggested the baby, named Brooke, could have survived had the response been different. Ryan, who is supporting Powell in bringing a discrimination case, explained: “Prisoners are entitled to the same standard of care as they would expect in the community.” Powell, who had been in prison for the first time after admitting common assault, harassment and criminal damage, said: “If I hadn’t been in prison, I would have dialled 999 because I knew it was a pain I hadn’t felt before. I felt like I was dying. I would have got to hospital when the pain first started. “My opinion is, having seen the expert evidence, that my baby could have survived and been alive today if I’d got to hospital sooner. I had felt her kicking earlier in the day.” She added: “I need accountability and I need to get justice for my daughter.” Data collected by the Observer found that jailed women in the UK are five times more likely to have a stillbirth as those living in the community. While the death of a baby in prison is rare, the Coventry University research echoes concerns raised by reports into the tragedies at Bronzefield and Styal, including delays in responding to women in labour or pain. One woman, Jodie, who was in prison for the first time on drug offences, wrote: “I was ignored and not believed that I was in labour. I was not responded to when I rang my cell bell… I was left from Saturday night to Monday morning in labour alone in my cell. The whole experience was traumatising.” Another woman, Ursula, said she constantly worried about her safety and was not listened to when she felt something was wrong. Maria Garcia de Frutos, a lecturer in midwifery at City, University of London and co-author of the report, said: “Structural failures and lack of timely access to care and specialist services are some of the inequalities reflected in our research.” The authors said it was “very concerning” that a woman who had experienced a possible placental abruption at 30 weeks and had a premature birth missed some midwifery appointments due to staff shortages at the prison. Her baby went on to spend nine weeks on a neonatal intensive care unit. Delap said: “These findings contribute to evidence that there are near misses and serious incidents happening behind locked doors but, because they don’t result in the death of a baby, the public don’t hear about them. There is a hidden healthcare crisis among pregnant prisoners which is not properly scrutinised.” The government has plans to build 500 new prison cells for women. But the chief executive of the charity Women in Prison, Kate Paradine, said: “There is another way – when women are supported in the community, they have better access to care and can tackle the issues that sweep them into crime in the first place, like trauma, domestic abuse and poverty.” Eleven countries, including Russia, Brazil, Mexico and Colombia, already have laws to prevent pregnant women from going to prison. Spectrum Community Health CIC said it accepted the findings of the PPO report and was working closely with staff at HMP Styal to further enhance the care and support women receive when entering prison. A Ministry of Justice spokesperson said: “While custody should remain the last resort for most women, we have made significant improvements to support female offenders, including pregnant women. Our new prison places will give them greater access to education, healthcare and employment and we are introducing specialist mother and baby liaison officers across the estate. “We extend our deepest sympathies to Ms Powell and are also looking at how we can better screen for pregnancy in jails so no woman falls through the cracks.” The government is working with NHS England to provide guidance for prison staff on how to respond in the event of an unexpected birth.When the players of Coventry United were told training had been cancelled and they should join an online meeting with the club’s directors at 10am two days before Christmas, they had little idea about what was to follow. Sitting one place off the bottom on goal difference, the Championship side had been struggling, but why call this meeting now? The reality was far worse than anything they could have imagined. Also on the call were accountants from BK Plus, who had been instructed to assist the formal process of putting the club into voluntary liquidation. The players and staff, who had not been paid for four weeks, were told their contracts were being terminated. Within days they had received formal notification that their employment had been terminated “with immediate effect”. According to one source, a creditors’ form was attached which disclosed the addresses of each player and staff member, and how much was owed to them. “It was a situation I hope never have to go through again,” says the manager, Jay Bradford, who has been with the club for 17 years. “I lost my dad in August so me and my mum were preparing for our first Christmas without him and had plans to go away and do different bits together. “Immediately I’m thinking about my own situation, I’m supposed to be going away and I’ve got a mortgage to pay but I’m not being paid, then I’ve got 24 players and X number of staff going: ‘What happens? What are we doing?’ I didn’t have the answers for them, which is difficult when I’ve always been the one that’s been able to answer their questions and give them information. It was so unexpected and I think we just felt blindsided by it.” It was such a bombshell because the club’s three owners – the proprietors and directors of the Coventry-based Mirius, owners of the cleaning brand Hycolin – had bought into Coventry United in December 2020 with the bold ambition of making the team fully professional. That goal had been realised but the poor results and the clear need for further investment was a “reality check” for them, says Bradford. “It’s a process,” says Bradford. “I kept saying to the original owners: ‘Yes, they spent a lot of money in the summer, but we haven’t spent enough.’ That wasn’t me being greedy and wanting the best players in the league, it was me saying we needed to compare our budget to the teams at the top. “I think hearing me say that may have been a bit of a reality check for them because we weren’t winning and we weren’t top, as they thought we would be. They thought what they’d invested was going to be enough, whereas actually we’d only really touched the surface.” As players and staff took to social media, Michael Mogan MBE, a fundraiser who was key to Coventry’s bid to become the 2021 City of Culture, became aware of their plight. At the request of his 10-year-old twin girls who play for Coventry United Juniors, he launched a Crowdfunder that raised more than £15,000 in 10 days to support the unpaid players. “It was phenomenal,” says Mogan of the response. “If I was to launch a campaign I would not launch it on 23 December, it’s the one time when we’re turning off our computers and our out-of-offices are on. So the fact that hundreds of people gave £15,000 within a couple of days, 1,000 people signed this petition and it was circulating widely at the hardest time of year to build momentum makes you realise that the groundswell of opinion is very, very strong.” Alerted to the club’s plight was the CEO of the energy company Angels Group, Lewis Taylor, who launched into action to attempt to buy and save the club before the deadline set for liquidation on 4 January. “When you see a lot of people about to lose their jobs, if you feel that you can help you should always help and that’s ultimately what drove the next steps,” he says. The liquidators then connected him with a sceptical Bradford, who met him for coffee on New Year’s Eve. After a chat with the team and staff in an online meeting the following day, during which he told them: “We can save this if you want me to,” he got the takeover ball rolling. He struck a deal with the existing stakeholders eight minutes before the deadline. While everyone waits for the paperwork to be completed and for Taylor to formally become chairman, the wages have begun to be paid from Mogan’s fundraiser, topped up with Taylor’s own money. A big barrier remains the FA’s 10-point deduction for any club that suffers an “insolvency event”. Coventry are appealing against the decision, pointing to the impact of the pandemic, Brexit and the energy crisis affecting businesses such as Mirius. “Ten points doesn’t seem right,” says Taylor. “I agree with the FA that women’s football needs to take its own path but in the men’s Championship for the same punishment it is a 12-point deduction, but there’s 138 points available if you win every game. In the Women’s Championship the punishment is a 10-point deduction out of a possible 66 points on offer, essentially 15% of the points available versus something like 8% in the men’s. “That doesn’t seem to fit when actually the women’s game needs more assistance, if anything it needs a leg up. Had we triggered administration, which we didn’t, I feel like there’d still be a valid argument there for that points deduction to be lower.” Taylor also believes there is a need for a “safe timezone” where clubs can raise a hand for help and support before they start to reach a crunch point. With the appeal continuing it is time for Coventry to get back to playing. First there is a trip to Sheffield United, then they play London City Lionesses at home on 23 January. That is a moment to pay back those that have supported them during this crisis, says Bradford. “Although these situations have happened before I think we’ve seen that people really do value the sport and they weren’t prepared just to let us be swept aside. I really hope that those people that donated, far and wide, make the effort to come because ultimately they’ve put us back on the pitch. “We have to have a mentality that says: ‘We nearly lost everything, and we didn’t. Now we need to be a force to be reckoned with.’ We’ve got 11 games left and we’re going to give it absolutely everything. It’ll either be the greatest comeback you’ve ever seen or it will relegate us but I can guarantee that we’re going to give it our absolute best.”Heather Knight has faced some stiff challenges in her five years as England captain, but the four-month odyssey down under – when her side will first attempt to regain the Ashes and then defend the 50-over World Cup won in 2017 – is undoubtedly the toughest of the lot. The recent Covid-enforced rejigging of the Ashes schedule means the series is condensed into a three-week block, with the three T20s now to be played first, starting on Thursday. They will be followed by the one-off Test and three ODIs. From there, players will fly to New Zealand to begin a 10-day quarantine, before facing off yet again in both side’s first encounter of the World Cup on 5 March. That Knight’s opposite number, Meg Lanning, took a break after the conclusion of the Women’s Big Bash in November to prepare for the intensity of the coming months is telling. “You always feel a sense of responsibility as captain,” says Knight , acknowledging the acute pressure she faces over the coming weeks. “You want to lead from the front and be successful and help the team win games of cricket. But I’ve had quite a lot of experience of doing that and hopefully it’s pressure I’ve managed pretty well in the past. “I won’t be changing too much in how I approach things and how I do things just because it’s an Ashes and a World Cup. I want to be as consistent as I possibly can in who I am as a person, how I prepare, how I chat to the girls. I’ll try and keep it as normal as possible.” Normality is a relative concept at the moment. England’s preparations for the tour have been badly affected by the spread of Omicron, first back in the UK and now in Australia. Players have been isolating at home since Christmas in order to ensure they could fly to Australia Covid-free and face severe restrictions on their activities for the duration of the series. “For those two weeks before we left England, we could only train as individuals and with our households,” Knight says. “We’ve had mums feeding bowling machines, boyfriends slinging, girlfriends slinging, dads batting and any family members or households supporting our training. As you can imagine it’s been pretty comical, but also not ideal preparation for a series of this magnitude.” Partly in response to Covid outbreaks in both camps during the men’s Ashes series, Cricket Australia has imposed strict restrictions on the women’s teams. “The restrictions changed overnight whilst we were on the flight,” Knight says. “We’re not allowed to go for dinner anywhere, even outdoors. We’re only allowed to socialise outdoors and try and distance as much as we can.” Even with these precautions, Covid has hit the England camp, with a member of support staff recording a positive test on Friday. The unspoken fear is that an outbreak could wreck not just the Ashes but either team’s forthcoming World Cup campaign. Due to quarantine rules, if a player is not Covid-free on 9 February – when the squads are due to fly to New Zealand – they will miss the tournament. For England, the rescheduling is particularly challenging given that much of their pre-series training camp in Oman was focused on red-ball cricket, in anticipation of the Test that was originally due to be the series curtain-raiser. Some of the scheduled warm-ups against the England A side that have accompanied the main side to Australia have also had to be curtailed; the two squads are being kept as separate as possible in an attempt to limit the spread of any potential infection. “Mentally it’s been tough but we’re doing everything we can to try and get ourselves prepped and be ready for the first game,” Knight says. “Mainly, the strategy we’ve found is to make jokes and try and laugh about it and try and keep everyone as relaxed as possible and try and find the funny side of it. We’ve got to keep tight as a group, we’ve got to keep spirits high.” Knight has an enviable record on Australian wickets, especially Canberra – the setting for the Test and the first ODI – where she hit her maiden T20 hundred, in February 2020. Even so, beating the world’s No 1 side away from home, with limited match preparation and Covid breathing down their necks, may prove one demand too many for England.Andrea Elliott is a Pulitzer prize-winning journalist at the New York Times. Through December 2013 she published a five-part series in the paper exploring the homelessness epidemic in New York City. It told the story of Dasani Coates, an 11-year-old girl living with her family in a run-down homeless shelter in Brooklyn. Elliott continued to follow the family over the course of almost a decade, recording their experiences in her first book, Invisible Child: Poverty, Survival and Hope in New York City, published last year. Elliott’s maternal family fled Chile during the Pinochet era. She lives in New York with her two children. How did you choose Dasani? What mattered most to me was finding a child who wanted to be heard and who could narrate her experience of growing up poor to me. I think it’s incredibly important, it’s essential, to give a voice to the person whose story I’m telling. It’s important to have a communicator, because I think the best writing and reporting rests on the power of intimacy. She was a kid it was almost impossible to keep quiet. She had so much to say and I wanted to hear every word of it. Was it difficult to maintain emotional distance from the family? As I continued to write the book, for nine years – October 2012 to August 2021 – I did grow close to the family. They called me Drea, just like I used to be called at high school. Drea was complicated because she was there to observe and translate into words things that were very upsetting, but also moments of joy – there’s a lot of joy and a lot of humour in this book, and people don’t expect that. But Drea was also there because she couldn’t not be there – they drew me in and I cared about them. That was a really hard thing to reconcile – my desire to help them at every turn and my duty to my work, which was as much as possible not to be part of the story. Has Dasani read the book? What did she think? I read the book to Dasani and her sister Avianna over the course of five days, line by line. It was really tough. We had many moments of deep sadness during it, but also much laughter. They would stop me every once in a while and say: “I’m not sure that’s exactly how I’d put it, Drea, maybe it was more like this… ” I see this book as an act of witness more than anything else. That is what I did – I witnessed and recorded the reality that faces families like this. I wonder how much you feel that telling the story has changed its outcome. You chose Dasani, and that must have altered the way she responded to you and to the world. I asked Dasani about this, and she will eventually speak publicly about it all. At the moment she’s kind of shy about it. She’s not shy about anything else, but she’s shy about this and she prefers me to be her voice. Her response to that question is sort of my response, which is that the truly good things that happened to Dasani were the things that she made happen. Let me give some examples: being discovered by a fitness guru. This kid was an extraordinary athlete, and I wouldn’t for a second want to take away her agency in achieving that. Another example is getting into the Hershey school [a non-fee-paying boarding school for gifted children from low-income families]. I believe she got in on her own merits – her sister did not get in. It’s possible that the school allowed me as much access as I got because they saw that they had something potentially to gain. I also think they saw that the risk was high, that something could go terribly wrong, which it did – she got kicked out. What I’m most astonished by was that the family was split up [by the authorities] despite the fact that I was there. I feel, as reporters, the quieter we are in places and systems that are oppressive, the more likely we are to see their reality. Was there ever a time when you despaired? I struggle very much to talk about my own pain in the context of their pain because their pain is so much greater than I could imagine, but I also think it’s important to convey that I witnessed things that changed me permanently, that have haunted me to this day, chief among them the moment that child protection came for those kids. I knew the parents, I knew the bond that was between them and their kids and that this was a family that was driven by love. Nobody was being abused – these children were being removed [from their parents] because of the crime of being poor. That’s what neglect charges generally are. Are you still in touch with the family? I don’t think my relationship with the family will end, ever. They know my kids, my kids know them. I’m a single mom – I share custody with their father. There’s a lot during those years that brought Chanel [Dasani’s mother] and me together, where she’s showing me the way to address things, to be a stronger person in my shoes. I talk in the book about my sibling who was an addict. He passed away a few weeks ago. This is one of my first interviews since then. This stuff is really close to me. Chanel got to know him and gave me some of the best advice when it came to dealing with my brother’s alcoholism. Certain things cut across class and race, and addiction is one of them. Invisible Child: Poverty, Survival and Hope in New York City by Andrea Elliott is published by Hutchinson Heinemann on 27 January (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyIt’s amazing, for me at least, to think that I have been working in horticulture for the best part of two decades. For almost all that time there has been real concern about how to get new audiences, and in particular younger people, into the art. I have often been invited to sit on industry boards to brainstorm new approaches and asked to consult on huge campaigns, all of which have simply insisted on churning out more of the same. So it is exciting to see young people are now doing it for themselves – in radically different ways, essentially creating what I think can only be described as a parallel horticultural universe. In the past five years there has been an absolute explosion in the interest in plants among younger generations. With the hashtag #plantsofinstagram racking up almost 13,000 posts, more than six times that of #avocadotoast, and some houseplant retailers reporting a 500% spike in interest over the past year or so, this is the radical transformation we have desperately needed. But when you meet them, these new horticulturists don’t read gardening magazines, watch gardening television shows or even shop in garden centres. They often come from backgrounds like tropical fish or exotic pet keeping, or the geeky science of lighting or hydroponic tech. Or they have a passion for interior design, or simply a fascination with collecting rare things. But what they have in common is that almost all have got into plants through totally novel routes. To me, what is so fascinating about this is how it creates a palette of plants, new techniques and an aesthetic which are all wildly different to the staid horticultural norms I grew up with and which have remained largely unchanged for decades. And it seems to exist in an alternate gardening reality. They have really built their own gardening media on YouTube and Instagram that is far more dynamic, experimental and accessible than traditional garden media, which in my experience is notoriously risk adverse, repetitive and open only to people of a very fixed social and ethnic demographic. They have even started their own nurseries online, like the achingly cool Grow Tropicals, Spicesotic Plants and Ugly Plantling, sold on internet auction sites and at fairs with more ironic beards and arm tattoos than you might see at craft beer festivals. At a recent packed-out event, I asked the audience of young plant geeks, some decades younger than me – for my own curiosity – how many of them were actually trained horticulturists. Only two hands went up and both had been kicked out of horticultural college for allegedly collecting too many plants and for having unusual pets in their student dorms. No wonder things are changing, and thank goodness it’s for the better! Follow James on Twitter @BotanygeekOil and gas companies have handed shareholders almost £200bn since 2010 and should be hit with a windfall tax to cap heating bills that are set to rise by as much as £500 a year, according to a report on the finances of the UK’s energy sector. Shell and BP are among companies that have seen their profits boosted in the last year as wholesale gas prices rose by as much as nine times and petrol prices jumped to record highs, leading to calls for them to help limit a £20bn bill faced by UK households. A report for the left-of-centre thinktank Common Wealth found that Shell and BP channelled £147bn to shareholders via dividends and share buybacks over the past decade, with North Sea producers and the big six energy suppliers contributing another £47bn. Business secretary Kwasi Kwarteng told MPs last September the government was considering a plan for a £2.6bn windfall tax on generators and energy traders that stood to gain from the energy crisis. It is understood Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, is still considering measures to limit rising bills, including a windfall tax, but with two weeks until the regulator, Ofgem, announces how much a cap on energy bills will rise in April, he has yet to settle on a final package. The chancellor, accused of being “missing in action” while energy costs soar, is under pressure from Tory MPs to cut state spending and reduce Britain’s debts. He is known to favour a loan scheme for energy suppliers, giving them the funds to cushion the blow this year, with the addition of a small subsidy to the poorest households using the Warm Home Discount Scheme. Several prominent energy bosses are known to have promoted a loan scheme as the best way to limit rising bills in a series of meetings at the Treasury last week. However, gas prices could remain high for several years, increasing the size of the energy sector’s debts and forcing suppliers to keep household bills up for the rest of the decade, while they make repayments. Ofgem is expected to announce on 5 February how much bills will increase in the next financial year. About 30 energy suppliers have gone bust in the last year, blaming the energy price cap for their fall into bankruptcy. Most rich nation governments have already put in place financial support, including a €4.5bn subsidy by the Italian government to limit bill increases. Ministers in Paris said last week they will force EDF, the 80% state-owned energy giant, to take an €8.4bn (£7bn) financial hit to protect households in a move that will limit energy bill increases to 4% this year. The Biden administration has ramped up grant payments for poorer US households to cover the rising cost of gas, while in Germany, the government has slashed a surcharge on bills used to support renewable energy schemes, which will instead receive extra state subsidies drawn from higher carbon taxes.Labour said it was fair that the oil and gas producers benefiting most from the energy crisis ‘“play their part in helping families through the cost of living crisis”. Ed Miliband, the shadow secretary of state of climate change and net zero, said: “When the head of BP describes the crisis as a ‘cash machine’ for his company and fossil-fuel producers pay out billions in share buybacks, it is a clear indication of the scale of windfall profits they are making.” Torsten Bell, the director of the Resolution Foundation, said a windfall tax should be part of the package of measures that included subsidies for poorer households. “It must be sensible for those companies making money from this crisis to cover a share of the costs,” he said. The Institute for Fiscal Studies recently said an additional £3bn needed pumping into the welfare system in response to soaring energy bills and mounting inflationary pressure. The report’s authors, Joseph Baines of King’s College London and Dr Sandy Hager of City University, said Centrica and SSE, which operate in the North Sea, had seen the sharpest increase in profit margins. They said that as oil and gas companies often made losses during periods of low wholesale gas and oil prices, they paid almost all their income to shareholders in more profitable periods. “BP’s shareholder payout commitments have been so large that they cover 98.3% of their pre-tax income and are 2.5 times larger than their tax payments for the same period,” the report said. “The findings may be combined with the insights on fossil-fuel subsidies offered by a recent Common Wealth report which identified an average of £12bn a year of taxpayer support for fossil fuels in the last five years,” they added. Oil traders could also be forced to pay a windfall tax, but the major firms – Vitol, Glencore, Trafigura, Mercuria and Gunvor – were not part of the study.The headline polling figures are bad enough for Boris Johnson. Labour has a 10-point lead and the prime minister’s popularity is now at the same point as Theresa May’s at her lowest. But digging beneath the surface, the latest Opinium poll for the Observer reveals a deeper and more serious problem: Johnson’s coalition of traditional Tories and pro-Brexit working-class voters is fracturing. The poll shows that 46% of Leave voters who voted Conservative in 2019 believe Johnson should resign, compared with 39% who want him to stay. These people are the core of the prime minister’s base and if they desert him, he is sunk. Johnson’s 2019 general election win was the result of his appeal to working-class Leave voters in the so-called “red wall” northern seats, while retaining many Remain-voting Tories in the party’s traditional middle-class base. Since then, some of the socially liberal, well-off voters charmed by David Cameron have been put off by Johnson’s behaviour in government, enabling a Liberal Democrat resurgence in the North Shropshire and Chesham and Amersham byelections last year. With a working majority of 77, the Conservatives can afford to lose some of those supporters if it keeps the rest of its voter coalition together. But losing the people who wanted to “get Brexit done” would be catastrophic, and the poll will confirm the anxieties of Tory MPs seeing their inboxes fill up with messages from angry constituents who do not normally contact them. The poll shows that 48% of all 2019 Conservative voters say he should resign as party leader. Even 30% of those who would vote Tory now believe he should go. Labour are now in their biggest lead position since 2014, 10 points ahead at 41%. “Today’s poll adds to growing evidence that the ‘partygate’ scandal is jeopardising the party’s support from red wall Leavers too,” said Rob Ford, professor of political science at the University of Manchester. “Such voters have long felt disaffected from, and distrustful of, a political class they felt ignored their concerns and lived by its own rules. The resentments once mobilised against the EU by the promise to ‘take back control’ now have a new target – an out-of-touch Downing Street team who partied while the Queen mourned.” Opinium found 76% of respondents think Johnson broke lockdown rules, with 8% saying he did not. Only 13% think he is telling the truth, against 64% who do not. Sixty-seven per cent say the police should investigate. Johnson appears to hope that by asking people to wait a week or so more until civil servant Sue Gray’s report, he may be able to ride out the storm. Yet people appear to have made up their minds already – asked if Johnson should resign if it turns out he broke lockdown rules, 67% say yes. But 63% of UK adults simply believe he should step down, compared with 22% who say he should remain as leader of the Conservative party. Yesterday, the ConservativeHome website reported that 53% of its panel of party members believed Johnson should quit. The site’s editor, Paul Goodman, said this was lower than the 71% who wanted Theresa May to go in 2019. “Nevertheless, that over half of party members want the prime minister out, if this return is representative, is a humiliating result for him, and shows a loss of confidence that may not be reversed,” Goodman wrote. Among general voters, Johnson’s net approval is the same as May’s before the 2019 European elections that heralded her resignation, according to Opinium. The prime minister now has a net -42% approval rating (22% approve and 64% disapprove). Labour leader Keir Starmer remains stable at a +4% net rating (36% v 32%) and is the preferred prime minister of 30%, compared with 21% for Johnson. “Johnson has shifted from the party’s biggest asset, with a Brexit-fuelled appeal separate to the Conservative brand, to its biggest liability,” Ford said. “The Conservatives may now be damned if they do and damned if they don’t.” Of Johnson’s potential Conservative successors, Rishi Sunak is viewed most positively – 45% say he would make a good PM with 32% against. The other widely tipped candidate, Liz Truss, has the support of 22% with 38% against. In the rest of the field, Sajid Javid is best placed (30% for v 44% against), ahead of Jeremy Hunt (26% v 43%), Michael Gove (24% v 53%) and Priti Patel (20% v 61%). “Sticking with Johnson risks further contaminating the party brand if the scandals continue and voter fury intensifies,” Ford added. “Party veterans with memories of the 1990s will recall how hard renewal can become once their party is toxic. Yet replacing Johnson brings its own risks, as none of the frontrunners for the succession looks likely to replicate his unique appeal with voters otherwise suspicious of the Conservatives.” Unlike 2015 and 2019, when the Conservatives recruited nationalist Eurosceptic voters from Nigel Farage, there was now no Ukip or Brexit party to squeeze, Ford added. “Keir Starmer’s personal ratings, though mediocre, are better than his predecessor and improving. The Conservatives’ hopes may now rest on whether voters’ longstanding reservations about Labour outweigh their growing anger at a prime minister now widely seen as a liar and a law breaker unfit for office.”The defenestration of a prime minister between elections is usually triggered by a seismic event. Neville Chamberlain was forced out after Norway was gobbled up by Hitler. The national humiliation of the Suez debacle did for Anthony Eden. The epic unpopularity of the riot-provoking poll tax impelled Margaret Thatcher towards her unwilling exit. David Cameron felt compelled to quit when he lost his gamble on the Brexit referendum. If Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson soon joins the gallery of toppled PMs, it will be because he attended a “bring your own booze” party in the back garden of Number 10 and his aides had a lockdown-busting piss-up in Downing Street the night before the Queen buried her husband. No other premiership has had such a pathetically shabby ending. No finale to his slummy reign would be more appropriate. It has always been highly likely that cavalier and blatant rule-breaking, and then lying about it, would be the undoing of a prime minister with a career history of casual contempt for truth and integrity. In its relatively short life, his premiership has been splattered with scandal. There was the “crony express” that sped lucrative Covid contracts to Tory mates down a “VIP lane”, which the high court has just ruled unlawful. There was the decanting of infected elderly patients from hospitals into vulnerable care homes at the height of the pandemic. Nor should we forget the multiple-sourced accounts that Mr Johnson callously declared that he would let the bodies “pile high in their thousands” in the winter of last year rather than take timely action to contain a resurgence of Covid, an appalling choice that resulted in many avoidable fatalities and has left Britain with the highest death toll in Europe. These and other outrages ought to have deeply troubled Tories, but many in his parliamentary party responded to scandal after scandal with a dismissive shrug. Conservative MPs now profess their shock-horror at the torrent of revelations about booze-ups at Number 10, but few expressed concern about earlier disgraces when it didn’t appear to be costing them support. Never mind the quality of the prime minister’s ethics, so they responded, feel the width of our poll rating. When previous charges of moral turpitude bounced off him, Tories told themselves that their leader was coated with a lacquer of Teflon so thick that nothing could stick. Some cynically opined that voters knew that Mr Johnson was a mendacious scoundrel when he won the election in 2019 and so appalling behaviour was expected and – ghastly phrase – “in the price”. It was often averred that a substantial chunk of the public enjoyed having a “lovable rogue” at Number 10. “Everyone loves a sinner.” So one senior Tory chortled to me last autumn when his party was still sitting on a poll lead even as Wallpapergate and several other scandals were on the boil. He went on: “If Boris was caught shagging a goat in Downing Street, people would immediately make a goat beer and drink to his health.” That senior Tory has had a sobering change of mind. He now thinks that Number 10 has generated a scandal so disgusting to the public that it will be terminal even for such a legendary escapologist. “Is Boris toast? Yes, he is toast. He’s lost the armour that used to protect him from the normal rules of political gravity. That’s evaporated. It’s definitely over. The question is when.” Another former cabinet minister agrees: “The Teflon is all gone. The odds of him taking us into the next election are very low – in fact, near-zero.” A third Tory MP, previously a fervent admirer, says: “I think it’s over. I simply can’t see a way back from this.” Here we have a scandal that even the great trickster can’t blag his way out of. The half-confession he finally made to the Commons last week failed to defuse the outrage because it was extracted only under intense pressure and after weeks of false denials. His attempt to sound contrite didn’t work because it was a non-apology apology so reeking with insincerity that it added insult to the injury felt by the many who have been bereaved by the pandemic. Everyone knows that the only thing he is genuinely sorry about is getting caught. Everyone also knows this: while large numbers were dying, often without the comfort of loved ones, and millions were making sacrifices to support what their government told them was a collective endeavour to control the pandemic, Mr Johnson’s Downing Street was on a booze cruise. It is hard to say which is the more jaw-dropping. The flagrancy of the rule-breaking. The arrogant stupidity of it. Or the stunning frequency with which the denizens of Number 10 behaved as if laws did not apply to them. The prime minister’s feeble plea in mitigation for the garden party that he admits to attending is that he thought it was a “work event”. This laughable excuse asks us to believe that he failed to notice that alcohol was flowing and that his wife and her chums were present. He had to fall back on such a risible defence because the alternative is to confess that he flouted his government’s regulations and afterwards sought to dupe the public and deceive parliament. We have learned that the many shindigs at Downing Street included parties the night before a grieving Queen sat alone at Prince Philip’s funeral and at a time when any indoor socialising was prohibited. Witnesses say that one staffer went off to the Co-op in the Strand to load up an empty suitcase with wine and beer, an aide played a DJ set in the Number 10 basement and a swing belonging to the prime minister’s son was broken by an inebriated party animal. On Mr Johnson’s watch, during the most severe pandemic in more than a century and on the eve of the burial of the monarch’s consort, Number 10 was turned into a nightclub. One Conservative MP says that this revelation has caused “the most profound abhorrence” in his patch, especially among true blue types. Another Tory MP reports that party members who were once fanatical Johnson devotees are spitting: “You’ve got to get rid of him.” Even if he was not physically present for all the parties, he was at every one in spirit. What possessed Number 10 staffers to think that it was sensible or decent to turn Downing Street into a drinking den while people were dying? As I like to remark from time to time, the culture of organisations is greatly shaped by the character of the person at the top. The most egregious rule-breaking became habitual at Number 10 and that is surely directly connected to the fact that the most senior person in the building is a compulsively shameless rule-trasher. “Fish stink from the head,” remarks one former Tory cabinet minister. “So does Number 10.” A growing number of Tory backbenchers think he should go, as do quite a lot of ministers, including some of the cabinet who are professing insincere loyalty oaths. Making things even darker for the prime minister, the Opinium poll we publish today indicates that he is shedding even his core support. Nearly half of those who supported Brexit in 2016 and then the Tories in 2019 say he should be out of Downing Street. What is lacking for now is a settled consensus among Tory MPs about when to remove him and who to replace him with. Many have congregated around the idea that the May elections, when voters go to the polls across the UK, will be the litmus test. This is a cop-out from their moral responsibilities. If he is a disgrace to the high office he holds, he is a disgrace whether the voters fiercely punish the government at the ballot box or the Tories improve on their terrible ratings. Truth to tell, most Conservative MPs are exercised by this scandal because it makes them fearful of losing power, not because of what it says about the prime minister’s ethical character. They never thought Mr Johnson was a man of sparkling integrity who would make a fine prime minister. They knew who he was. They made him their leader because they thought that winning is all that matters in politics and he looked like a winner. Far too many people in the Tory party chose to ignore his unfitness to be prime minister. If they had bothered themselves with that question before, they wouldn’t have put him in Number 10 in the first place, nor shrugged so cynically at all the squalor that has ineluctably followed. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the ObserverFor bitcoin enthusiasts in Kosovo with a breezy attitude to risk, it has been a good week to strike a deal on computer equipment that can create, or “mine”, the cryptocurrency. From Facebook to Telegram, new posts in the region’s online crypto groups became dominated by dismayed Kosovans attempting to sell off their mining equipment – often at knockdown prices. “There’s a lot of panic and they’re selling it or trying to move it to neighbouring countries,” said cryptoKapo, a crypto investor and administrator of some of the region’s largest online crypto communities. The frenetic social media action follows an end-of-year announcement by Kosovo’s government of an immediate, albeit temporary, ban on all crypto mining activity as part of emergency measures to ease a crippling energy crisis. Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies are created or “mined” by high-powered computers that compete to solve complex mathematical puzzles in what is a highly energy-intensive process that rewards people based on the amount of computing power they provide. The incentive to get into the mining game in Kosovo, one of Europe’s poorest countries, is obvious. The cryptocurrency currently trades at more than £31,500 a bitcoin, while Kosovo has the cheapest energy prices in Europe due in part to more than 90% of the domestic energy production coming from burning the country’s rich reserves of lignite, a low-grade coal, and fuel bills being subsidised by the government. The largest-scale crypto mining is thought to be taking place in the north of the country, where the Serb-majority population refuse to recognise Kosovo as an independent state and have consequently not paid for electricity for more than two decades. There is serious money to be made – and in a time of ready energy supply it was being made. The number of people mining cryptocurrencies in Kosovo is thought to have skyrocketed in recent years. Groups such as Albanian Crypto Amateurs on Facebook and Crypto Eagles on Telegram have exploded with thousands of new members, though it is unclear how many are mining cryptocurrency, or on what scale. But the good times appear to be over – at least for now – and the developments in Kosovo highlight one of the big questions about the future of bitcoin and other such digital currency. The latest calculation from Cambridge University’s bitcoin electricity consumption index suggests that global bitcoin mining consumes 125.96 terawatt hours a year of electricity, putting its consumption above Norway (122.2 TWh), Argentina (121 TWh), the Netherlands (108.8 TWh) and the United Arab Emirates (113.20 TWh). Meanwhile, Kosovans spent the final days of 2021 in darkness as domestic and international factors combined to cause energy shortages and rolling blackouts across the country. At the peak of the recent crisis, an unforeseen shutdown at one of its two ageing power plants left Kosovo importing about 40% of its energy on international markets – where prices have soared – and the government was forced to provide an emergency subsidy to help meet the costs. Kosovo’s minister of economy, Dr Artane Rizvanolli, said the ban had been a “no-brainer”. “We have allocated €20m for subsidising energy, which is probably not going to be sufficient, and this is taxpayers’ money that is going to subsidise electricity consumption,” she said. “On the other hand we have crypto mining, which is a highly energy-intensive activity and is not regulated.” Kosovo is not alone. Last September, the 10 most powerful regulators in China vowed to kill off what was then the world’s biggest cryptocurrency mining industry. In Iceland, the country’s national power company, Landsvirkjun, has said it will turn away potential cryptocurrency miners as the country is experiencing power shortages. Last week, a powerful committee in the US Congress announced it would convene a hearing on the issue. US cryptocurrency miners are believed to be the largest consumers of energy, followed by Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation. “It’s time to understand and address the steep energy and environmental impacts it is having on our communities and our planet,” said committee chairman Frank Pallone and Diana DeGette, who heads its oversight panel. Alex de Vries, a Paris-based economist, said his initial estimates in a paper to be published later this year suggest just a quarter of the energy used by miners is renewable: “The question really is: what are you getting in return for that?” Jason Deane, chief bitcoin analyst at Quantum Economics, said he believed there were a host of advantages, including the offer of instant, virtually free, financial transactions carried out without the use of a third party, with certainty that there will be instant settlement, and that the current teething problems need to be put in perspective. Since the Kosovan authorities made the decision, police and customs officers have begun conducting regular raids, seizing hundreds of pieces of hardware. While a 60-day state of energy emergency remains in place, the prospect of upcoming regulation and energy bill price rises leaves the future anything but certain. “There are a lot of people who have invested in crypto mining equipment and it’s not a small investment,” cryptoKapo said. “People have even taken out loans to invest and the impact now is very bad on their lives.”If you thought Novak Djokovic had a God complex, he’s got nothing on Australia’s immigration minister. After the government suffered the ignominy of wounding, not killing, Djokovic on his arrival in Melbourne for the Australian Open a week ago, the immigration minister Alex Hawke was determined to stop the GOAT. Armed with the almost bulletproof section 133C(3) of the Migration Act, which gives the minister the power to cancel a person’s visa if satisfied it is in the public interest to do so, Hawke proceeded with the nuclear option of booting the world No 1 tennis player out of the country. The law is clear – the rules of natural justice don’t apply. Sunday’s federal court hearing did not need to consider the merits or wisdom of Hawke’s decision – just whether it was “irrational or legally unreasonable”. In a unanimous decision, the court found it was not, dismissing Djokovic’s appeal and ordering he pay costs. It was a messy week for the government, but the outcome proves once more that Australia’s immigration laws are as harsh in design as they are in execution. (Just ask Mehdi Ali, who has spent nine years in detention as a result of Australia’s border policies.) In the court hearing, the government had argued Djokovic was “perceived by some as a talisman of a community of anti-vaccine sentiment” and allowing him to stay in the country could undermine the government’s public health messaging. In essence, Djokovic had become a poster boy for anti-vax views – it was likened to a sponsorship deal – and his very presence would serve as a country-wide advertisement for others to follow suit. Australia’s new hardline no-dickhead approach was accepted by the court and Djokovic’s fate was sealed. He won’t be missed by most, with the tennis world’s most unsympathetic protagonist doing little for his cause by confirming he defied health advice for a photo opportunity after testing positive to Covid, and then incorrectly filled in his immigration paperwork. Even among the tennis community he has received little sympathy, with the saga (triggered, let’s not forget, by Djokovic’s decision not to get vaccinated) overshadowing the Australian Open, where other vaccinated players just want to get on with the tennis. But if being arrogant, anti-science and an all-round jerk is grounds for the government to push the button on its extraordinary deportation powers, then perhaps we can look forward to the government doing more about similar characters domestically. Has Alex Hawke chewed the fat with Alex Antic or George Christensen in the Coalition party room lately? They make Djokovic look like a veritable quiet Australian, what with their calls for civil unrest and suggestions state health departments are involved in grand cover-up conspiracies. Queensland LNP senator Gerard Rennick is publicly questioning the safety of booster shots and has suggested the health department of having a “callous attitude towards the safety of Australians”, while Nationals senator Matt Canavan has continually downplayed the threat of the virus compared to the threat to personal liberty. The poor old Therapeutic Goods Administration has been pulling its hair out in frustration over the well-funded Clive Palmer misinformation campaign, which gets met with an official shrugging of shoulders when asked if the government can do anything about it. If only Palmer and Craig Kelly were non-citizens! Government ministers themselves have been keen to dog-whistle to anti-vax sentiment, distancing themselves from controversial vaccine mandates when politically expedient to do so, and tacitly supporting freedom rallies that have targeted health restrictions. The handling of the Djokovic case has been a rolling administrative shambles, and Australians who have done the right thing and got vaccinated – many who would have preferred not to – overwhelmingly think the Joker should go home. But anyone who suggests the government is being driven by its fervent belief in good health and public order, and not by a desire for a much-needed political win in its strong suit of border control, has not been paying attention.You can continue to follow global Covid news here: Here’s the main stories in Australia today: Novak Djokovic to be deported from Australia after federal court upholds visa cancellation, with the government saying the decision vindicates its approach. An underwater earthquake eruption in Tonga triggers tsunami warnings in Australia, with the BoM reporting a “mass rescue” at a NSW beach caused by the unusual conditions. Victoria records 13 Covid-19 deaths and 28,128 new cases; NSW records 20 deaths and 34,660 new cases; Queensland records three deaths and 17,445 new cases; ACT records two deaths and 1,316 cases; SA records 2479 cases; Tasmania 825 new cases; Northern Territory 327 cases. Western Australia to introduce a mask mandate from 6pm local time in response to six new Covid cases. The health minister, Greg Hunt, says Omicron cases may be peaking ion NSW and the ACT. (Sorry, I know I said that was it for Djokovic news.) The prime minister Scott Morrison has just released a statement on the Djokovic decision: The Full Federal Court of Australia unanimously decided to dismiss Mr Novak Djokovic’s application for judicial review which sought to challenge the Minister for Immigration’s decision to cancel his visa. This cancellation decision was made on health, safety and good order grounds, on the basis that it was in the public interest to do so. I welcome the decision to keep our borders strong and keep Australians safe. As I said on Friday, Australians have made many sacrifices during this pandemic, and they rightly expect the result of those sacrifices to be protected. Over the pandemic, together we have achieved one of the lowest death rates, strongest economies and highest vaccination rates, in the world. Strong borders are fundamental to the Australian way of life as is the rule of law. Our Government has always understood this and has been prepared to take the decisions and actions necessary to protect the integrity of our borders. I thank the Court for their prompt attention to these issues and the patience of all involved as we have worked to resolve this issue. It’s now time to get on with the Australian Open and get back to enjoying tennis over the summer. Novak Djokovic has lost his appeal against his visa cancellation, and is set to be deported from Australia. He has said in a statement that he respects the federal court’s decision and will cooperate with authorities working on his deportation. Our story on the saga is here: The immigration minister Alex Hawke has just released the following statement: I welcome today’s unanimous decision by the Full Federal Court of Australia, upholding my decision to exercise my power under the Migration Act to cancel Mr Novak Djokovic’s visa in the public interest. Australia’s strong border protection policies have kept us safe during the pandemic, resulting in one of the lowest death rates, strongest economic recoveries, and highest vaccination rates in the world. Strong border protection policies are also fundamental to safe-guarding Australia’s social cohesion which continues to strengthen despite the pandemic. Australians have made great sacrifices to get to this point and the Morrison Government is firmly committed to protecting this position, as the Australian people expect. To date around 43 million vaccination doses have been administered in Australia and more than 91.6% of Australians aged 16 years and over are fully vaccinated. Accordingly, Australia has been able to commence a step-by-step, safe reopening of its international border as a result of this successful vaccination program. There’s not been an update to the Australian Open schedule of play for tomorrow reflecting that the number one seed is probably going to be on a plane back to Serbia, but this is a good suggestion: A good point (ahem), well made. Alize Cornet, France’s top ranked female tennis player, has had this to say: Some more reaction urging perspective on the broader issue of how Australia’s immigration system works. Here is Novak Djokovic’s full statement, just released: I would like to make a brief statement to address the outcomes of today’s Court hearing. I will now be taking some time to rest and to recuperate, before making any further comments beyond this. I am extremely disappointed with the Court ruling to dismiss my application for judicial review of the Minister’s decision to cancel my visa, which means I cannot stay in Australia and participate in the Australian Open. I respect the Court’s ruling and I will cooperate with the relevant authorities in relation to my departure from the country. I am uncomfortable that the focus of the past weeks has been on me and I hope that we can all now focus on the game and tournament I love. I would like to wish the players, tournament officials, staff, volunteers and fans all the best for the tournament. Finally, I would like to thank my family, friends, team, supporters, fans and my fellow Serbians for your continued support. You have all been a great source of strength to me. Djokovic says he respects the court’s ruling and “will cooperate with the relevant authorities in relation to my departure from the country”. He adds: I am uncomfortable that the focus of the past weeks has been on me and I hope that we can all now focus on the game and tournament I love. I would like to wish the players, tournament officials, staff, volunteers and fans all the best for the tournament. Finally, I would like to thank my family, friends, team, supporters, fans and my fellow Serbians for your continued support. You have all been a great source of strength to me. A very brief statement, which says he is extremely disappointed, but will take time to rest and recuperate before commenting further: And this reaction from Liberty Victoria: The decision by the Hon Alex Hawke MP, the Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs, to cancel Mr Novak Djokovic’s visa and to deport him has drawn attention to Australia’s dysfunctional visa cancellation and detention regimes and to the troubling use of the Minister’s God-like personal powers. Liberty Victoria has repeatedly warned about the dangers of such powers. Australian tennis player Nick Kyrgios has reacted to the decision in a somewhat atypically understated way: That’s all folks. The case had been adjourned by 30 minutes in case either side had sought them, but that’s it from the full court of the federal court. Here’s what the former Liberal and now independent MP Craig Kelly reckons. A reminder that immigration minister Alex Hawke said Djokovic was “perceived by some” as a “talisman” of anti-vax sentiment: Labor says Scott Morrison is an international laughing stock because of how the government has handled Djokovic’s visa. Kristina Keneally, the shadow minister for immigration, said in a statement: Scott Morrison has made himself a laughing stock on the world stage through a litany of failures as he and his Government mishandled Novak Djokovic’s case, undermined Australia’s border security settings, and provided a lightning rod for the anti-vaccination movement. The Morrison Government’s own argument before the court was that Mr Djokovic’s visa should be cancelled because his presence here may foster anti-vaccination sentiment based on what he did and said before he was granted a visa. This must prompt the question, why did Mr Morrison’s Government grant him a visa to come to Australia in the first place? This mess is not a failure of our laws. It is a failure of the Morrison Government’s competence and leadership. Australians have made all the hard sacrifices during lock downs, only for Mr Morrison and his Government to serve up an embarrassing and farcical series of unforced errors after they foolishly granted Mr Djokovic a visa 60 days ago. Here’s who is possibly replacing Djokovic in the Australian Open. This is what it hinged on, in a nutshell: Novak Djokovic will be deported from Australia ahead of the Australian Open after the full federal court dismissed the world No 1’s bid to restore his visa. On Sunday the court upheld the decision of Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, to cancel the visa on the basis Djokovic’s presence in Australia might risk “civil unrest” as he is a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment”. The chief justice, James Allsop, announced the court unanimously dismissed Djokovic’s application, with costs, but explained the decision of the court did not reflect on “ the merits or wisdom of the decision”. Full reasons will follow at a later date. The full story is here: It is a huge blow for Djokovic: the court’s decision was unanimous, and he is ordered to pay the costs of the appeal. But to make it clear: this decision means that Djokovic’s visa has been cancelled and he is to be deported. He faces a three-year ban from returning, except in certain circumstances, that can include “compelling circumstances that affect the interests of Australia”. There is now an adjournment of 30 minutes while Djokovic’s team and lawyers for the minister discuss whether they will apply for any further orders. Chief justice James Allsop has announced the full federal court’s decision unanimously to dismiss Novak Djokovic’s application seeking reinstatement of his visa. Reiterating that this decision to dismiss Djokovic’s appeal was unanimous. Djokovic has application dismissed, with costs. Orders to be published at later date. Allsop says the court considers it appropriate to make clear a number of matters about the process that has taken place, given the international interest. The orders are unanimous, he says. Chief justice James Allsop on behalf of the full court of the federal court of Australia is up. He is explaining the change to the orders allowing recording of hearing. ABC planning to show Djokovic live too, apparently: The Djokovic decision is expected to be announced in the next five minutes or so. You can watch here, and there are court documents here. I have just realised, because of the report below, that the Queensland government has built its regional quarantine facility at a place called Wellcamp. Wishful thinking? This from AAP: Border restrictions may be easing but the Queensland government is confident its regional quarantine facility can still be used for “an array of options”. The finishing touches are being put on the centre at Wellcamp, west of Brisbane, which is set to open in the “coming weeks”. The 500-bed opening stage is almost complete with the administration and reception set to be finished while the rest of the 1000-bed centre is expected to be unveiled by April. The federal government is building another 1000-bed quarantine camp in Pinkenba, near Brisbane airport, like similar centres in Melbourne and Perth. However, the Queensland Opposition has questioned the value of the Wellcamp facility outside Toowoomba with quarantine requirements easing. Domestic travellers have been able to enter from 1am on Saturday without showing proof of a negative COVID-19 test. Fully jabbed international arrivals won’t need to quarantine once the state hits 90 per cent vaccination rate, a target set to be reached in coming days. But Deputy Premier Steven Miles said there would still be a need for the quarantine facility. “Clearly over time the usage of a facility like that is going to change as we have met our vaccination targets,” he said. “But there will continue to be a need for quarantine for some arrivals as well as other cohorts. “Throughout the last two years there have been a wide variety of times where we have needed suitable, appropriate, custom-built accommodation. “I wish we didn’t need it but I expect that we will. We are just working through which cohorts would be best to utilise that facility.” Chief health officer John Gerrard said the Wellcamp facility was as important as ever. “There are quite an array of options that facility will enable us to do,” he said. An email has just been sent by the federal court, confirming the time, that reasons will come later, and also that the broadcast of the decision can be carried live by media outlets and recorded. The BoM say there’s been reports of a “mass rescue” caused by the impacts of a Tonga tsunami at a NSW beach. The bureau updated its tsunami warning at 4.57pm, and it remains current for the coasts of NSW, Lord Howe Island, and Norfolk Island. All beaches are closed. But there’s been a couple of interesting additions: reports of two new “tsunami impacts in NSW” recorded today. The BoM write that there were reports of a “mass rescue due to the sudden drop in tide” at Sawtell, near Coffs Harbour, at 3.53pm AEDT, and of dangerous tidal movements at Gunnamatta Bay and Maroubra between 2.30pm and 3.30pm AEDT. Here’s a full story on health minister Greg Hunt’s comments from earlier today that Omicron cases may have peaked in NSW and the ACT: Widely mocked plans to establish a tropical haven for cryptocurrency enthusiasts have run into trouble after a contract to buy an island in Fiji for US$12m fell through, Ben Butler reports. Here is the latest on how the tsunami situation is playing out in Tonga: All the Australian warnings from the Bureau of Meteorology re the Tonga tsunami, which as of 3.54pm remain current for all the NSW coast, Lord Howe Island, and Norfolk Island, can be found here. Interesting timelapse from earlier today showing how the tsunami impacted some parts of NSW: Just one final bit on the Queensland situation (I cut back the AAP report a little). The CHO, Dr John Gerrard, said people in Queensland have been calling triple zero asking where to get a rapid antigen test. Via AAP: While confident the state’s hospitals could cope, Dr Gerrard has urged Queenslanders with mild COVID-19 symptoms not to dial triple zero, in order to ease pressure on the ambulance service. He said: We have had a lot of calls...for very minor aspects...people even calling the ambulance centres asking where to get a RAT test. He said emergency calls should only be made if people had difficulty breathing, significant chest pain or were coughing up blood. Here’s the rundown of the Covid situation in Queensland, via AAP: Three people have died from COVID-19 in Queensland, with the state recording another 17,455 new cases as the number of people in hospital continues to “creep up”. But chief health officer John Gerrard is confident the state’s health care system can handle the rising case numbers despite conceding some south-east Queensland hospitals are “under pressure”. Queensland’s COVID-19 death toll has reached 29 after a person in their 60s, another in their 80s and a 103-year-old became the latest fatalities. Two had a single dose and the other was double jabbed but all had underlying medical conditions. The new cases recorded included results from 4,615 rapid antigen tests, with a total of 42,420 tests in a 24 hour period. There are 203,657 active cases in Queensland. Dr Gerrard said there are 670 people in hospital across the state - up from 649 on Saturday - with 49 in intensive care, an increase of three in the past 24 hours. Sixteen people are on ventilators. “This (state’s hospital numbers) continues to creep up from yesterday,” Dr Gerrard said. He said he felt for south-east Queensland hospitals dealing with case surges and staff shortages with the majority of the state’s ICU patients - “about 20-odd” - on the Gold Coast. Overall 2,643 Queensland health staff have COVID-19 with 2,835 in quarantine. “The biggest pressure at the moment is at the Gold Coast and the south Brisbane hospitals,” Dr Gerrard said. “There is no doubt they are under pressure and my thoughts are with the staff at those hospitals looking after significant numbers of patients. “(But) we have the capacity for looking after patients in the thousands. Our modelling suggests with assistance of private hospitals we will be able to absorb the load.” Australian Open organisers have scheduled Novak Djokovic to play his first round match after Ash Barty’s on Rod Laver Arena tomorrow night. There has been a gun fight between police and a man in Tasmania, AAP report: Police have shot a gunman in the shoulder after he allegedly fired at officers with a shotgun in Tasmania’s northwest. Officers were called to a property in Shorewell Park, near Burnie, about 8:30am on Sunday after reports an armed man was acting aggressively, making threats and firing a weapon. Police said they tried to negotiate with the 25-year-old, urging him to disarm himself. He allegedly fired at police before being shot in the shoulder by officers. He was taken into custody at the scene, given first aid and taken to hospital. Western District Commander Debbie Williams said the man is in a stable condition and is expected to undergo surgery on Sunday afternoon. “We would like to thank the local community for their assistance as we carry out our investigations,” she said. “We appreciate their patience and understanding.” The Tasmania police professional standards unit has been advised and will investigate the incident. Anyone with information has been asked to come forward. Not sure what Tennis Australia will do here in relation to the No 1 seed, who is due to play his first-round match tomorrow ... Thanks Christopher for your efforts on the keys. Although you have just jinxed us to not hearing about Djokovic until Monday. Right, that’s me done for the day. Not quite the slow news Sunday I’d been hoping for, but there you are. I’m going to hand over to my colleague Nino Bucci. He’ll keep you across any developments in the Djokovic case. Hopefully a decision is not too far away. My colleague Paul Karp has just published an updated report on today’s proceedings in the federal court. Well worth a read. Shadow health minister Mark Butler spoke to reporters a little earlier. He was asked about the Djokovic saga. He said: This has been an embarrassing soap opera of Scott Morrison’s making. If Mr Djoković did not satisfy the entry test to come into Australia, he should not have been granted a visa way back in November. Frankly, at a time when we are dealing with tens of thousands of cases every day, dozens of deaths, we don’t need a government spending time, energy and money dealing with this soap opera day, upon day, upon day. I think Australians want this soap opera brought to an end one way or the other and for the government to get on with its job of protecting Australians in this disastrous fourth wave. The reports emerging out of Tonga, while patchy due to internet outages, do not sound good. My colleague Joshua Mcdonald has filed this report: Tsunami waves caused by an undersea volcano have flooded the Pacific Island country of Tonga, where entire towns have been inundated with water and scientists warn the main island could be blanketed in volcanic ash. Videos shared on social media after the eruption showed people running for higher ground as the one metre high floods hit coastal areas and made their way farther inland while the sky darkened with ash. A video shot from the roof of a building on the coast showed large waves breaching the coastal wall seconds apart, while a video shot from the New Zealand high commission in Nuku’alofa, where people ran for shelter, showed the downtown area of Patangata had been completely submerged, including the Royal Palace and Tonga’s largest bank. Another video, shot inside a church, showed children crying out as water surrounded the building and waves begin lapping up against the windows. In a video posted to YouTube after the eruption, Abraham Leilua begins by telling his followers that “it’s not that bad” but within minutes, as the water rises, saying: “I have to run for my life” before ending the video. Health minister Greg Hunt says there are clear signs that the spread of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus is peaking, according to AAP. He told reporters earlier today: There are signs that NSW in particular and the ACT maybe peaking. I won’t call it as having reached it yet, but in particular what we’ve seen, is that all of these jurisdictions have so far significantly undershot the hospitalisation, ICU and ventilation predictions that were made at the outset. So, as we await the decision, it’s worth recapping what we’ve just heard. Djokovic’s lawyers accused the government of making an irrational and erroneous decision to cancel his visa on public order grounds. The government’s decision was based on the risk that his continued presence would excite anti-vaccination sentiment. But Djokovic argued the government failed comprehensively to consider the “counter-factual” to that, namely, what would be the effect on anti-vaccination sentiment of deporting Djokovic? They said this error was “perverse” and “irrational”, given the government had singled out the potential of fostering anti-vaccination sentiment as its chief concern about Djokovic’s presence in the country. In response, lawyers for immigration minister Alex Hawke said he clearly did consider the impact of deporting Djokovic on anti-vaccination sentiment, but decided his continued presence in the country was too risky, particularly because the current debate had highlighted his anti-vaccination views and made him an “icon” to anti-vaccination groups. They also argued Australia must not “be bound to suffer” a person’s presence due to fear of what would happen if they were removed. Djokovic’s lawyers accused the government of making “elementary” mistakes in its reliance on news articles to link Djokovic with anti-vaccination groups in Australia, despite those news articles making no such connections themselves. The government also took a BBC report about Djokovic’s anti-vaccination views, used as evidence of his opposition to the Covid vaccination, out of context, Djokovic argued. Djokovic also accused the government of failing to ask him what his current views on vaccination were. In response, the government said it was unlikely Djokovic would have told them anything new. Djokovic said there was no evidence that he had excited anti-vaccination sentiment in any of the other tennis tournaments he had played in since the vaccine was distributed. His lawyers said the government failed to collect any evidence about this, despite it being easily available. The chief justice, James Allsop, intervened to make an observation that was helpful for the immigration minister’s case. Djokovic’s lawyers have been focused on the lack of “evidence” before Alex Hawke of the impact of his presence in Australia. Allsop said the minister was entitled to rely on his common sense. The court is likely to indicate its decision to the parties later today, but will not publish full reasons. One more point to be made. It is a great step forward for open justice that the federal court has allowed this case to be watched by the public in such a seamless fashion. Most other Australian courts make it prohibitively difficult to watch proceedings remotely. The submissions are now done. Chief justice James Allsop says the court will adjourn. He says the court won’t be able to give full reasons for any decision today. But he says the court hopes to be in a position to indicate what it is proposing to do later this afternoon. What we would hope to do is to spend the afternoon hopefully, and perhaps the early evening, dealing with the arguments that have been put to the court, not with a view to delivering full reasons today, but with a view if possible as to reach a view as to the outcome of the matter and on one hypothesis, if it be relevant, Mr Lloyd, the individual basis for it. We would hope to do that later in the afternoon. So in a sense we’re not asking counsel and solicitors to stand down in their present positions as it were. But we would hope to be in a position to indicate to the parties later in the afternoon what we propose to do. Nicholas Wood in his reply responded to the minister’s claim that he shouldn’t be “bound” to keep someone in Australia based on the consequences if they were removed. Wood said, effectively, of course if the minister had been more reasonable he could have removed a troublesome visa-holder. Stephen Lloyd is not happy. He says that Djokovic’s case in written submissions was that the minister hadn’t considered the effect if Djokovic is deported, but his counsel now seems to be arguing “even if he did consider it he was unreasonable in what he did”. Lloyd says this is a “different ground” that they weren’t warned of. Wood says no, it’s not a new case, it’s simply restatement that it was not considered and that made the decision unreasonable. Chief justice James Allsop observes if the court finds the minister did consider it – the first ground would fail. Wood agrees. Phew, glad we got that straight. Wood says they are seeking Djokovic to be released within 30 minutes of a decision being made, if the court does find against the minister. That concludes the submissions from Stephen Lloyd, representing the minister. Nicholas Wood, acting for Djokovic, is now replying. He promises to be brief. The chief justice James Allsop, who previously observed that the immigration minister could use his common sense, just made another intervention that indicates how hard it will be for Djokovic to win. Allsop said: What’s put against you, Mr Wood is saying where’s the evidence, you have to have the facts? We could’ve had examples in other places in the last year, of people following his lead. [There are] two categories: one being taken up by those who have strong anti vaccination views, but the second is a much broader concept of an iconic sports star setting an example that is not wished to be followed. As I understand your submission, the notion you need to lead evidence of what effect he might have in the US or somewhere else is beside point. You can use common sense and human intuition about how people behave. If Mr Djokovic won the Open – there’s an example, embedded in the minister’s reasons, for young and not so young fans of tennis. Lloyd makes the point that Djokovic, right now, had become an “icon” for anti-vaccination groups in Australia, given the current debate about his presence. More importantly and more recently, perhaps inevitably because of recent events, the applicant’s views or widely understood views about vaccination have come to the fore, they are right in people’s minds at the moment. He has now become an icon for the anti-vaccination groups and then what role that will have if somebody of his significance being present in Australia at a time when that is an issue. The minister clearly sees there is a risk... in the same way that Mr Djokovic associates himself with a whole array of products and no doubt, because of his popularity and status, that does well for people who engage him for his endorsements, in the same way rightly or wrongly he is perceived to have engaged with an anti-vaccination view. Lloyd has also denied there is any contradiction in immigration minister Alex Hawke, on the one hand, saying Djokovic has well-known anti-vaccination views, while also conceding he did not ask the tennis star what his current views are. Lloyd accuses Djokovic’s lawyers of misreading that part of the minister’s decision. It has to be read as a whole. He doesn’t say... that he doesn’t have a view about what Mr Djokovic’s views on vaccinations were, he just says he didn’t ask for an update on what his present view was. You may have noticed that the Australian Open is yet to release its schedule for the tournament’s first day, which is ... tomorrow. Tennis writer Ben Rothenberg says the delay is at odds with prior tournaments. Lloyd is hitting back at allegations the government failed to seek Djokovic’s current views on vaccination and relied on outdated comments, taken out of context. Lloyd says Djokovic wouldn’t have told the minister anyway. There is no evidence before the court that the applicant could or would have put forward any useful information to the minister, had his views been sought. Lloyd has responded to Novak Djokovic’s lawyers asking for evidence about the impact of his alleged anti-vax views by citing low vaccination rates in Serbia. Lloyd said it would be in Serbia one would expect Djokovic’s stance to have the biggest impact, and on the evidence: In Djokovic’s home country ... under half the country is fully vaccinated against Covid. Lloyd said he doesn’t think Alex Hawke needs to prove that impact – but there was evidence in front of him about it. Lloyd is continuing to defend the government’s consideration of the effects of deporting Djokovic. He says there is nothing in the law to suggest, as Djokovic does, that failing to consider a counter-factual makes a minister’s decision “irrational or unreasonable”. It doesn’t follow from the minister failing to consider a counter-factual, if that’s what the court finds, that he transgressed the bounds of reasonableness. He also says: Australia must not be bound to suffer the presence of an alien for fear of what might happen if they were removed. Lloyd says the minister was aware of the presence of anti-vaccination groups in Australia, the fact they “idolised” Djokovic, would react angrily to his visa cancellation, and that the decision would lead to media coverage. We’re back on in the federal court. The chief justice, James Allsop, has come back and posed a lengthy question about what the minister did and didn’t do to consider the risk posed by deporting Djokovic. Allsop said: It might be that you are correct to the effect that much of this can be seen in submissions the existence of other groups that may have an anti vax predisposition or view, the possibility of antagonism about the withdrawal or cancellation of visa. One can on this hypothesis, one can readily accept your submissions that this kind of problem was in a sense, within the submissions that the minister in a case such of this we would hardly infer that he didn’t read. That said – what he didn’t do on one view is finely balance the weighing of them. The answer to that may be he didn’t have to. One can see a lack of balancing of one against the other, without denying the notion that he was alive to problems in the future if he did cancel. Then one goes back to the statutory task, what consequence there is if he understood aspects of the future but did not finally weigh the alternative binary detriments. Stephen Lloyd, replied that the possibility of unrest if Djokovic were deported “must have been part of consideration of balance”. And here comes Christopher Knaus, fresh from lunch. Happiest of afternoons to you all. The Victoria and Tasmania tsunami warnings have been cancelled by the bureau of meteorology, but the NSW warning remains. You can find the updates here. A reminder that we’re expecting the Novak Djokovic federal court hearing to resume at 1.30pm. But she also confirmed that NZ were yet to have direct contact with the Tongan government, given the tsunami has knocked out the internet... I guess if you were planning on heading along to the tennis tomorrow this would also be nice to know: There may be light at the end of the tunnel in NSW, report AAP: While the coming days will be bleak, NSW Premier Dominic Perrottet says it’s reassuring that the state’s exploding COVID-19 caseload is not being matched by major increases in hospital numbers. “I think what we are seeing today is incredibly encouraging and pleasing but there’s a long way to go,” he told reporters in Sydney on Sunday. “It’s going to be a difficult three weeks.” NSW posted 34,660 new cases on Sunday along with a further 20 virus-related deaths, bringing the seven-day fatality total to 141. While more people are dying than at any time during the pandemic, Mr Perrottet says it appears the crisis is in fact tracking better than expected. NSW hospitals are now caring for 2650 COVID-19 patients. Of these, 191 are in intensive care beds. At the depths of the Delta outbreak last September, there were 244 virus-infected people in ICUs. Recent worst-case scenario modelling suggested 6000 people would be hospitalised at the apex of the outbreak, with 10 per cent of those patients in intensive care. Even the best-case predictions painted a grimmer picture than reality, allowing for almost 3160 people in care. Mr Perrottet says a full re-assessment of the forecast data will be conducted later in the week. “We’ve gone through the last two years and we’ll get through Omicron as well,” he said. “We have a highly vaccinated population, we have a less severe disease but one that is more contagious and it is pleasing to see that those numbers aren’t increasing at an exponential rate.” Mr Perrottet says while the state is 95 per cent vaccinated, around half the patients in intensive care are not. Of the 191, 61 currently require ventilation. “So the evidence, the facts, are very, very clear,” he said. “Vaccination helps protect you and your family and your friends and the wider community. So please continue to make that effort.” Some 93.8 per cent of all NSW adults are now double dosed, while 25.4 per cent have also received a booster, representing about 47 per cent of those eligible. Of children aged 5-11, 11.5 per cent have had a single dose of vaccine. Health Minister Brad Hazzard warned people not to forget the importance of a third jab. “The booster is showing itself to be one of the vital tools in pushing back against the evil of this virus,” he urged. “It ... does make a huge difference to both ensuring you can fight back ... and reducing the likelihood you’ll end up in hospital. “It definitely reduces the likelihood you’ll end up in ICU and reduces the chance of death”. Mr Perrottet also apologised for ongoing disruptions to food supply networks and delays at PCR testing sites, saying the latter had now begun to “largely resolve and subside”. Here’s the full wrap of the Covid situation in Victoria, via AAP: Victoria has received a “significant” first batch of three million rapid antigen tests, which will soon be handed out to the state’s essential workers, people with pre-existing conditions and community groups. The state posted 28,128 new COVID-19 infections and another 13 deaths on Sunday, as hospitalisations with the virus continue to climb. Premier Daniel Andrews announced the state’s “significant first batch” of three million RATs has arrived, from a bulk order of 44 million. They will be distributed to essential workers in health and aged care, disability and emergency services from Monday. Victorians with pre-existing conditions, that make them susceptible to severe illness, will also be prioritised for a RAT to ensure they are diagnosed so that care can be quickly provided. Additionally, 60 community and multi-faith organisations would receive a “modest but important” portion of the free RATs, to be handed out in a culturally appropriate way, Mr Andrews said. “Three million is a very important start, we are working very hard to make sure that each and every one of the orders that make up the 44 million are honoured,” he told reporters on Sunday. “That will be three million tests that don’t need to be sourced elsewhere, so that alleviates some pressure.” Authorities handed out more than 400,000 free RATs to people at state testing sites last week. Deputy Chief Health Officer Ben Cowie said the additional RATs would allow people to begin their isolation periods sooner and ensure they were linked to care faster. “It is great news that the tide is starting to turn on the supply of rapid antigen tests in Victoria,” he said. “We are all going to have significantly increased access in the coming days and weeks.” Meanwhile, Mr Andrews flagged the state government would soon make an announcement on what the return of schools would look like. “We will have another discussion this coming Thursday, and we look forward to making announcements quite soon,” he said. “Lots of officials are working really hard on the return to school.” There are a record 1114 patients in Victorian hospitals with COVID-19, 60 more than the 1054 on Saturday. The number of people in ICU has grown to 122, with 35 on ventilators, five more than the previous day. Professor Cowie said hospitalisations were increasing “significantly” every day and health teams were working to build up capacity. And the final thing I would point you to today (among all the madness): Maddie Thomas on bush architecture. Next on the “stuff you might not have read yet because there’s a lot of news about” list: this story by Ben Smee on the stinker of a summer in Queensland. Given it’s roughly lunch time, and it has been a bit of a frantic morning, I’m going to point you in the direction of some longer reads published today that are worth your eyeballs. First, this wonderful feature from Mostafa Rachwani: Thanks Chris, a solid performance of web logging if ever I’ve seen one. With that, I’ll hand you over to my colleague Nino Bucci. The court takes an adjournment until 1.30pm. Lloyd says he has another hour of submissions to make, so the hearing should be concluded by mid-afternoon. On the same issue (whether the government properly considered the impact of deporting Djokovic), Lloyd points to the unrest that occurred after the first decision to revoke the cancellation of Djokovic’s visa. There were protests in Melbourne directly connected to the issue. The minister was clearly aware of those protests. So the minister, he says, clearly would have considered that another decision cancel Djokovic’s visa and deport him would create further unrest. So it’s impossible to imagine that wasn’t within the minister’s understanding. In the federal court, Justice Besanko intervened to ask whether it was sufficient that the immigration minister was aware of possible unrest if Djokovic were deported, or whether he had to take that into account in his decision. For the Australian government, Stephen Lloyd replied: They have to show he failed to consider the issue. They say there is nothing in the decision about it, so you should infer he didn’t do it. We say: he doesn’t have to do a comprehensive set of reasons. There’s no obligation of reasons, so you shouldn’t start from the proposition that if not mentioned it wasn’t done. A whole lot of other things are mentioned which suggests those matters were taken into account in the decision making process. [Alex Hawke] has in mind the broad possibility of unrest, whatever his decision. It becomes impossible to infer that wasn’t part of the balance. And Queensland has just reported three deaths and 17,445 new Covid cases. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded two deaths and 1,316 new Covid cases. Stephen Lloyd is flatly denying that the minister failed to consider the consequences of deporting Djokovic. He says it is obvious from the material that he turned his mind to the possibility of unrest, whether Djokovic was present in Australia or deported. We separately have an argument that [the minister] didn’t need to consider it. In the federal court, the chief justice James Allsop has just asked the minister to explain the government’s position on the “counter-factual”. Here, the counter-factual means the risks posed by deporting Djokovic, rather than allowing him to remain in Australia. Interestingly, Allsop says: One could see a situation in which it was plain to anyone with common sense that cancelling the visa would cause overwhelming public discord and risks of transmission through very large public gatherings. One could see in the sense the counter-factual overwhelming the mere focus only on ... the consequence of presence. Djokovic’s lawyers have accused the government of failing to consider the risks posed by deportation. Stephen Lloyd, speaking for the minister, says the minister was “obviously” aware of the risks posed by the deportation of Djokovic, but believed that his presence would “encourage others to emulate his position, and that would put Australians at risk”. The concern is that he’s a high profile person who is in many respects a role model, certainly for many people, so that his presence in Australia would present more strongly and more currently to Australians his anti-vaccination views. Lloyd also said “the starting point is that [the minister’s power to cancel the visa] doesn’t call for counterfactual at all” and the decision deals with the “presence of the. person in Australia”. He said: The idea of asking for a counterfactual raises the surprising notion that Australia when deciding whether or not to cancel a visa, might have to avoid cancelling a visa of someone who is actually presenting a risk when they are here, that Australia’s sovereignty is held at risk because the cancellation might lead to adverse consequences. Lloyd submitted the counterfactual wasn’t a “mandatory consideration” - it was relevant, but the minister didn’t have to take it into account. Just away from the Djokovic case for a moment, the health minister Greg Hunt has defended the government’s approach to rapid antigen test procurement. In October, when asked about the availability of rapid antigen tests, Hunt said that the government would “let that market develop”. Fast forward three months and the tests are in short supply, leading the Australian Medical Association to describe the situation as a “market failure”. The health minister said that around the world the Omicron variant had seen case numbers explode from 500,000 cases a day to more than 4 million cases a day, and supplies were a “global challenge”. But he said supplies of the 66 approved tests, including home and point of care kits, were now coming into Australia. What you’re seeing is increasing supply of rapid antigen tests, but right around the world vastly increased demand. We’ve been in the market since August, and we’ve been able to provide that continuous supply to aged care. The states have recently entered the market and they’ve indicated that there are significant purchases that they’ve made, and we are beginning to see now already more supplies coming into the pharmacies and the supermarkets. So that’s been a global challenge, but what I’m pleased about is that the Australian market has responded. Hunt said that the GP package to expand telehealth, announced Sunday morning, did not include the provision of rapid antigen tests because it was focused on personal protective equipment, but the government would allow rapid antigen test diagnoses to qualify for the Covid supplement payment to doctors. The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners “cautiously welcomed” the GP package, which it said had been announced after its meetings with the minister. RACGP President Dr Karen Price said: It’s positive news that the Government is listening to the Royal Australian College of GPs on telehealth and need for more support to manage the increasing number of COVID-19 positive patients in the community. GPs and patients have embraced telehealth during the pandemic, and it is here to stay. Video and telephone consultations have changed the way we deliver healthcare and I believe many patients will continue to utilise telehealth for years to come post-pandemic as a compliment to face-to-face care. We have strongly advocated for Medicare rebates to remain for longer telephone consultations and for good reason. Telehealth use in Australia is largely phone-based. Between March 2020 and March 2021, video consultations comprised only 2.4% of telehealth services. Video consultations are not suitable for many patients including older people unaccustomed to the technology or those with unreliable internet access. We’re back to the BBC report, in which Djokovic expressed opposition to vaccines. That report was published well before the Covid vaccine was available. But Lloyd says that only strengthens the government’s view that he was opposed to vaccinations: Even before vaccinations were available, his prima facie position was to be against them. Sure, he left open the possibility that he might change his mind. But nevertheless his publicly stated position was that he was not in favour of taking vaccines. Lloyd says the minister is not just relying on Djokovic’s public statements to assume an opposition to vaccination. It’s not just the applicant’s public statements that he is opposed to vaccination, it is the fact of his ongoing non-vaccinated status ... at this stage of the pandemic. It is open to infer that a person in the applicant’s position could have been vaccinated if he had wanted to be. He continues: We say that that choice makes an important inference about his views about Covid-19 vaccination. Barrister Stephen Lloyd is now making submissions on behalf of the immigration minister, Alex Hawke. He quickly picks up on a point just made by Chief Justice Allsop, saying the minister is entitled to rely on his common sense when deciding whether to cancel a visa, not just material evidence later placed before a court. Lloyd: We certainly embrace the view that it is not limited to evidence before a court, administrative decision-makers usually inform themselves by a much broader range of materials. Wood is now pointing out the “contradiction” in the minister not asking Djokovic for his current views on vaccination, despite claiming he had a “well-known stance on vaccination”. The minister, as we’ve reported, relied on an old BBC report, published before the Covid vaccine was available, to suggest Djokovic was against vaccination. Wood says the reliance on that BBC report was done without context, including by reference to Djokovic’s comments that he was no expert. And that’s where Wood concludes his submissions. The chief justice, James Allsop, has just intervened to make an observation that is very helpful for the immigration minister’s case. Djokovic’s lawyers have been focused on the lack of “evidence” before Alex Hawke of the impact of his presence in Australia. Allsop said: The word evidence shouldn’t mislead. What is really necessary is material before a decision-maker, which material includes the rational and reasonable use of perception and common-sense, in the place the decision-maker is in. One needs to be careful when speaking about evidence in the sense of litigation... Before a decision-maker, it’s the legitimacy of the material before [them] and whether or not it is of sufficient character including what can be drawn from common-sense and the perception of the minister to matters relevant in the community.” So, Allsop is saying the minister is entitled to rely on his common-sense. That’s a big blow for Djokovic’s case. Djokovic’s lawyers accepted that statement of the law. We’re now on to ground two – attacking the minister’s purported satisfaction that Mr Djokovic’s presence “may” cause a risk to public health or good order. Nicholas Wood submitted the minister needed to be positive satisfied, it must be formed “rationally upon findings of fact which are logically founded by probative evidence”. Wood: As I’ve said, the only evidence here was the BBC report that concerned anti-vax sentiment following cancellation. If there were evidence about anti-vax sentiment consequent to Mr Djokovic merely being in a place and playing tennis, such evidence could have been obtained – Rr Djokovic has been playing tennis for a long time – but no such evidence was identified. Wood also accused Alex Hawke of “elementary error” by citing news reports about anti-vax protests that don’t mention Djokovic. Back in the federal court, Wood is savaging the government’s claim that it did consider the effects deportation would have on anti-vaccination sentiment. He says that Alex Hawke’s case amounts to asking the court to “infer from snippets of this and that” that there was “active consideration” of the counterfactual (what the impact on anti-vax sentiment of booting Djokovic would be). Wood ridicules the government’s claim that its consideration of a public poll, which voices only general support for Djokovic’s presence in the country, amounted to it considering whether his deportation would excite anti-vaccination sentiment. The minister’s grasping for straws... it was not considered. On the tsunami alerts, the Bureau of Meteorology has cancelled its tsunami alert for Queensland. The New South Wales state emergency service has just urged residents to stay out of the water. Local beaches have been closed. Here’s the SES statement: As a result of an eruption of HUNGA TONGA-HUNGA HA’APA in the Tongan Islands at 3.10pm AEDT Saturday 15 January 2022, the Bureau of Meteorology issued a marine tsunami warning for the NSW coastline, Lord Howe Island and Norfolk Island. NSW State Emergency Service (NSW SES) is the lead agency for tsunami in NSW. To keep members of the community safe, local beaches along the state’s coast have been closed. NSW SES is asking that members of the public stay out of the water until it is safe to do so. Members of the public considering looking to local rivers as an alternative for swimming are reminded that due to recent heavy rain, some river systems across the state are swollen, and may present dangerous swimming conditions. The marine tsunami warning for the NSW coast could have the following impacts: dangerous rips and waves, strong ocean currents and some localised overflow onto the immediate foreshore exists overall coastal areas. An initial land tsunami warning for low-lying coastal areas of Lord Howe Island has since been downgraded to a marine tsunami warning this morning (Sunday 16 January). Norfolk Island has also been downgraded to a marine tsunami warning. NSW SES is working closely with Surf Life Saving, NSW police and local councils to ensure members of the community are safe. Wood continues, describing the failure to consider the consequences of deportation as “perverse”. It is somewhat perverse to adopt such a narrow focal point or lens on the 133(c)(a) question and to blinker oneself only to risks related to presence, when there is evidence before you of the risks related to the binary alternative. Wood is developing the argument that the minister should have considered the consequences of deporting Djokovic on anti-vaccination sentiment. It was irrational, your honours, for the minister to only contemplate the prospect of the fostering of anti-vaxx sentiment that might accrue from Mr Djokovic playing tennis, in other words being present, and yet not consider the binary alternative, which was the prospect of anti-vaxx sentiment being fostered by ... coercive state action. Wood says “no evidence at all” was obtained about the impact on anti-vaccination sentiment posed by Djokovic remaining in Australia and playing tennis. He said such evidence was available, because Djokovic has been playing tennis all over the world since the vaccine was developed. Wood says Djokovic only needs to prove that the immigration minister should have considered a “material possibility” that deporting Djokovic would drive up anti-vaccination sentiment. We don’t need to demonstrate the anti-vaxx sentiment if cancelled would have been greater than Djokovic’s mere presence in Australia, however I hasten to add that is the only evidence that existed. [We need prove] only that the minister if he had considered [it] … there is a material possibility that there is some such anti-vaxx sentiment because ultimately this is a balancing of scales exercise. All but one of the factors went in Mr Djokovic’s favour … Plainly there is a material prospect that the public interest assessment might have differed because of balancing the scales, or the discretionary exercise would’ve differed [if he had considered the counterfactual]. In the hearing, we’re now talking about the immigration minister Alex Hawke’s assertion that Djokovic is a “risk to good order”. This is a seperate ground used to cancel Djokovic’s visa, alongside the health concerns expressed by Hawke. Nicholas Wood, Djokovic’s counsel, also challenges the notion that Djokovic’s presence is a threat to “good order”, saying it is also based on faulty logic. The same thread of reasoning on health also runs through the minister’s reasoning on good order. Djokovic’s written submissions in reply have been published. Djokovic’s lawyers have invited the court to draw the inference that Hawke didn’t consider the counterfactual (anti-vaxx unrest if his visa were cancelled). They argue Alex Hawke’s decision was “comprehensive”, that the minister considered everything he set out in it and nothing else. They note Hawke’s legal team has made an “important concession that there is no express reference to the counterfactual in the reasons”. They said: The minster expressly confines his consideration of ‘unrest’ to things that have already happened. That is, he says that the fact that there has been some unrest which the minister associates with Mr Djokovic’s presence in Australia is a factor against cancellation; this says absolutely nothing about the unrest that might follow from his absence, despite this perhaps being an obvious place to consider that very issue. Again, Djokovic’s lawyers say there is no evidence his presence will incite unrest. They said: The minister is not permitted to cancel a visa based on an evidence-free figment of his imagination. Just away from the federal court, momentarily, we’ve got a little more detail on the tsunami alerts issued following the underwater volcano eruption overnight. The tsunami alerts for Lord Howe Island and Norfolk Island have been downgraded. Sarah Scully, a senior meteorologist at the Bureau of Meteorology, has just spoken to the ABC. She says tsunami alerts have been downgraded in some areas. And the latest news is the land threat off the islands of the coasts, the Pacific Islanders have been downgraded. They were a land threat, now they’ve been downgraded to a marine threat. Those warnings will remain in place for a particular location until there are no significant observations for six hours, so we are waiting to be really sure that the impact on the energy for their volcanic eruptions have dispersed and it’s no longer a danger to any people out of the water. Djokovic’s counsel, Nicholas Wood, is arguing that “the only evidence” connecting Djokovic to anti-vaccination demonstrations is a BBC article about anti-vaxx groups’ anger “in response to action by the state to cancel his visa”. Wood said: Not a single line of evidence in the material before the minister provided any specific, logical or probative foundation for the proposition that the mere presence of Djokovic himself – not the cancellation of his visa and expulsion – may somehow foster anti-vaccination sentiment. Wood said it is conceivable that his presence could have that effect, but that is not enough. Wood notes that Djokovic has been playing at tennis tournaments and grand slams ever since the Covid-19 vaccination was developed and distributed, including the last Australian Open. There is no evidence that his presence at any other tournament had excited anti-vaccination sentiment, he says, despite the fact there would be a “reservoir of evidence” if it had, given his global profile. There’s nothing like that of any kind identified by the minister whatsoever. This is interesting. We’re back on to the BBC report that the minister relied on to suggest Djokovic’s presence in the country would excite anti-vaccination sentiment. Wood says the BBC report was published after the government’s first decision to cancel Djokovic’s visa. The report suggested it was the government’s decision, rather than Djokovic himself, that had “galvanised anti-vaccination activists”. The only evidence is anti-vaxx group anger and agitation in response to action by the state to cancel him and thereby to set in train a course of events that would ... have led to his expulsion and statutory consequences impairing his capacity to come back to this country.” The court hears minister Hawke cited two articles – one from the Guardian and another from the ABC – to suggest that anti-vaccination groups in Australia had expressed support for Djokovic due to his vaccination status. But Wood says neither article made any mention of Djokovic whatsoever. The articles were about anti-vaccination groups but said nothing of the tennis star, he said. He says it is clearly an error by the minister. That is plainly wrong. Mr Djokovic is not referred to once in either of the articles from the Guardian or ABC news. Wood is speaking about the minister’s finding that Djokovic was a “high-profile unvaccinated individual” who had indicated publicly that he was opposed to becoming vaccinated. He raises a BBC article cited by the minister as evidence of Djokovic’s approach to vaccination. The article says Djokovic was opposed to being forced to be vaccinated to travel. But Wood says the BBC article also quoted Djokovic as saying he was “no expert”, wanted to “keep an open mind” and “wanted to choose an option that is best for my body”. Wood says minister Alex Hawke ignored that part of the article in his reasons. The court hears that Hawke also sought no new clarification from Djokovic about his current attitudes towards vaccination. Wood says Djokovic’s previous statements about vaccination were from before the Covid-19 vaccination was developed. Djokovic’s counsel, Nicholas Wood, is making submissions. The early submissions are complex and relate to the legal authorities the government is relying on as foundations for its decision to cancel Djokovic’s visa. The minister’s statement of reasons for the decision, issued voluntarily to explain his reasoning, completely ignored the first argument the government used to cancel his visa, namely that he had no proper medical exemption to bypass the border restrictions. Instead, Wood argues, the government “erected an entirely different rationale”. That rationale was that Djokovic would excite anti-vaccination sentiment in Australia. Wood says the minister had “not sought or read the actual medical material that Mr Djokovic had provided” to the government after the initial challenge to his visa. That included material that Djokovic posed no real health threat given his recent Covid infection. The hearing has started with an explanation from Chief Justice James Allsop about why he considered the case significant enough to have a full court (three judges) hear the case to finalise it today or tomorrow. Allsop says that they needed to go to a higher level right away, because the right of appeal by Djokovic from a single judge to three judges would’ve been “inutile” because of the looming Australian Open. Basically – we need a result, pronto. In submissions just released the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, has argued that: It was “clearly open” to him to conclude that Djokovic is personally opposed to vaccination. There is “ample evidence” that Djokovic’s presence may foster anti-vaccination sentiment. Djokovic has failed to show that the minister didn’t consider the impact of cancellation on anti-vaxx sentiment. Hawke’s submissions note the “counter-argument” that he didn’t consider the impact of Djokovic’s removal and says basically ... prove it. “There is insufficient basis for the court to make this finding,” he said. Even if Hawke didn’t consider this, the minister argued that didn’t make his decision illogical, irrational or unreasonable, and it was not a material error. Hawke has responded to Djokovic’s argument he should have ASKED his view by asking: What Mr Djokovic could have said to the minister in response to a question about his stance on vaccination would not have altered the fact of his previous public statements and the views of those in the Australian community as to what his views on vaccination were. Proceedings have just begun in the federal court, before Chief Justice James Allsop, Justice Anthony Besanko and Justice David O’Callaghan. Novak Djokovic’s amended submissions are now public, arguing that immigration minister Alex Hawke: Failed to consider the consequences of cancellation Could not be satisfied that Djokovic’s presence “is or may be” a risk; and Was unreasonable in his conclusion about Djokovic’s stance on vaccination. Djokovic’s lawyers have argued that what really galvanised anti-vaccination sentiment was the first decision to cancel Djokovic’s visa, citing a BBC report about widespread backlash in the wake of that decision, which was later overturned by the federal circuit court. They said: It was irrational, illogical or unreasonable for the minister to fail to consider the influence of Mr Djokovic’s removal on anti-vaccination sentiment. Djokovic’s lawyers also dispute claims Djokovic is an anti-vaxxer, arguing this was based on one statement in March 2020 that had since been qualified. They said: There was no evidence before the minister that Mr Djokovic has ever urged any others not to be vaccinated. Indeed, if anything, Mr Djokovic’s conduct over time reveals a zealous protection of his own privacy rather than any advocacy. They criticise Hawke for not making “the obvious, critical, and easy inquiry of Djokovic as to what his sentiment in fact was”. In further Australian Covid news, the Morrison government has announced $24m in new funding to widen the use of telehealth for GPs and other specialists. The funding is a direct reaction to the infection rate from the Omicron outbreak. AAP reports: The $24m will also cover the continued supply of personal protective equipment, such as masks, respirators, face shields and gowns for face-to-face consultations including patients that have tested positive through a rapid antigen test. The latter aligns with national cabinet’s January 5 decision that RAT tests no longer need to be confirmed by a PCR test. Health minister Greg Hunt said telehealth had been a vital support during the pandemic, providing greater flexibility in healthcare delivery at the most critical time and continues to be a fundamental part of the pandemic response. The government will introduce temporary specialist inpatient telehealth – via video and phone – including initial and complex specialist telephone consultation items, and longer telephone consultations for GPs until June 30, 2022. “These services will be made available nationally rather than targeted to Commonwealth-declared hotspots as they were previously, recognising the high infection rate and need to provide healthcare support across the community,” Hunt said in a joint statement with regional health minister David Gillespie. NSW has just released its latest Covid data. It recorded 20 deaths in the previous 24 hours and 34,660 new cases. Our reporter Paul Karp will be covering the Djokovic hearing today. He’s just sent this preview: The full federal court will sit today (commencing 9:30am AEDT) to hear Novak Djokovic’s bid to overturn the immigration minister, Alex Hawke’s, decision to cancel his visa. According to court documents, Hawke’s decision was based on his satisfaction that Djokovic could pose a risk to “civil unrest” as he is a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment”. Djokovic’s lawyers will argue that: this conclusion was illogical, irrational or unreasonable; it was not open for Hawke to find Djokovic is a risk to health or good order; and that Hawke made findings about Djokovic’s views on vaccination based on public statements without actually seeking his views. Overnight, Djokovic’s lawyers lodged an amended document at 9:15pm – so it’s possible he has added to his case. Hawke’s submissions were lodged at 10pm. The hearing will be before three judges: Chief Justice James Allsop, Justice Anthony Besanko and Justice David O’Callaghan. The significance of that is that, win or lose, the result is likely to be final. Only the high court sits above the full federal court, and taking the case there that would require leave to appeal. Victoria has just recorded 13 deaths and 28,128 new Covid-19 cases. 122 people are in ICU and 1,114 people are in hospital in the state. That’s a reduction on yesterday’s case numbers and deaths, when 23 lives were lost and 25,526 cases were recorded. Hospitalisations, though, are up to 1,114 from 1,054 yesterday. Away from the Djokovic case, there’s troubling news out of Tonga, where tsunami waves were sent crashing across the shore following an undersea volcano eruption on Saturday. So far, we have no reports of injuries or on the extent of the damage because all internet connectivity with Tonga was lost at about 6.40pm local time. Tsunami advisories were issued for other Pacific islands, the Australian east coast, Hawaii, Alaska and the US Pacific coast. AAP has more details: On Tonga, home to about 105,000 people, video posted to social media showed large waves washing ashore in coastal areas, swirling around homes, a church and other buildings. Satellite images showed a huge eruption, with a plume of ash, steam and gas rising like a mushroom above the blue Pacific waters. Authorities in the nearby island nations of Fiji and Samoa also issued warnings, telling people to avoid the shoreline due to strong currents and dangerous waves. In New Zealand, officials warned of possible storm surges from the eruption. New Zealand’s private forecaster, Weather Watch, tweeted that people as far away as Southland, the country’s southernmost region, reported hearing sonic booms from the eruption. Others reported that many boats were damaged by a tsunami that hit a marina in Whangarei, in the Northland region. Earlier, the Matangi Tonga news site reported that scientists observed massive explosions, thunder and lightning near the volcano after it started erupting early on Friday. Satellite images showed a 5km-wide plume rising into the air to about 20km. The Hunga Tonga Hunga Ha’apai volcano is about 64km north of the capital, Nuku’alofa. In late 2014 and early 2015, a series of eruptions in the area created a small new island and disrupted international air travel to the Pacific archipelago for several days. The Tonga Meteorological Services said a tsunami warning was declared for all of the archipelago, and data from the Pacific tsunami centre said waves of 80cm (2.7ft) were detected. Read more here: We’re expecting general public support for Djokovic to be an issue raised before the federal court. Early Sunday morning, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Age published the results of poll showing more than two-thirds of Australians believe Novak Djokovic should be sent home without playing in the Australian Open. The survey showed 71% of respondents believed he should not be allowed to stay, only 14% want him to compete, and 15 % say they do not care if he stays or goes. Novak Djokovic has left the Park Hotel and is on his way to his lawyers’ offices in Melbourne. Support for Djokovic has been strongest in Serbia, including in the capital Belgrade, where Serbian president Aleksandar Vučić has posted a video statement attacking the Australian government overnight. Vučić accused Australian prime minister Scott Morrison of mistreating Djokovic for political purposes. If you wanted to forbid Novak Djokovic to win the trophy for the 10th time, why didn’t you return him immediately? Why didn’t you tell him that it was impossible to get a visa. Why do you harass him? Why do you mistreat him, as well as his family and nation that is free and proud? Is all this necessary to win the elections and please your public? Djokovic was also the holder of a diplomatic passport, according to the Serbian government. In a statement reported by the Sydney Morning Herald, the embassy said that should have entitled him to fair treatment at the border. Although the fact is that he is the best tennis player in the world, Serbia doesn’t expect any preferential treatment of Novak Djokovic, but an adequate, professional approach of foreign authorities, which we are obliged to provide to every holder of our travel document. On the other hand, we do not expect that, because of his status as the best, he will be subjected to a particularly harsh treatment in order to serve as an example to others just because of his popularity. The Australian Open is due to begin tomorrow. It’s not actually clear whether we’ll have a decision from the federal court before then, though it’s certainly open for the judges to hand down judgment immediately. The Djokovic saga has understandably overshadowed the event’s preparations. Many of the competitors are frustrated by that fact. Only a few have spoken candidly about the Djokovic case, but fewer still have openly offered support for his actions. The Australian Alex de Minaur, the world No 42, hinted at the resentment many people feel in Melbourne, a city which has endured lengthy lockdowns throughout the pandemic. Australians have gone through a lot. There’s no secret about that. They’ve had it very tough. They’ve done a lot of work to protect themselves and their borders. When you’re coming in, as well as every other tennis player, if you wanted to come into the country, you had to be double vaccinated. It was up to him, his choices, his judgment. Nick Kyrgios, previously critical of Djokovic’s response to Covid, has offered some support for the world No 1. Kyrgios told the No Boundaries Podcast: It’s just a shitshow. It’s not even about the vaccination any more. I feel so sorry for him. How we’re dealing with stuff is just so embarrassing. I just think if Australia had dealt with Covid better, I don’t think this would be such a big issue. It’s insane now. Rafael Nadal, who will be among the favourites whether or not Djokovic plays, said: From my point of view, there is a lot of questions that need to be answered. In some ways I think it will be good if everything is clarified soon. Everyone chooses his road. I wish him all the best. I really respect him, even if I do not agree with a lot of things that he did the last couple of weeks. We’ve still got an hour until proceedings begin in the federal court, where the case will be heard by a full bench, comprisong Chief Justice James Allsop, Justice Anthony Besanko and Justice David O’Callaghan. Novak Djokovic spent last night back at Melbourne’s Park Hotel, used as an immigration detention facility, after he was returned into the custody of Border Force guards on Saturday. His detention again prompted supporters and anti-vaccination groups to gather outside the hotel late Saturday. So what exactly is Australia’s case against the world’s best tennis player? Well, it’s shifted entirely from its first, failed iteration. The immigration minister Alex Hawke initially argued Djokovic had arrived in Australia without a proper exemption to the country’s tough Covid-19 border restrictions, which require full vaccination. Hawke, after losing his first case, has now conceded Djokovic arrived with a proper exemption. He now argues that Djokovic’s pubic opposition to vaccination, disregard for Covid-19 restrictions and global popularity may fuel the anti-vaccination movement in Australia, posing a threat of civil unrest. Hawke: Given Mr Djokovic’s high-profile status and position as a role model in the sporting and broader community, his ongoing presence in Australia may foster similar disregard for the precautionary requirements following receipt of a positive Covid-19 test in Australia. In particular, his behaviour may encourage or influence others to emulate his prior conduct and fail to comply with appropriate health measures following a positive Covid-19 test, which itself could lead to the transmission of the disease and serious risk to their health and others. I consider that Mr Djokovic’s ongoing presence in Australia may lead to an increase in anti-vaccination sentiment generated in the Australian community, potentially leading to an increase in civil unrest of the kind previously experienced in Australia with rallies and protests which may themselves be a source of community transmission. Hello everyone and welcome. It’s a huge news day today. All eyes will, of course, be on Novak Djokovic. From 9.30am, Melbourne time, the federal court will hear his fight to overturn his visa cancellation. If he’s successful, he’ll be allowed to stay in Australia and defend his Australian Open title, pending any appeal. If he fails, Djokovic will be deported and barred from the country for three years. The hearing will directly engage with Djokovic’s views on vaccination. Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, argues the unvaccinated star’s presence in Australia could incite “civil unrest” and encourage others to avoid vaccination against Covid-19. Djokovic, in the government’s view, is “perceived by some as a talisman of a community of anti-vaccine sentiment” and cannot be allowed to stay in the country. Djokovic’s lawyers say there is no evidence whatsoever to bolster the minister’s claims, and that the characterisation that Djokovic held anti-vaccination views was unjustified, based on selectively edited historical comments in the media. It promises to be a dramatic day before the federal court’s full bench. We’ll bring you all the developments as they happen. Djokovic’s case is not the only issue making news this morning. We’ll continue to bring you the latest Australian Covid news and developments in Tonga, where the eruption of an underwater volcano has prompted tsunami fears this morning.Nick Blackburn began writing what would eventually become this, his first book, in 2017, in an office at Macclesfield hospital. That afternoon his father had died suddenly; while his mother signed some papers and was given back the plastic bag she’d used to bring her husband his pyjamas, he tapped out on his phone a thought about how, in death, “one dances”: an elusive notion that may have been stirred, he later realised, by an image from Ingmar Bergman’s 1957 film, The Seventh Seal, which is set in a Sweden ravaged by plague. The lines in question can be found, seemingly unedited, on page 28 of The Reactor; I know this because their author tells us of their Cheshire beginnings, and of what inspired them, on page 29. Blackburn, a therapist who specialises in LGBTQ+ issues, is always making the reader aware of the precise circumstances in which he wrote this or that part of his memoir; also, of the scepticism of his partner, James, over his habit of writing on the tube and other unlikely places, a practice that while producing plenty of shards, results in no coherent whole (“James says there’s nothing the miners’ strike and Chernobyl have in common”). Could it be that by pointing out the flimsy construction of his book himself, he hopes to encourage the reader not to think any more about it? To believe that its makeshift, provisional nature is the result of creative decision rather than, as it sometimes seemed to me, the result of creative failure? Blackburn’s central conceit is that grief and a variety of things related to nuclear meltdown might be comparable. Grief and radiation are, for instance, both invisible, while his father’s end had, he thinks, commonalities with the disaster at Chernobyl, an event with which he’s fascinated: the hospital, in age and size, was not unlike a Soviet power station; his father’s system, like that of a victim of radiation, was poisoned (a build-up of calcium in his brain). But this description gives no sense of Blackburn’s narrative as it appears on the page. The clue is in the title. The Reactor is, in essence, an extended chain reaction, one thought – however fleeting, however partial; mostly, there are barely more than a dozen lines to the page – leading to another, and on and on, until the moment when its author at last looks ahead to a future in which his father’s ashes, having too long been stowed in the garage, will be scattered. Alderley Edge and Fukushima, Alexander McQueen and Rachel Carson, Audrey Roberts (of Coronation Street) and Ivor the Engine. Everything’s connected, you see. On The Reactor’s jacket, someone praises this “bricolage” for its beauty and mystery. Bricolage is a lovely, distracting word; it makes me think of that genius Robert Rauschenberg. All the same, I can’t be tempted. I want to be kind, but I also think there’s no point in being less than truthful. The Reactor doesn’t read like “a book about grief and recovery”, but like notes towards a book about grief and recovery. In spite of Blackburn’s obvious wisdom and his occasional flashes of writerly brilliance (“a man’s knuckles on the morning tube, draped over his bag like one of Dalí’s melting clocks”), it is not, in my eyes, ready. It is an approximation of something; a series of workings-out for which we still await a solution. Like a commonplace book, it also relies too heavily on quotation; the thoughts of others. Why, I wonder, did no agent or editor see this? But I think I know the answer. Whether fortunately or unfortunately for Blackburn, The Reactor is paradigmatic of literary publishing’s current fad for barely-there books: brief, wilfully minimalistic volumes whose editors are clearly labouring under the illusion that they are (or, to be more accurate, might be) as brilliant and as dazzling as, say, Jenny Offill’s Dept of Speculation. It comes of nervousness, I think: a fear of pointing out that the emperor, though not exactly naked, has only managed so far to pull on his vest and pants. (What if this prose is, er, poetry? What if this slip of a book is the next Grief Is the Thing With Feathers?) But never mind! Here I am, my index finger cocked like a gun, to tell you that such gnomic morsels, however bewitching at moments, do not always a good and complete book make. • The Reactor by Nick Blackburn is published by Faber (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyScottish Tories standing up and reviling their English leader? The gundog snarling and refusing to go fetch the rabbit? Astonishment at this sudden outburst of rage against Boris Johnson is understandable. At Holyrood and Westminster, Scottish Conservatives have been notorious for dumbly following their party bosses. But now they want Boris out. Douglas Ross, the Scottish leader, demands it. So, her face clenched with fury, does Ruth Davidson, a predecessor. So do almost all the 31 Tory MSPs in Edinburgh and most of the six MPs at Westminster. And – something unheard of – a prime minister has been refused leave to speak at his own party’s Scottish conference. Rival politicians are sarcastic. “Why now? What kept you?” But that’s unfair. Under the obedient surface, Scottish Tories have been arguing and anxious resentment has been building for years. The latest tide of anti-Tory feeling – Johnson was rated at 80% disapproval even before the current scandal – threatens the party with near-obliteration at the next Scottish parliament elections in 2026. The party’s reputation has still not recovered from Scotland’s exposure to Margaret Thatcher, more than 30 years ago. Seen as the archetypal bossy Englishwoman, she is blamed, not always fairly, for the collapse of Scotland’s industrial and mining base that gave so many Scots work and meaning. This is why Jacob Rees-Mogg’s sneer at Ross last week – “lightweight” – hit the wrong spot with fatal accuracy. That tone again! That contemptuous arrogance! That particular… well, Englishness! For a crazy split second, thousands of Scots who would never dream of voting for a Tory became Douglas Ross. The Scottish Conservative and Unionist party has 31 seats in the Scottish parliament, making it the largest opposition group (the governing SNP has 64). This is thanks to Scotland’s proportional voting system that, ironically, the Tories fiercely opposed; if first past the post still operated, they would have only five seats. The party’s performance at Holyrood has been uninspiring, loud in denunciation of SNP governments but pretty barren of new ideas. And yet the Tories, like the other unionist opposition parties, are tormented over their links to London. Scottish Labour still shudders at the words of Johann Lamont, a previous leader, when she exploded a few years ago against being treated as a “branch office”. Money, senior appointments and policy are decided in London, not Glasgow. The Scottish Liberal Democrats have more autonomy but even less influence on their Westminster party. For the Scottish Tories, the union has traditionally been sacred. But a string of electoral defeats, as the whole landscape and language of Scottish politics diverged from the “British” model in the late 20th century, shook that confidence. More than 10 years ago, Murdo Fraser, one of the party’s few original minds, suggested that the party should break with central office in London, find a new name and operate as an independent force, while still loyal to the union. At the time, Fraser was squashed by Davidson, who took over the Scottish leadership, apparently comfortable with its “branch office” status. Now things look different. There have been upheavals before, as in the 1970s, when a minority fought in vain to soothe Thatcher’s hostility to any form of political devolution. But to see the party almost unanimous in demanding that a British prime minister be sacked – this is utterly new. Until 1965, this was the Scottish Unionist party. The “Conservative” label was only tacked on as the Scottish Tories, once dominant, entered steep decline. Now the Johnson crisis challenges them to choose: are they more unionist than Conservative? Or vice versa: could they conceive of themselves as an independent rightwing party in a sovereign or quasi-confederal Scottish state? The “Unionist” title referred to Ireland and the venerable rows over home rule, not to the 1707 Anglo-Scottish union. In the 20th century, Scotland’s Tories were perceived partly in sectarian terms: thousands of working-class Scots voted Tory to express their Protestant loyalty and keep down the Catholic, mostly Irish, minority. Supporters were content with a generally patrician leadership, a “colonelocracy” often educated at English public schools and deeply committed to crown, empire and the proud warrior legend of the “Scottish soldier”. Almost all of that is history now. “Unionism” means the United Kingdom, the defence of a new sort of unifying “British” identity that sounds ancient but is in fact quite recent and rather frail. It’s an ideology that is shared by all the “British” parties in Scotland to different degrees, but expressed most forcefully by the Tories. In the last few years, however, unionism has begun to be infiltrated by rightwing extremism, by groups less interested in constitutions than in conspiracy theories (‘“SNP fascism”), anti-vaxx protests and venomous misogyny directed at Nicola Sturgeon. The demography of Scottish conservatism has changed too. The patricians and great landowners have almost all departed from the leadership, while the religious element is draining out of politics. The party is represented today by more plebeian men and women, educated in Scottish schools. Its most solid support is now regional – mainly the range of rural constituencies along the English border and in the north-east – rather than class based. The late Teddy Taylor MP, populist and maverick, tried to persuade his party that Glasgow’s large Asian minority could be recruited as naturally bourgeois, but Labour and the SNP got there first. Yet the biggest change of all, the rise of political nationalism and cultural self-confidence, has unfairly landed the Tories with public perception as “the English party”, just as the party’s activists have left southern “poshness” behind them. Which way will the Scottish Conservatives turn now? The tantalising fact is that Scotland is in many ways a “conservative” – with a small c – society. The SNP’s faith that the Scots are naturally social-democratic is questioned by widespread values that are often repressive rather than liberal. “Who d’ye think you are – the queen of Sheba?” In an independent Scotland, or at least as an independent organisation cut loose from London, a centre-right conservative party could expect a very healthy future. • Neal Ascherson is a journalist and writerI am a sucker for lifestyle suggestions and pretty packaging. Show me a picture of someone wearing fingerless gloves, cupping a marshmallow-crowned hot chocolate and I’m there. So when I found some chocolates that not only had gorgeous packaging but were named after the sort of occasion where you might eat it, well. This was Josh’s Chocolate, which I found on a freezing day in a shop called Join in Clare, Suffolk, although the company is Cornish. There were beautifully packaged giant chocolate buttons, £4.60 (145g), but it was the bars that got me. Stunningly illustrated by Joanne Barry (shout out to the artists!), paper-jacketed and with names such as Weekends on the Water (milk chocolate with Cornish sea salt and caramel), A Ramble in the Woods (milk chocolate with blueberry and hazelnut), and A Stroll Along the Harbour (milk, cranberry, almond, cinnamon). But the one that spoke to me, as my nose reddened with the warmth of the shop vs the cold outside, was Friends by the Fire, 55% dark with little chunks of ginger, illustrated with a picture of friends, indeed, sitting by a wood burner, ignoring its carcinogenic effects. This isn’t single-origin craft chocolate, but it’s very nice at £3.95 a bar (100g), and various other permutations are available, plus hot chocolate spoons (a chunk of chocolate on the end of a lolly stick to dunk into warm milk). It’s like a card and a chocolate in one and a few bars of this would make a lovely present to cheer up someone’s January. Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaBBefore Free Britney there was Free Earl, the 2010 movement to “liberate” the then 16-year-old US rapper Earl Sweatshirt from a reform school in Samoa to which his law professor mother had sent him, alarmed at his drug use. Since Sweatshirt’s graphic start as part of fellow enfants terribles Odd Future, the MC born Thebe Kgositsile has grown into one of hip-hop’s least obvious talents, rejecting mainstream rap tropes while grappling with his own introversion – he made an LP called I Don’t Like Shit, I Don’t Go Outside – and episodes of loss. Some Rap Songs (2018) reeled at the death of his estranged father, South African poet laureate Keorapetse Kgositsile – a dense, muzzy work delivered at speed, at an angle. Sick! emerges with musicality enhanced, full of strings, soul samples, arpeggiating pianos and vinyl crackle – sometimes, as on the immersive Vision and Tabula Rasa, all at once. More extroverted than previously, Sick! feels like a reset, harking back – there’s a great track called 2010 – then addressing the pandemic (and, on the grimey Titanic, maybe drugs as well) from the point of view of an artist who has famously reconciled with his mother, become a father himself and become more engaged with the “gorgeous” world outside his door.In the market town of Amersham on the edge of the Chilterns in Buckinghamshire, Christmas seemed to arrive a bit late this year. Families complained that they did not get their usual flurry of cards dropping on their doormats until the first week of 2022. Some residents said they barely saw a postal worker last month but, in the new year, there was a sudden deluge of late cards and missing post. There were notifications about hospital appointments that had been missed, crucial legal documents that had been delayed for weeks, and even a death certificate that had been stuck in the post. “It has been chaos,” said Karen Martin, 75, an artist and former midwife. “Seven or eight of my Christmas cards arrived a few days ago. I was also sent a cheque in the post on 16 December and it still hasn’t arrived.” Kathleen Williamson, 43, a singer and music teacher, said: “There was barely any post before Christmas and then everything came at once on 5 January. I feel sorry for the postal workers because they are really trying.” Martin Tett, leader of Buckinghamshire council, has written to Keith Williams, the Royal Mail chairman, complaining that one resident received 24 Christmas cards on 5 January. The local sorting office has been inundated with householders hoping to find their missing mail. “We’ve had people complaining they’ve not had a delivery in a month,” said Tett. “There are queues around the Amersham sorting office and residents have been told there are stacks of unsorted post inside. The service has been atrocious.” It is not just some residential areas of Amersham that have fallen into a postal black hole over the past few months. On 22 July last year, during what postal watchdog Ofcom said was a “regulatory emergency period”, there were just 10 areas in England that were suffering significant disruption to mail. Last Tuesday, the number had risen to 77 areas in England, and there were another 18 areas affected in Wales and Scotland, according to Royal Mail. More than 120 postal districts have been hit across the country over the Christmas and new year period, including areas in London, Oxford, Chelmsford, Sheffield, Merseyside and Glasgow. Householders have complained of a deteriorating service over many months. The number of postal districts affected last week is the highest-ever recorded in the Royal Mail disruption updates. The bosses of Royal Mail now face scrutiny over their performance – and the justification for huge payouts to shareholders. The postal giant increased the price of a first-class stamp to 85p from March 2020, a rise of 21%. It made £726m profit before tax in the year to 28 March 2021 and in November announced a £400m payout via a special dividend and share buyback. At the same time, it has repeatedly failed to hit its delivery targets, blaming Covid-related isolation, vacancy rates and sickness. Under the Postal Services Act 2011, the Royal Mail has a legal “universal service obligation” to provide a six-day-a-week service for the delivery and collection of letters. Matthew Upton, director of policy at Citizens Advice, said: “We know [postal workers] are working hard to deliver our letters and parcels but we’re increasingly concerned about Royal Mail delays.” Executives will be keen to improve performance and there is a reorganisation in progress. The Observer has confirmed that Achim Dünnwald, chief operating officer at Royal Mail, has recently stepped down, but the company said this weekend it would not comment on the terms of his departure. Two senior “service delivery directors” have also left their roles. Paul Dornan, 48, a writer who lives in Crouch End, north London, said the usual post rounds in his neighbourhood had stopped for about a month over the Christmas period. He said: “Soldiers used to send letters back from the front in the first world war that arrived the next day and the Royal Mail can’t deliver a card from Yorkshire within a month. “The postal service has broken down in this area. Some people have resorted to going to the sorting office, but have been told: there is so much unsorted stuff we can’t give it to you. “The Royal Mail are shovelling cash into the pockets of their shareholders, but they are not delivering the post. It’s a massive dereliction of duty.” Helen Wallis, 67, from Herne Hill in south London, whose husband, Gary, died in November, said she had not received important documents involving the administration of his affairs because of postal delays in her neighbourhood. She said although postal workers were doing a “remarkable job” in difficult circumstances, there was just one postal delivery in her neighbourhood between Christmas Eve and last Monday. “I’m still getting condolence cards and I’m still getting Christmas cards,” she said last week. “A lot of them are not postmarked.” Helen Hayes, the Labour MP for Dulwich and West Norwood, has highlighted the continuing postal delays in her constituency after the closure of a main postal depot without consultation in East Dulwich in south-east London in 2018. She said: “There is no criticism of frontline postal workers, who have been really brave, but there is no slack in the system. There are important documents being delayed, death certificates going missing and people getting into a mess with their bills.” She said the Royal Mail should be required to publish performance data by individual postcode districts and introduce public consultations for proposed closures of mail depots. Terry Pullinger, deputy general secretary (postal) of the Communication Workers Union, said only a minority of offices had experienced backlogs, but more resources were required in those areas. He said: “There clearly have been problems and they need to be sorted out. It’s unacceptable where offices have been failing for a number of weeks and the resources haven’t been put in place.” A Royal Mail spokesperson said the number of affected areas had been reduced over the past week. He said it was providing targeted support for the affected areas and was continuing to make significant investment in the business to transform the operation. The spokesperson said: “Our postmen and women are continuing to work incredibly hard, as they have done throughout the pandemic, and we are thankful for all of their efforts and determination.” The spokesperson added that the company tried to keep the price of stamps as low as possible, but needed to ensure there were sufficient funds for investment.It is getting more expensive to stay in touch, with many mobile phone users facing higher bills in the coming months – especially if they plan to go on holiday. Virgin Mobile customers will see an annual price rise of 3.9% above January’s RPI inflation rate for calls – currently prices increase in line with the RPI index – while Tesco Mobile pay-monthly customers face price rises from 9 February for sending picture messages, calling internationally, and adding more data to their plans. Meanwhile this year Vodafone, EE and Three plan to bring in a £2-a-day roaming charge for those travelling to Europe – potentially leading to heavy bills for families after two weeks in the sun. So how can you save money while staying mobile? Break up the bundle Buying a bundled deal, where the phone and the contract come together, means you could miss out on better deals if the two are taken separately. With O2, you can buy a new iPhone 13 on a 24-month contract with 150GB of data and unlimited calls and texts, for just under £50 a month – £28 of which is for data and calls. But if you were to buy the phone separately, you could get a sim-only deal with O2 for £15 with 100GB of data. This also means you can choose the length of time you commit to a contract, usually from one month onwards. There are numerous sites where the best deals can be compared: MoneySavingExpert, Uswitch and GoCompare among them. Shelling out large amounts for a new mobile will not possible for everyone, however. Apple operates an iPhone upgrade programme through its stores when the cost of one of the phones can be spread over 20 months. A 0% credit card allows you to roll out the price – Barclaycard currently has one for up to 24 months, while the M&amp;S card runs up to 23 months. However, consumers will have to go through credit checks to get a 0% card and should ensure they pay off the money during the period – essentially treating the card as a loan. Consumers nearing the end of their phone and sim contract should always consider breaking up the two, or at least switching, says Lisa Barber of consumer organisation Which? “Otherwise you could end up paying for a phone that you’ve already paid off,” she says. Search for the best deal There is often good value to be found with so-called “mobile virtual network operators” (MVNOs) such as iD Mobile, Talkmobile, Tesco Mobile and Plusnet, among many others. These operators lease their networks from the four main providers, and can often provide attractive deals as they have lower overheads, says Hannah Isitt of GoCompare. “The mobile signal will be identical, but you won’t really get the same added benefits of a bigger network – things like O2 Priority, free Netflix subscriptions, family plans, 24/7 customer service, free wifi hotspot use,” says Kim Staples from MoneySuperMarket. Find better value data After years of hype, 5G is now standard on new mobiles, meaning users can access a lot more, a lot faster. It can be up to 10 times faster than 4G – a movie will download in seconds rather than minutes. But in terms of bills, users may find themselves using an awful lot more data as they take advantage of the faster speeds. Ernest Doku, a mobiles expert from Uswitch, warns to be very wary of how you use a new 5G device. “While you have the ability to stream videos without interruption, you’ll also find that it has the potential to guzzle your data.” There is good news, however, in that data deals are becoming more competitive. Those with higher limits start from about £12 a month. Talkmobile has 50GB for £5.97 a month for three months, and then £11.95 after. For 100GB, Talkmobile also costs £11.95 with a one-month contract. For unlimited data, Three and iD Mobile have 12-month contracts at £18 a month. Anyone who thinks they can use the extra data by connecting other devices – “tethering” – to their mobile should check the small print to see whether there are any limits on how much they can share. “Check that tethering, or using a wifi hotspot, is allowed as part of your data bundle, and that there are no restrictions. This is particularly important on unlimited data deals,” says Barber. New roaming rules Since Brexit, mobile operators have the option of reintroducing roaming charges for UK consumers who travel to Europe. Vodafone plans to introduce a £2 daily charge by the end of January. Three says there will be a £2 fee from May, and EE from March. But Virgin Media and O2 customers have been told they will not face any roaming charges. While there are some deals to avoid the full effect of the charge – EE has a 30-day roaming pass for £10, and Vodafone has eight and 15-day passes which reduce the daily price to £1 – costs could still easily mount up. A family of four, all with mobiles, face the possibility of a £112 bill for using their phones every day over two weeks on the continent. The easiest way to avoid the charge is to simply turn off roaming and use whatever wifi is available. Since it is now relatively easy to switch provider, anyone who wants to move to another operator which does not have roaming charges should see whether they will be penalised for leaving a contract early, says Isitt. Easy savings Changing phones will leave you with a potentially valuable old phone, which can be traded in to take the edge off the bill for a new one. An iPhone XR can fetch £175 if in top condition from the musicMagpie site, while a Samsung Galaxy S9 can net £81. There are any number of sites where you can sell phones – from those run by manufacturers to companies linked to the resellers – but the price quoted can quickly drop depending on the condition. A minor scratch on the screen of an iPhone XR can decrease the amount from £160 to £40 with Apple. Isitt says phones can also be recycled, often saving on buying another handset. “You might want to think about other options – for example, your old device might make a great first phone for your child, or it could become a second phone for a student to take with them when they go backpacking, or even as a spare to keep in the house for emergencies.” Students can often get discounts through sites such as UniDays, while members of the emergency services, NHS, social care sector and armed forces can get discounts by using the Blue Light Card, which costs just under a fiver for two years. Some of the operators have cashback offers via certain credit cards or cashback sites, and it is worth checking with your bank in case it has offers.A British man who was stripped of his citizenship by the Home Office for almost five years has described the “devastating” impact of the decision as the government pursues fresh powers to remove a person’s citizenship without warning. The 40-year-old, who was born in London, returns to the UK this week after being stranded in Bangladesh since 2017 when the Home Office served a deprivation of citizenship order on him shortly after he flew to the country for the birth of his second daughter. E3, as he is referred to in court documents, was working in the UK when he travelled to Bangladesh but not earning enough to sponsor his wife to join him and has since been stateless and destitute with his wife and three daughters. According to the Home Office’s deprivation order, the Briton was “an Islamist extremist who had previously sought to travel abroad to participate in terrorism-related activity” and that he posed a threat to national security. Although the UK government has reinstated his citizenship, his lawyers say they have received no explanation or any specific details to support the claims. E3 has never been charged with any criminal offence in the UK or elsewhere. E3 told the Observer: “The allegation against me is so vague that it even suggests that I only tried to travel to some unknown destination to take part in an unspecified activity related to terrorism. “How on earth do you defend yourself against an allegation like that, especially when the government relies on secret evidence? The disclosure my solicitors received was almost entirely redacted so I have no idea what the government is referring to. “Why was I not arrested and questioned? Why have I been punished in this way without ever being shown a single piece of evidence against me? The government should admit that they have made a mistake and own up to it.” It comes as politicians consider controversial plans contained in the contentious nationality and borders bill, which is going through the House of Lords, to allow the Home Office to remove someone’s citizenship without the need to inform them. The plans have prompted warnings that ethnic minorities could be treated differently from white Britons for committing the same crime. “Being left stateless and not knowing why I was suddenly stripped of my citizenship had an extremely adverse impact on my mental health. It was the most depressing period of my life,” said E3. “Being British is a fundamental part of my identity, but it really feels like you need more than just being born and raised in the UK to really be considered one. Having an ethnic background relegates you to being a second-class citizen,” he added. Fahad Ansari, his lawyer at Duncan Lewis, said: “My client lost five years of his life because of the unlawful decision of the home secretary that lacked any prior judicial oversight.” During E3’s period of statelessness in Bangladesh, his wife gave birth to another child in 2019, but because E3 was not considered British, the child was denied British citizenship. Despite her father’s citizenship being reinstated, the Home Office is refusing to accept that the daughter is a British citizen. The high court has granted E3 and his daughter permission for a judicial review of that decision and a hearing is expected in the spring, with E3 saying that one of the main reasons for returning to the UK was to help the legal fight as well as to see his frail mother. Ansari said: “We will continue fighting for his baby daughter to be recognised as a British citizen as is her legal right so that she can join him in the UK.” The case also has ramifications for many children stranded in the refugee camps in Syria, who were born after their parents were deprived of their citizenship on the same basis as E3. Anas Mustapha, communications manager of advocacy group Cage, which is assisting E3’s family, said: “E3’s case brings into sharp focus the devastating impact of citizenship deprivation and its often forgotten victims, the children of those deprived. “E3 has been successful in overturning the decision but many others must reckon with the state-imposed exile as it is impossible to meaningfully challenge it due to the use of secret evidence.” E3 married in Bangladesh in 2013 and his first daughter was born a year later. Working in the UK and sending money to his wife in Bangladesh, he travelled to be with her on 19 April 2017 for the birth of his second daughter. His two older daughters have British citizenship. On 3 June 2017, a deprivation of citizenship notice was sent to his mother’s London address – the day before E3 was due to return home. The Home Office followed it up with a call to his mother informing her that E3 would not be able to return to the UK. E3’s British citizenship was restored following a judgment that he had effectively been left stateless because he could not have Bangladeshi citizenship like his parents: he forfeited that right by not claiming it by the age of 21. Speaking to the Observer on the eve of his return to London, E3 said that he could not wait to see his mother but felt “very sad” at leaving his wife and daughters behind and facing an uncertain future. He said: “I have also missed taking long walks in the UK countryside, getting out to the beach in the summer, watching Match of the Day with my friends, and just the general sense of humour everyone has there. There is nothing quite like British sarcasm.” The Home Office has been contacted for comment.The Conservative press has been put in an awkward position in recent days. They all supported Johnson in the 2019 general election, but his conduct in office, and management of Downing Street during the pandemic, has since proved every bit as haphazard as his critics had suggested it might. Do they still support him now? Here, the Guardian looks at the Sunday newspaper editorials and comment pieces. They mostly reflect surprise, anger and despair – but none actually call for him to quit. Sunday Telegraph Where did it all go wrong? The PM should show the voters who gave him a landslide that he is still on their side by scrapping the projected increase in National Insurance as part of a total rethink on tax and spend … Time was when Mr Johnson identified himself as standing on the side of the consumer, as a liberal-minded and patriotic politician who thought that the Government should largely leave people alone. This has been jettisoned in favour of the nanny state and social-democracy, which is both an economic miscalculation and a political one. Are Extinction Rebellion, Greta Thunberg, anti-car activists, and supporters of big government and higher taxes now queuing up to defend the Prime Minister? Successive Tory governments have bent over backwards to give the Left everything it wants with no electoral payoff whatsoever. Key to political survival is loyalty: remember who put you where you are and why … Mail on Sunday Unusually, perhaps, the Mail on Sunday did not write an editorial on the prime minister’s woes, preferring to focus on its criticism of the BBC. Two opinion pieces made the case for keeping Johnson. Dr Liam Fox, Conservative MP and former defence secretary Those who hate Johnson because of his role in the referendum campaign, or because they are unwavering in their opposition to the Conservative Party, will never be placated. We should not be swayed by their voices … Given that the pandemic has become the defining issue of Johnson’s government, we will only know its real agenda in the coming months. We should defer judgment. This is a time for unity over division, hard work over personal ambition and putting the country before the party. It is not a time for a leadership challenge. Peter Hitchens Heaven knows I am no supporter or defender of Johnson. Even on his own terms, his behaviour has been dismal. I think he betrayed everything he supposedly stood for when he closed the country that evening nearly two years ago. He listened to the wrong experts and allowed the promotion of a terrible exaggerated fear, which has permanently ruined many lives and which he still has not managed to disperse. But I do wonder why he is now in such trouble, just after he had begun to show signs of regaining his reason. Sunday Times Johnson’s longevity is a more complicated question. On one level it is axiomatic that voters, exercising their will at the ballot box, get the politicians they deserve. When you consider that the alternative in 2019 was Jeremy Corbyn, it puts a different light on the old adage. Sir Keir Starmer, for all his improvements to Labour’s front bench, remains some way from looking like the winner of the next election. Hoping for Johnson to change is pointless: he won’t. We can only hope that this era of destructive decadence eventually gives way to something brighter. Perhaps, out of the bewildering mess that is Johnson’s premiership, a challenger will at some point emerge who can combine competence with trustworthiness and a little entrepreneurial vision. Is that too much to ask? Sun on Sunday Boris Johnson’s lack of grip over the Downing Street lockdown parties and their fallout has been staggering. The Prime Minister has admitted joining one bash as voters endured strict restrictions which prevented them seeing dying loved ones. At another do, a fridge was stocked with booze while the nation prepared to mark the death of Prince Philip. We report today that around 35 Tory MPs have submitted no confidence letters in the PM to the backbench 1922 Committee. That was before they returned to their constituencies this weekend to face the full ire of furious voters. Another 20 or so letters will trigger a disastrous leadership contest that could seal his fate … Now Boris is pinning his hopes on the Partygate inquiry by civil servant Sue Gray. Even if he is cleared of serious rulebreaking, Boris’s famed ability to wriggle out of scrapes will be tested to the limit. The PM urgently needs to re-establish the trust of the British people if he is to survive. Sunday Express We hope that Boris Johnson and those around him will now do the right thing for the health of our politics. The surest way to stop the seemingly almost daily toxic deluge of scandals about lockdown-era partying is to ensure that every single incident is fully reported to the senior civil servant Sue Gray as she pursues her forensic investigation. This debacle must not delay urgent work to revitalise the economy, rescue health and social care and make up for lost time in education. And there is also the big challenge of delivering on all the promises of the 2019 election and levelling-up Britain’s poorest communities. Millions of people will enjoy the return of full freedoms to daily life on January 26, but politics will not get back to normal until the full story of an elite’s illicit partying is disclosed.Broadcast journalist John Simpson has been a face and measured voice of the BBC for more than half a century. For most of his career he has been world affairs editor, reporting from Tiananmen Square in 1989, both Gulf wars and the US invasion of Afghanistan in 2001 among many other places. Some of his expertise and experiences also now find their way into his fiction: his latest novel is Our Friends in Beijing. Simpson, 77, lives in Oxford with his wife and teenage son. In Our Friends in Beijing, a journalist called Jon is tortured, which you only recently revealed owes much to your own experiences in Beirut covering the Israeli invasion of 1982. Why did you keep this secret for so long? Well, that torture thing, it wasn’t quite as bad in reality as it is in the book. But I didn’t behave as I would have liked to: I would have told them anything. So I didn’t feel very proud of that and kept quiet about it. One of your captors held a gun to your head and performed a mock execution – and you scandalised viewers of Good Morning Britain not long ago by disclosing that you called him a “wanker”. Did it take a long time to get over the episode? Well, like most men, I’m amazingly good at forgiving myself for things. So I forgave myself, but it did take some time. I behaved in the most grovelling manner you could imagine, and it was only telling the guy he was a wanker that made me feel I’d kind of come out on top. But that was only because he didn’t understand the word. If he’d understood he’d have shot me on the spot. As a result of injuries sustained while reporting, you’re deaf in one ear and walk with a permanent limp. Has it been worth it? These are fairly minor problems along the way. I am just hugely grateful to be alive and to still be, at my age, having a really, really useful, worthwhile and exciting job to do. So I’m bloody lucky and if I started whining about it, I’d deserve a kicking. That’s not to say I don’t whine about it. Of course I do. Because everybody does. In November, you gave an emotional report from Afghanistan on Radio 4, where you broke down talking about Fatima, a widow with seven children who was facing starvation. What was behind your response? I was very, very affected by having seen this family, with a kid just like my own kid, with two daughters just like my daughters used to be when they were teenagers. And the thought that one of those daughters was going to have to be sold off to some old bloke in marriage, just to keep the family alive. And that the boy would face the strong possibility of dying of hunger. Amol Rajan was asking me about this and suddenly my kids came up in front of my eyes, and, you know, I lost it. Is it true that you helped Fatima and her family financially? Well, I don’t really want to talk about that too much. But I defy anybody to see a family that is facing death from starvation and not put your hand in your pocket. You’d have to be quite an unfeeling monster to walk out without having helped them. So they’ll be OK, but there are millions and millions of other families in Afghanistan that won’t be. You’ll be back on our screens next month presenting a new, weekly current affairs show on BBC Two called Unspun World. What can you say about it? My plan is to have a no-nonsense, no-frills programme where we work out four or five topics a week and we’ll go to the BBC expert and get the absolutely unvarnished facts about it. What’s really, really happening, not that endless business of getting one person on one side, one person on the other, and they talk it out. I got the idea really from the Economist, those five articles at the start of the magazine: Is China going to invade Taiwan? Are we really going to have Donald Trump back as US president? Those big questions. And the great thing is that when you’re dealing with BBC people, you can get real answers out of them. Were you surprised to get another big presenting opportunity on the BBC? It’s really something for an organisation to take a bloke of 77 and say: “Look, here’s a train set.” I’ve got a 15-year-old son and I said to him: “God, this is fantastic. I feel like Lazarus.” And my son said: “Who does he play for?” I feel I’ve had a rebirth, certainly a resurrection. Covid must have kept you grounded for much longer than usual. Did you drive your family nuts? Oh listen, I’ve only got to come through the front door to drive my family nuts! We just had as good a time as we could possibly have. It was really nice to be a househusband again and I watched an awful lot of television. Such as? I’ve got to confess my standards have dropped. I used to be a rather intellectual type and now I just watch what the latest series is. So The Tourist, the superb BBC thing set in Australia. And there are moments where my wife manages to rope me in to watch an episode of Emily in Paris but it’s not quite my taste. Do you ever plan to retire? My dear father always used to say that he had one foot in the grave and the other on a banana skin. And that’s true after a certain age of all of us. But I’ll take it for as long as it’ll take me and then we’ll see. Then I can just sit down and read my books. Or binge the rest of Emily in Paris? You know, I still don’t think I’m going to watch all of Emily in Paris. • Our Friends in Beijing by John Simpson is published in paperback on 3 February (John Murray, £8.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyLast month, I spent a cold morning wandering around Hampstead Heath, one of London’s largest green spaces, with a sound designer named Nicholas Allan. For many, the Heath is an escape. There are almost 800 acres of it: meadows and woodland, hollows and springs, hills and ponds. It is big and important enough to have its own 12-person constabulary, which upholds the park’s 47 bylaws, including firm restrictions on drone flying and car driving. Locals I know walk dogs in and out of old forests and along curling gravelly pathways. On the few days in summer, when the sun shines on the city, the park becomes so busy it seems to vibrate, festival-like. But for the rest of the year it remains mostly hushed. In July, Allan awarded the Heath “Urban Quiet Park” status. He was acting on behalf of Quiet Parks International, or QPI, a non-profit based in Los Angeles that is “committed to saving quiet for the benefit of all life”. QPI’s purpose is to identify locations around the world that remain free from human-made noise for at least brief pockets of time. As humanity grows louder, these places are in danger of extinction, the organisation argues, even though they are integral to our wellbeing and to the health of the natural world. Some of the locations already identified, like stretches of the Zabalo River in Ecuador, where quiet might linger for several consecutive hours, are in the wilderness. Remarkably, others are in urban centres. The Heath, which QPI calls “a refuge from the noise of the city” that “has shown it provides the experience of being able to fully immerse oneself within the natural environment”, is one of them. Allan is QPI’s man in London (he lives in Bristol – close enough), though “I still can’t find my way around the park very well,” he told me. We’d entered the Heath through a southern gate and were ambling up a hill, in no particular direction. When we met, we’d been surrounded by city noise, though it had been difficult to pinpoint exactly where each sound was coming from. “I think of it as a diffuse hum,” Allan said. “A glowing blanket that just sits there, no discernible direction.” I would have described it, less poetically, as a shit heap of sound. But a few hundred metres into the park the noise had dimmed so much we could identify individual notes between moments of near-silence: a helicopter in the distance, a passing conversation between dog walkers, the cries of young schoolchildren in red uniforms playing together in a grassy clearing. It was easier to talk, and to think; we could still see the city, but we couldn’t hear it. “It’s only when you go somewhere really quiet that you realise what was there before,” Allan said. These days, real quiet is difficult to come by. We’re surrounded by noise almost constantly: the thrum of aeroplanes, the rush of roads, the dings of email and smartphones. Listen now, wherever you are – what do you hear? For me: the whirring of a washing machine, the tip-tapping of laptop keys, my son’s loud crashing and shouting, the brash clicks of a new computer mouse, the machine-sawing of wood in a neighbour’s garden, the brief rise-and-fall roars of cars hurtling past the front of our home. All of these sounds are common and intrusive and, if persistent, bad for our long-term health. Research has shown that if you live near a busy road you are more likely to develop high cortisol levels, to suffer from hypertension and heart disease, and to become overweight. In a 2012 study, it was estimated that up to 40 million adults in the US suffer from hearing impairment related to excessive noise exposure. The World Health Organization considers noise “one of the most important environmental risks to health.” A 2018 report warned that 1.6m years of life are lost in western Europe as a result of exposure to road noise, which can contribute to other threatening health conditions: a lack of focus, sleep disturbance, a creeping reduction in quality of life. This would be less worrying if the noises weren’t getting louder. Before the pandemic, the aviation industry was skyrocketing – 4.5 billion passengers boarded flights in 2019, up from 1.5 billion in 1999. Car production continues at pace. Shipping traffic is also increasing. In 2020, the Metropolitan police received 41,212 noise complaints, even though it doesn’t really deal with noise complaints. We are able to recognise loud sounds – the shocking burp of a motorbike, a young child’s yelp – as noticeably intrusive, but the effects of these moments in isolation don’t always add up to much. What is more worrying, and often now so normalised as to be imperceptible, is the implacable din that soundtracks our daily lives, which can lead us unknowingly into ill health. On the Heath, Allan and I continued walking, up over the crest of a hill, then along a path that began to curl to the right, where there was an area of woodland. Allan pointed around. “If you saw a beautiful landscape and it was peppered with litter, it would be diminished,” he said. “I feel the same way about the sonic landscape.” It’s now difficult to find a litter-free sonic zone anywhere in the UK, he continued. “You can study maps of elevation and roads and flyways to pinpoint potential spots, but often when you do locate a point that’s far enough away from a road, and that doesn’t have too much overhead air traffic, you’ll find there’s some other disturbance, like a tractor ploughing or something.” He sighed, which I took to mean, “How will we ever escape it?” What confuses Allan is why we rage at finding litter on a hillside, but do very little (and sometimes nothing at all) when that same hillside is surrounded by A-roads and railway lines, which blot the landscape in their own way. “To not be able to experience nature without human noise,” he said, “to me that feels like a real loss.” Which is why he agreed to work on the Heath. Allan spent four days in the park in total, monitoring decibel levels. To pass the QPI test, noise levels must remain below 40 decibels, similar to the hush of a library, for at least an hour. That level can be breached eight times, but only by noises up to 60 decibels – nothing louder than the whir of an electric toothbrush. This standard is an outline, Allan said – every now and then you have to go with your gut. (The rustling of leaves shouldn’t be considered a disturbance, Allan thinks, even if it exceeds decibel limits.) Sometimes during a recording a dog would bark, or an aeroplane would fly low overhead, or parakeets would squawk from trees, sending decibel levels soaring. But mostly he was able to record quiet for the necessary stretches of time, and the Heath was given its award. Though many of us drive, and fly, and listen to music, and turn the volume of our TVs up very high, and drill and saw and hammer, and live in busy cities, which are relentlessly loud, we do seem to broadly understand that too much noise is bad for us. To escape, some turn to wellness practices – meditation, sensory-deprivation tanks, silent retreats – which have turned quiet into a consumable product. A new acquaintance of mine, a London vicar, recently told me he goes on silent retreats three times a year, to “discover stillness”. I remember thinking, if a vicar is surrounded by so much noise he seeks sanctuary, shouldn’t we all? One of QPI’s missions involves bringing “quiet to all”, a nod to the fact that wellness practices can be expensive and exclusive, and that quiet should be available to everyone as an essential ingredient of being alive, like clean water and clean air. QPI was founded by Gordon Hempton, an acoustic ecologist, who lives in Seattle. We speak one day over Zoom, while Hempton walks a trail near to Olympic National Park, a vast wilderness in the Pacific Northwest. When I ask him about the commodification of silence, he says, plainly, “The more scarce it becomes, the more valuable it becomes.” A decade ago, Hempton was able to record hours of consecutive silence in Olympic National Park. Even then, he warned land owners the noise was coming. “The most common response we’d get was, ‘Why do we need to save something that will never be endangered?” he says. “They couldn’t imagine how they could ever have an issue with noise pollution.” Recently, Hempton realised he could now only record 15 minutes of quiet in the park before some human-made noise interjected. This is bad news for wildlife, which relies on quiet to communicate. But it is also bad news for us. Studies have shown that experiencing quiet can reduce stress and anxiety, bring down heart rate and blood pressure, improve mood, cognitive ability and concentration, and increase pro-social behaviours, such as generosity and trust. It is helpful to experience silence in long periods, though every little helps – a 2006 study found that even a minutes-long session can be beneficial. Five years ago, after the birth of our first child, my wife and I moved from central London to a quiet town on the edge of the Chiltern Hills. When we’d arrived in London, a decade earlier, we’d been surprised, naively, by the noise – the unending whir of it, its eternal presence – and we joked we wouldn’t be able to fall asleep. When we left, we worried the calm of our new environment would now keep us awake, its nothingness startling. I began to experience the quiet as a void. Was life passing me by? When, not long after we moved, my wife became seriously unwell, and an additional, enforced quiet descended on our home for months, I found it too much to bear. I remember worrying about the situation to my sister, who said, correctly, “People normally complain about the noise, not the lack of it.” Hempton is aware silence can be frightening to those who are out of practice at embracing it. To that end, the pandemic has been helpful, he says. “Quiet is no longer a word that has no experience. The whole world got to experience what we’d been missing. And initially, of course, it was alarming: ‘Why are things different?’ ‘What’s going to happen next?’ But now we’re beginning to emerge, we can reflect on how there were aspects of that quiet that made us healthier, made us more aware of who we are and what we believe in, what we want to do.” On the Heath, Allan told me that, at the beginning of the pandemic, “several friends commented on suddenly being able to hear birdsong near to their homes.” For a while, they speculated as to whether there were more birds that year. “I think it’s just accepted now that that acute hum had dropped, and you could suddenly hear into the distance.” “Like now?” I said. We were walking past a small knot of trees. Around us was birdsong and the sound of shaking leaves. “It’s actually quite noisy today,” Allan said. “There’s that strange noise. I’m not sure what it is. Can you hear that?” He waved his hands in the direction of the park boundary. In the distance there was a steady, specific low-level drone, similar to an aeroplane’s rumble but closer to earth. “What is that?” he said. “A drill?” We continued walking, first up a hill to a muddy brow, and then on into woodland. Once we were surrounded by trees, the drone was less present. “As we walk further into the park, it’s slowly nurturing our inner stillness,” Allan said. “Or hopefully it is.” In the woodland we came to a depression, a big green-brown bowl, and when we reached the bottom the drone was all but gone. I looked up and saw an aeroplane but couldn’t hear it, then mentioned that it seemed as though we could have been deep in the countryside now, rather than in the middle of a city. Allan nodded. This is what it had been like when he visited the park previously: quiet, save for the rustling of leaves, the soft-crunch of walkers’ footsteps, the odd flyover. Then a crow called so loudly it resembled a dog’s bark, startling us both. “That wouldn’t be considered a disturbance,” Allan said. “That’s part of the natural soundscape. People seem to be in agreement that that’s calming.” Moments later, a chainsaw began to rev, shocking more crows out of the trees. Allan seemed disheartened – there had been no chainsaws when he was making the QPI recordings. Up ahead, three park employees were cutting down large branches and laughing. We walked towards them, closer to the noise, and then in a different direction, away from the sound. Allan was frowning. “We’d never have complete silence,” he said, by way of explanation. “There would always be something.” Then he said, “It really does feel quite noisy.”Telling our son that he was soon going to have a little sister was one of those rare moments where we got the sort of heartwarming reaction we’d hoped. As parents, I mean, but certainly not as someone who hopes to write a palatably relatable column. He’s continued choosing names for her – Pizza has now overtaken both Alexander and Blueberry in his top tier – and insisting, quite sweetly, that he’ll be a doting big brother once she arrives, proving it by holding toys outstretched to his mum’s stomach. It is, in short, the cutesiness of one who has learned he will curry special favour by appearing adorable. Still, we do find it adorable, so the victory is his. I shudder to include such stories because even I find that level of wholesome cheeriness a bit much. Look, I want to relate the sweet things he does because he’s a lovely, nice boy of whom I am very fond, but if I veer too far into the saccharine stuff, I picture my cruel and cynical readership retching in their droves, blemishing this paper – or screen – with vomit in the process. It behoves me to mask such sweetness with the thin veneer of crotchety snark that let’s me have my cake and eat it, week after week. You know, ‘Oh, I love him but he gets yoghurt everywhere and has started killing small rodents,’ that kind of thing. It’s a tactic that’s served me well for a while now and I don’t much feel like retiring it, which was making his absurdly charming reaction to news of his baby sister not just narratively inconvenient, but professionally embarrassing. Luckily, he stepped up to the plate yesterday by offending me quite profoundly. His charming, if slightly invasive, habit of kissing his mum’s stomach and whispering hello to his baby sister led him to do the same to my pale belly, tugging at and cooing over the child inside. He has since graduated to shouting ‘Hellooooo!’ into my belly button. We’re not quite clear if he thinks I’m also pregnant, or if we simply swap incubation duties on an ad hoc basis. Either way, he cannot be dissuaded and now speaks often of my baby, and even places a gentle hand on my stomach any time it comes within admiring distance. I’ll try not to dwell too long on what led him to believe I, his doting father, could be with child, because this very magazine paid me money to lose a bit of weight a couple of years ago and I’m vaguely worried they’ll make me pay it all back if I confess that my build has rebounded to pregnancy-confusion levels. I will simply continue to correct him, and request he refer all such affection to his mother, in the hopes he isn’t upset to discover he has just the one sister arriving in a few months’ time. For now, I’m content to let him pat, hug and slap my wobbly paunch after every large meal. Slap, slap, slap he goes. It’s enough to make you sick. Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsEuphoria (Sky Atlantic/ Now TV) Rules of the Game (BBC One) | iPlayer Screw (Channel 4) | All 4 After Life (Netflix) As Euphoria, on Sky Atlantic and Now TV, created by Sam Levinson, returns for the eight-part “difficult second season”, there’s a sense of so now what, you crazy kids? The first series, adapted from an Israeli drama, was one of HBO’s biggest hits in 2019 – and the most tweeted-about show, after Game of Thrones – delivering hyperreal explicitness about teen life that rattled parents, even as it drew in young audiences. Now, the shock value of drug-addicted, porn-addled, party-zombie US teens has gone, if it ever existed (the real shock would be a drama about scholarly, virtuous young people who value a good night’s kip). The danger of lapsing into parody seemed to be acknowledged by 2021’s two slower-paced specials, which separately examined two main characters: addict and chief narrator Rue (Zendaya) and her estranged transgender lover, Jules (Hunter Schafer). The answer, for Euphoria, seems to be to go steamier, nastier, grittier, more provocative. The first episode opens with a backstory for drug dealers Fezco (Angus Cloud) and Ashtray (Javon Walton) – an energetic, albeit ludicrous granny-Goodfellas narrative featuring the shooting of a man as he’s being fellated. From there, it’s all Euphoria staples – illicit sex, betrayal, partying, violence – as Rue and Jules attempt to reconnect. Among the cast regulars, Nate (Jacob Elordi) returns as the sociopathic all-American jock (think Ted Bundy who will mow your lawn first), while Cassie, played by Sydney Sweeney (The White Lotus), is equal parts eroticism and neediness. Certain Euphoria parents, such as Nate’s dad, Cal (Eric Dane), persist as explainers for their screwed-up progeny. While some main players (including Jules) seem sidelined, there are new characters, such as Faye, played by real-life porn actor Chloe Cherry, who steals scenes as a drawling, no-fucks-given junkie. Having watched ahead, I’d say that Euphoria remains utterly absurd while still eminently watchable. At times it’s just too pretentious, graphic and wretched to take seriously. It’s also overreliant on the motif of good-looking young people ugly-crying: look, it seems to gasp – the nubile and beautiful suffer too! To which you can only gasp back: so what? Still, when Euphoria works, it works, and Zendaya – awarded an Emmy for the first series – continues to give as fine a portrayal of dead-inside drug addiction as I’ve seen. Here, sex and drugs are just the flashing neon signs to make you look. There’s usually more going on: an ache of sadness; a flaring of hope. The show is a reminder that youth can be the ultimate unsafe space; that it can be heaven and hell, and sometimes you can’t tell the difference. Initially, the four-part BBC One thriller Rules of the Game, written by Ruth Fowler, directed by Jennifer Sheridan, promises much. Maxine Peake, recently seen in ITV’s Anne, plays sportswear company boss Sam, who discovers a dead body (unidentified at first) at her HQ. Is it suicide or murder? Flashbacks reveal an uber-toxic workplace culture: exploited young women; older predatory men; a furious whistleblower (Callie Cooke from The Stranger); an imminent stock exchange flotation requiring a corporate rethink; an earlier suspicious death. When new HR director Maya (Rakhee Thakrar) attempts to instil post-#MeToo guidelines, she not only has to deal with the male owners – brothers played with sulphurous faux-geniality by Ben Batt and Kieran Bew – but also inspires eye-rolling from a scathing Sam. I wish things had continued in this fashion – subtle, relentless, acerbic. The culture war battle lines between hard-bitten, old-school Sam and nervy new-broom Maya are particularly well drawn: “Don’t try and shag her unless you want a lecture on feminism.” Elsewhere, Alison Steadman’s steely matriarch is terrifying, and a disturbing stalking subplot deserves its own series. However, Rules… falters as it goes on (all episodes are available to stream), floating off on soapy suds into myriad backstories, family dramas, infidelities, anxieties, secrets. It gets to the point where everything is so overexplained, the mystery stops being a mystery and just has to be played out. Over on Channel 4, Screw, written by Rob Williams (The Victim), directed by Jordan Hogg and Tom Vaughan, is a six-part dramedy set in a men’s wing at fictional prison Long Marsh. Following the emotional tour de force of Jimmy McGovern’s Time last year, Screw sets out to humanise not just prisoners, but prison officers too, with Williams drawing on past experiences teaching inmates. The nuanced Nina Sosanya (W1A) plays a chief officer threatened by secrets from her past; Jamie-Lee O’Donnell (Derry Girls) is a gobby newbie. Elsewhere, there’s Laura Checkley (King Gary), and male officers played by Faraz Ayub, Stephen Wight and Ron Donachie. Having watched the whole thing, Screw seesaws rather too jerkily between liberal idealism and acid cynicism. Some overwrought – and plain daft – plotlines drag focus from a sense of looming threat. Still, in terms of characterisation alone, there’s fuel for a second series. It’s also great to witness O’Donnell segueing effortlessly into drama. As in Derry Girls, you can’t take your eyes off her: she moves through scenes like a firework that could explode at any time. The third and final series of hit Netflix series After Life, created, directed by and starring Ricky Gervais as a grieving widower, arrives with many questions. How many videos did Tony make of his dying wife (Kerry Godliman)? Why did nurse Emma (Ashley Jensen), the quasi-love interest, put up with Tony’s wavering? Is Penelope Wilton’s character sleeping rough in that graveyard? After Life remains tonally bizarre: one moment suffocatingly mawkish, the next jarringly crass. The cast, featuring everyone from Jo Hartley to Paul Kaye, is stellar (Gervais has a superb radar for working-class talent). At least it’s finally explained why a free-newspaper hack is living in a huge posh house (the dead wife sorted it out, presumably in a rare moment when she wasn’t being videoed). Gervais is better than this – I loved it when he used to host the Golden Globes, genuinely alarming the A-list audience. Here, the finale, with superb use of Joni Mitchell’s Both Sides Now, shows imagination and spirit. Otherwise, I remain unconvinced by After Life’s exploration of grief. For me, there’s a blatant prodding of buttons; the sense of a cue card reading: “Audience, cry now!” It’s time for After Life to slip gently away. What else I’m watching Yellowjackets (Sky Atlantic) The penultimate episode of this pitch-black drama in which a female high school soccer team survive a plane crash any way they can, including cannibalism. Christina Ricci, Juliette Lewis, Tawny Cypress and Melanie Lynskey play the girls as adults. A re-spin of Lord of the Flies. The Green Planet (BBC One) The indefatigable David Attenborough takes a look at the pivotal role of plants in nature. There’s everything here from a Costa Rican rainforest to underground fungus to (calling all goths!) corpse flowers from Borneo, which smell like rotting flesh. The Bay (ITV) The return of the Morecambe Bay-based crime drama, featuring a brand new detective, DS Jenn Townsend, with Marsha Thomason taking over in the lead role from Morven Christie. In the opening episode, a body washes up on the beach.Though Ronnie Spector died on Wednesday, aged 78, all the signs are there that, culturally speaking, she is not going anywhere. Not if the past near 60 years are anything to go by. The tributes keep coming: Keith Richards, Brian Wilson, Darlene Love, Joan Jett, Elvis Costello. Patti Smith wrote: “Farewell, little fireball.” Ronnie Spector isn’t just part of rock’n’roll history, she’s the staples holding it all together. As lead singer of the Ronettes, she was barely out of her teens when she was influencing the influencers. The Beatles courted her. Jimi Hendrix played with her. The Rolling Stones opened for her. She and Richards, for a time lovers, became life-long friends. She was also linked with David Bowie, a long-time admirer. Friends included everyone from Dusty Springfield to Aretha Franklin. Wilson famously had to pull his car over to avoid crashing when he first heard the Ronettes’ 1963 classic, Be My Baby; he went on to listen to it obsessively, declaring it “the greatest record ever produced”. With a heritage that was part-African American, Irish and Cherokee – she grew up in Spanish Harlem, New York City – she ended up embraced across the musical genres, including the New York punks: Smith; Lou Reed; Joey Ramone was a super-fan. Madonna said: “I want to look like Ronnie Spector sounds.” Amy Winehouse revered and emulated her, from the teetering beehive to the missing-a-skin delivery. So much influence, so eclectically spread, pulsing through the decades. Spector kept working and collaborating throughout her life – Bruce Springsteen and the E-Street Band, Johnny Thunders, the Misfits – but you get the feeling that, even if she’d spent the years slumped on a beanbag watching daytime soaps, her influence wouldn’t – couldn’t – have stopped spreading. Is this the essence, the triumph, of Ronnie Spector: that she’s of the past but not trapped by it? Veronica “Ronnie” Bennett and the other Ronettes, her sister, Estelle, their cousin Nedra Talley, revolutionised the concept of demure, proto-virginal girl groups: eyes caked with mascara and winged with liner, in heels and tight skirts, they were the unapologetic bad girls, the dirty stop-outs, the glorious walk of shame of 1960s pop. Ronnie’s spirit couldn’t be homogenised or airbrushed away. Her vocals pushed and fought, wildly riding the music. Even embedded in the silvery landscapes of the Ronettes’ most celebrated songs (Be My Baby; Baby, I Love You; Walking in the Rain), she was raw, passionate, distinct – an alley cat sharpening her claws on every note. It’s this quality – provocation, rebellion, outlaw spirit – that can be sensed filtering through in a diverse slew of later groups and artists, from the Runaways, Chrissie Hynde, TLC, the Bangles, the Go-Gos, Destiny’s Child, B-52s, Neneh Cherry and Poly Styrene, to Pussycat Dolls, Hole, Beyoncé and Solange. Rihanna, Dua Lipa, Cardi B, and Megan Thee Stallion. Ariane Grande nicked her styling and delivery. Billie Eilish, in darker, wittier moments, is a direct Ronnie descendant. Though not everyone is, of course: Adele, for instance, has a direct, emotionally targeted style. Ronnie was different. Sometimes her voice said “yes” but her eyes said “maybe” and her attitude said “nah!”. She was gifted with tonal clarity, but she used it to mess with you. Then there was her spirit. Ronnie spent 15 years wresting back Ronettes money, saying: “It was about winning back me. I gave birth to those songs in the studio.” Thus, we come, inevitably, to her first husband and “Wall of Sound” producer, Phil Spector. An undeniable talent, he was also a major-league controlling abuser. As detailed in her 1990 memoir, Be My Baby, he beat Ronnie, threatened her, isolated her, frightened her by showing her a coffin she’d be inhabiting if she tried to leave. He surrounded the house with barbed wire, adopted children without telling her, bought her a car and then made her travel with a dummy that looked like him. This appalling abuse, and more, was rendered even darker when Spector was convicted of fatally shooting the actress Lana Clarkson (in the mouth) in 2003, for which he was eventually found guilty of second-degree murder and sent to prison, where he died on this day last year. You might ask: why did Ronnie keep his surname? Well, why not? She’d earned her right to use what was essentially her international stage name. Just as it’s a powerful statement to junk an abuser’s surname, arguably so is using it, showing you’re not scared of it. (See also Tina Turner: another who ditched the abuser and kept the name.) What mattered was that Ronnie overcame her own alcohol demons, and escaped, even though Phil Spector hid all her shoes. And that she found lasting happiness with Jonathan Greenfield, who became her manager and with whom she had more children. For all the horror Phil Spector put Ronnie through, for all that they encapsulated a sound together, he never managed to wholly define her, nor subdue or distort her legacy, either as Battered Rock Woman or Interchangeable Songbird. Unsurprisingly, Ronnie was all for feminism and the #MeToo movement. She also publicly supported Taylor Swift when she took on her old record label boss, Scooter Braun, for using her material. Was Ronnie born out of time? It’s a big question: if she managed to achieve all she did back then in the bad, old (uber-chauvinistic) days, what might she have accomplished now as a 20-year-old? Or maybe she belonged right where she was: dynamic, unstoppable, her appeal straddling the genres, paving the way for the Chrissies and the Pattis, the Beyoncés and the Amys, the Taylors and the Billies, and whatever spirited lionheart comes next. It’s the nature of true legend: lightning, not caught in a bottle, not confined, but flashing forward, inspiring new generations. That’s the thing about originals like Ronnie Spector: they never date, so they never die. • Barbara Ellen is an Observer columnistIt truly was what the film industry now calls a “meet cute” scenario. When writer Catherine Mayer first bumped into her future husband, the guitarist and songwriter Andy Gill, they were both guests at the sort of wild house party that usually crops up on the pages of bestselling fiction or the script of a romcom. “It was not a meeting I was going to forget,” Mayer says. “It was the 1990s and it was held at the very flash Islington home of an architect where one of the walls was the glass side of a swimming pool. I saw Andy at the buffet; this incredibly handsome man in a frock coat and white jodhpurs who was eating trifle with his hands from a bowl because there was no cutlery. I laughed then and we kept on laughing all the time we were together.” Gill, who died almost two years ago of suspected coronavirus at the age of 64, was a cult figure to many and a founding member of the post-punk band Gang of Four. Stranded now by the loss of the man she married in 1999, Mayer is still painfully adjusting to life alone. “Some days I feel like a beetle on its back, too full to get up. Grief commonly manifests as an emptiness, but I suffer from the opposite problem. Love for Andy, with nowhere to go, fills my chest, leaks from my eyes, bubbles in my throat,” Mayer writes in a raw new account of the cruel aftermath of the death and of the rupture at the centre of the band, which will be published next month. But that night in Islington it was all before them. Gill led Mayer up to the roof terrace of the party house in Corsica Street and sang “beautifully” to her. A week later they went out on a proper date and were with each other from that day on. After he died, Mayer found herself mired in a bitter legal row over the band’s legacy. Lawyers, go-betweens and incendiary documents are her corrosive inheritance. It does not make mourning any easier, that is for sure, she says. “Andy had often tried to inveigle me into taking an interest in the music industry, but I always resisted. I loved the music, but I certainly never loved the industry,” she says. Tawdry visits to cramped, mucky tour buses, filled with a grim fug and the inevitable creative tensions, did nothing to win her over to life of the road. And besides, Mayer, a successful journalist, activist and author, had her own hectic career to handle. Next month, on the second anniversary of Gill’s death, the paperback edition of Good Grief comes out. It is a book she wrote with her mother, Anne Mayer Bird, about the bereavements they have both recently suffered. But this time there is a significant new chapter that tackles the fractured relationship between her late husband and the founders of Gang of Four, and chiefly with his beloved old schoolfriend, singer Jon King. In the new pages, Mayer candidly explains her decision to ask King not to attend Gill’s memorial, although she is clear it was not a ban. King had left the band in 2011 and the two musicians had not spoken for around a decade. “I know some people will see this as a music feud,” says Mayer, “but I really see it as a sad love story. A tragedy. Andy always loved Jon and that makes what has happened between them, and to the story of their band, so distressing.” The dispute has been reignited by the band’s latest box set, which Mayer felt was revisionist and devalued the later work of Gang of Four, both in its other iterations and also in its briefly reunited form, back with bassist Dave Allen and drummer Hugo Burnham in 2005. It was with this lineup that the band initially won acclaim in 1978. With an urgent, disruptive and ultimately highly influential guitar sound, they were never likely to be regulars on Top of the Pops. Mayer is now a reluctant “keeper of the flame”, a part that widows of admired artists are often called upon to play. She was pleased, she says, to learn the band are to tour again in March in a lineup that will include “brilliant” bassist Sara Lee. It is some of the first band members’ recent decision to remove the North America rights to the band’s early music from Warner Bros – a move that had upset Gill and to which he was opposed – that has left the lasting damage. “I had wanted to help with their planned new box set. But when I finally saw it, the sleeve note begins by saying the band did its best work between 1977 and 1981. I knew Andy would have disagreed vehemently.” Mayer adds that she is often asked how she knows what Gill would have thought of it: “I reply, well, I, and the others who were around him at the end, heard nothing but that from him.” Gill was so inflamed by the back-catalogue switch that he persuaded Mayer not to inform King just how ill he was, and not to allow hospital visits. She tells the full story now in her new chapter, she says, largely for the sake of music history and because she feels a weight of responsibility. Aside from handling Gill’s funeral and financial affairs, Mayer also shouldered the task of finalising The Problem of Leisure: A Celebration of Andy Gill and Gang of Four, the double album of cover versions that Gill was devoted to organising in his last months and which came out last spring, with a cover design by his friend Damien Hirst. This all had to be done on top of Mayer’s writing, and her role as co-founder and president of the Women’s Equality party and co-organiser of its annual festival. “I thought I was going to punch anyone else who said to me ‘it’s good to keep busy’, but there was never any question I would finish the album. You do the only thing you can do for the person who has gone,” she says with emotion. Providing a clear account for posterity is not the only aim of her new chapter, though. Mayer also believes that many deaths are followed by “terrible and unexpected arguments” that can ambush the bereaved and which no longer have a hope of resolution. Festering issues are suddenly magnified, although they are often proxy arguments for the real emotions at work underneath. She sees Gill’s band as a real family, born of the long friendship between Gill and King that began at Sevenoaks school, where they were also friends with illustrious British film-makers Adam Curtis and Paul Greengrass. The wider family of the band has been supportive through Gill’s illness and death, Mayer reports happily. John Sterry and Thomas McNeice, respectively the band’s singer and bass player in the last decade, were always at hand. “They’re much younger, but they have been in on it all for a long time now and they still check up on me. Adam Curtis and his partner, Tessa, are also nearby.” A death, especially an early death, frequently prompts some jostling for position among the bereaved. Yet Mayer notes wryly that the status of the mourning wife is sacrosanct. “One thing about being the widow, nobody ever questions your right to grieve. But actually, I’ve been struck by how utterly devoted lots of young men also were to Andy. Soon after he had died, someone anonymous got hold of my number and rang me up in grief. It was intrusive, yes, and not great timing, but in fact I felt and continue to feel that the misery of people who did not know Andy is authentic.” • This article was amended on 16 January 2022 to clarify text referring to a legal dispute involving Mayer.Losing My Religion was one of the defining songs of my youth, thanks to REM. Rather more importantly (unless you care a lot about teenage angst) our collective loss of belief matters hugely for how society has evolved. When I was born, twice as many of us were Christians as had no religion. Today, more of us are atheists than Christians and it appears only slightly over half of British Christians believe in God. We see a similar picture across Europe, even if globally religion is in less of a retreat. We tend to think about religiousness as a personal decision but new research examining the role of schools illustrates that collective choices have a part to play. The authors use data from Germany, exploiting the fact the religious education mandated by the postwar West German constitution was removed across different states at different times from the 1970s. They find abolishment significantly reduced religiousness, both in private (less praying) and public (church attendance). The effect was biggest in Catholic areas. Before the social conservatives get all up in arms, note there was no impact on moral or ethical views, life satisfaction or political leaning. That may be because religious education was replaced with non-denominational ethical teaching, rather than more maths. But less religion did have wider effects, reducing the prevalence of people thinking that gender should determine who does what job or indeed that women cannot use technical devices as well as men. It’s not a coincidence that up went labour market participation and earnings and down went marriages and children. Religion has hugely shaped our societies for millennia, so maybe we shouldn’t be surprised its decline is doing the same today. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation. Read more at resolutionfoundation.orgA top US lawmaker who heads a congressional committee investigating the targeting of veterans by extremist groups has warned that the problem is a serious one and could get bigger unless it is effectively combated. In an interview with the Guardian Mark Takano, a Democratic congressman from California, said he was concerned about the recruiting strategy being deployed by violent rightwing extremist groups, especially in America’s increasingly fraught political climate in the wake of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. Takano is the chairman of the House veteran affairs committee, which has begun hearings into the rising threat to veterans. The first of three hearings occurred in October last year, but Takano has been concerned about the threat for years. “Targeting of veterans by violent extremist groups is a problem and it could become a bigger problem if we don’t understand what’s involved and the dimensions of it,” Takano said. Takano said the issue was bipartisan and the definition of extremism did not favor liberal or conservative. “We define extremism not by the content of the ideology of the group, but whether a group espouses, advocates, endorses or promotes violence as a way to achieve their ends,” said Takano. But he was clear the current threat of veteran recruitment comes more from the extremist right. “We are seeing that this violence is occurring to a far greater degree among rightwing groups, especially within the last six years,” said Takano. “As far as we can tell, rightwing extremist groups are the ones targeting veterans for recruitment. And there’s not really any evidence that we’re seeing that leftwing groups are targeting veterans,” said Takano. Data shows violent attacks from rightwing groups in the United States are significantly more prevalent than from leftwing or international or Islamist terrorist groups. An analysis by the Center for International Strategic Studies, a non-partisan thinktank, looked at 893 terrorist plots and attacks in the United States between January 1994 and May 2020. It found that “far-right terrorism has significantly outpaced terrorism from other types of perpetrators, including from far-left networks and individuals inspired by the Islamic State and al-Qaeda.” The report also found that “‘rightwing extremists perpetrated two-thirds of the attacks and plots in the United States in 2019 and over 90% between January 1 and May 8, 2020.” The 738 defendants charged in the 6 January attack on the Capitol include 81 with ties to the military, while five were active-duty service members. Air force veteran Ashli Babbitt was shot dead by police while attempting to break into the House chamber. Recently, three retired army generals wrote an op-ed in the Washington Post warning of the threat of a coup in the 2024 US election, saying it could succeed with the aid of rogue military elements. Takano’s committee conducted its first hearing in October. “We looked into how and why veterans were being recruited by violent, extreme groups: at the history and the track record of groups like the Proud Boys, Three Percent militia, Oath Keepers, Boogaloo Boys and others,” said Takano. Takano said extremist groups see an advantage in having veterans in their ranks. “In that sense they are a greater target for recruitment than non-veteran Americans,” said Takano. Takano described friction in addressing the problem among some Republican lawmakers on his committee. “At least two members … wouldn’t even engage the subject,” said Takano. “When it came for their turn, they didn’t ask the witnesses any questions, including the witness that was chosen by the Republican team. “The two members instead just used their five minutes to attack me for holding the hearing,” said Takano. Takano sees the issues that leave veterans vulnerable to extremism as being the same as for the general population. “The things that contribute to veterans being vulnerable are the same things that affect all Americans: social isolation, addictions, mental health issues and emotional trauma,” said Takano. “We need to recognise that there is a problem that we have politically motivated violent extremist groups that are targeting veterans. We need to look at ways that we can protect veterans,” he added.The elderly don’t tend to eat as much as younger people. That’s just something I’ve noticed – it’s not from a proper survey commissioned by Saga Holidays or a stairlift manufacturer so you can’t rely on it. But it seems to me that, in general, they eat sparingly and with care, their days of inhaling gallons of carbs and cream and booze now behind them. The older they are, the more this is the case, and so the plump pinkness of late middle age morphs into a watchful and wiry grey. Which leads me to ask: is a great big brand new pudding really what Her Majesty the Queen wants as she celebrates 70 years on the throne? She’ll be 96. Is that what she’ll be in the mood for while she marshals her resources for an intense period of engagements? A great big creamy platter. That’s the plan: a national contest to come up with a platinum jubilee pudding to counterbalance the invention of coronation chicken with which the reign began and that, for many, is still repeating. The mere thought of it is making me feel bloated and I’m greedy, overweight and half her age. The Fortnum &amp; Mason Platinum Pudding Competition is already drowning in submissions like a crumble in custard and it only launched a few days ago. I hope, for her sake, that the Queen isn’t looking at them. Food writer Alex Hollywood’s pitch, salted banoffee crunchie Eton pie, seems calculated to induce type 2 diabetes with its name alone. Other ideas contributed by famous cooks via the Daily Mail include jubilee crown meringue, jubilee jammy roll cake, jelly cherry jubilee – I’m just getting a bit of acid at the back of my throat – and pineapple and rum sticky toffee pudding, this last a contribution from the Hairy Bikers, of whom Prince Philip was reportedly a fan. So that adds a nice touch of appropriateness and poignancy to go with the lovely rum and sugar and dates and pineapple and rum and butter and treacle and sugar. Guardian readers have been joining in as well and are reassuringly on-brand, with ideas including banana loaf, tofu Reine Elizabeth (a vegan version of coronation chicken so not a pudding at all) and, from one septuagenarian reader, the suggestion “I think it’s better to get rid of the whole self-serving structure, including all these lords and ladies”. Who knows, Her Majesty may find this last notion the most palatable. The ushering in of a republic might be a blessed relief compared with a Mall-length trestle table covered in pimped-up trifles and flagons of butterscotch. But it’s not about what the Queen wants or likes. “Her Majesty’s pleasure” just means prison or horse racing. It is not her role to be seen to have anything nice. In fact, it’s key to the survival of the monarchy that she doesn’t. How else could a society that vociferously aspires to be egalitarian, where even sociopathic crooks and power-mongers talk of “levelling up”, stomach so much wealth, influence and celebrity being lavished on a random person? And a woman, no less! Perhaps the most disdained of all the sexes. The British monarch is treated, albeit cartoonishly, like a minor deity, an icon, an intercessor with the almighty. This is not a position the Queen earned, nor one that anyone could deserve. So, instead of deserving it, it is vital that she be seen not to enjoy it. Suffering is a far more powerful appeaser of envy than merit can ever be. And so it must be with the pudding. I don’t know what substance will win the competition. Let us hope it’s edible. But I doubt it’ll be delicious even to people with more voracious appetites for glucose than the average 96-year-old anointed sovereign. The reason for my concern is that this foodstuff has to tick so many boxes. It’s supposed to taste nice, yes, but it must also, according to the people running the competition, have “a memorable story”, be easy for lots of home bakers to recreate, look “fit for the Queen” and be original. In my view, the last four requirements militate powerfully against the first. Easy, spectacular, never-previously-made foods with cracking associated anecdotes are far less likely to taste good than a tried-and-tested chocolate mousse that isn’t topped with a sparkly rendering of “E II R” sculpted out of quick-drying mouldable marzipan. So whatever wins will be a fudge – metaphorically at least. And then it will be presented to the Queen. I’m eager for this scene, having enjoyed footage of her failing to cut an enormous cake with which she was presented at the centenary of the WI in the Albert Hall. Princess Anne had to help out. But this occasion should be even more special because, presumably, the Queen will be expected to eat some of whatever it is. I can picture it now. Millions are gathered on the wind- and rain-swept Mall. It’s the coldest June since records began and has led prime minister Rishi Sunak to backtrack on most of his government’s climate agenda. The BBC and ITN microphones pick up the thunderous downpour as it connects with the thousands of square metres of marquee with which much of central London has been covered. Then the Queen appears all dressed in bright yellow, wearing sparkly earrings that Penny Junor says mean she’s thinking of Prince Andrew. And here comes the winning pudding – the nation’s been talking about it for weeks. Jubilee glazed mint and fennel salted caramel flapjack cheesecake bake! It’s all in the shape of Balmoral and so detailed that footage of the cake is subsequently deemed a security risk and taken down from the news websites. This time the slicing isn’t left to chance. It’s taken care of by a charity worker who looks like a plump Theresa May and is wearing a huge blue hat that emits little spritzes of rainwater every time she turns her head. The Queen squints as she gets a faceful and then is handed a plate of pudding and a wooden spork. All eyes are on the royal mouth as a morsel goes in. An eternity of chewing, a laboured swallow, an attempted smile, a dry cough. “Delicious,” says the Queen.This is the ninth year in which the Observer’s writers and editors spent the busy weeks before Christmas with our heads down in dozens of forthcoming debut novels, written by authors who live in the UK and Ireland, in order to give you a heads-up on 2022’s 10 best. The result, we think, always merits attention. We told you how good Douglas Stuart was, long before he won the Booker for Shuggie Bain; ditto Caleb Azumah Nelson, winner of this year’s Costa first novel prize. We told you about Gail Honeyman before Eleanor Oliphant Is Completely Fine sold millions of copies around the world; we even told you about Sally Rooney before she became Sally Rooney. We’re as excited as ever about this year’s selection. The class of 2022 reminds us that the novel is a form without limits or rules. From a hard-hitting depiction of the aftermath of knife crime to the comic travails of a reluctant TV chef; from historical novels set during the Industrial Revolution and the English civil war to an Instagram stalker’s splenetic monologue; from stories set over a single day, a year or a century; from works of lapel-grabbing sexual candour to otherworldly tales of a supernatural tint, there’s a novel here to thrill everyone. Happy reading. Anthony Cummins * * * Sheena Patel I’m a Fan (Rough Trade Books, 5 May) I like novels where attraction isn’t just sex: it can be domination, obliteration “I didn’t want to completely break you. I hope it’s funny as well,” says Sheena Patel, of her first novel, I’m a Fan, a twisted romance blazing with angry verve. Its unnamed narrator, a vengeful young Londoner of Gujarati heritage, is seething about “the man I want to be with” – an older artist stringing her along with multiple other lovers, not least “the woman I’m obsessed with”, a white American whose online presence the narrator avidly hate-scrolls. Luring us into its ugliest depths with killer comic timing, the fractured narrative unfolds as a series of vitriolic salvos on sex, race and the internet. “The only stories we’re allowed to tell are like, oh, this poor bitch, this man is being horrible to her,” Patel explains. “I wanted my narrator to be bad. She became this monster. I couldn’t talk to anyone about it while I was writing because I had to stay in this space of what I’d say if I had no filter. I was like, what would you do if you were completely unbridled and didn’t sign up to the contract of being a good person? And it was such a hungry voice: I want, I want, I want.” Patel, 34, who lives in London, set up the poetry collective 4 Brown Girls Who Write in 2017 after she realised three of her friends were, like her, writing poetry without telling anyone. Nina Hervé, the publisher of Rough Trade Books, put out their pamphlet in 2020 after Patel had contacted her on Instagram asking her to watch them perform. Encouraged by Hervé to write her own book, Patel switched to prose but didn’t want a “novelistic” narrative, borrowing the story’s jump-cut structure from her work as an assistant director in film and television. Another important influence was the book Shame Space, by the American artist Martine Syms. “She says something like: ‘I’m sick of white people.’ I was like, I can’t believe you wrote that down. I wanted my book to pull apart whiteness but not in a way that was, you know, ‘how to be a good ally’. It was more like, I would like to fuck you up actually and not guide you through this.” Is the internet dehumanising us? It’s amazing and terrible. I’m interested in how it changes us. We’re so reptilian. You could just look me up and know everything about me but you’re sitting there pretending that you don’t know anything about me. We all do it, but we don’t talk about it. I’m fascinated by what that distortion does to your brain, when you know too much and have to pretend you don’t. What did you read growing up? My parents were typically Indian in that education was the thing that mattered most, but we never had books in the house. As a teenager I found Jun’ichirō Tanizaki’s novel The Key in a charity shop and I really liked how dark it was. It’s about a couple where the woman’s writing a diary and knows her husband’s reading it. It seems like she’s being vulnerable but she isn’t really. I like novels about the violence between men and women, or between women and women, where attraction isn’t just sex: it can be domination, obliteration. Why is that a theme in fiction now, do you think? We’re in a patriarchy. It’s not a now thing; Jean Rhys was writing all this stuff. The novel mirrors the violence in the world, but I wanted the narrator to be complicit. She thinks she’s of more value because she’s younger and can have children; these systems she’s screaming about have got her own behaviour trapped as well. I decided early on that I wanted absolutely no redemption. AC Ayanna Lloyd Banwo When We Were Birds (Hamish Hamilton, 10 February) I believe in ghosts like some people believe in God Ayanna Lloyd Banwo, 41, emerged from the University of East Anglia’s MA in creative writing with a manuscript for When We Were Birds, her masterly debut novel. It announces an important new voice in fiction, at once grounded and mythic in its scope and carried by an incantatory prose style that recalls Arundhati Roy’s hugely impactful debut, The God of Small Things (1997), which Lloyd Banwo cites as a major influence. Born and raised in Port of Spain, Trinidad, she also sees her work within a tradition of female Caribbean writers including Olive Senior, Jamaica Kincaid and Lorna Goodison, but says the biggest influence on her writing was the oral storytelling of women in her own household: “My grandmother told stories like it was breath.” Following the deaths of her mother, her father and her grandmother in Trinidad, Lloyd Banwo moved to the UK five years ago and lives in Battersea, south London. Her writing draws on grief, but Lloyd Banwo’s literary gift lies in her capacity to transfigure that emotion – to conjure a cosmic landscape where the living coexist among the dead. When We Were Birds is both a love story and a ghost story – the tale of a down-on-his-luck gravedigger and a woman descended from corbeau, the black birds that fly east at sunset, taking with them the souls of the dead. How long have you been writing? For a long time. As a child growing up. But it was only around 2013, 2014 that I started to think: is this a thing I could actually do? What was the turning point for you? Bocas lit fest, 100%. It’s a literary festival in Trinidad-Tobago that happens every year. It’s run by Nicholas Laughlin and Marina Salandy-Brown and a small but very dedicated team. Just seeing writers up close and hearing them talk about how they wrote and what their process was and how they got published… That was a really big deal. How was your experience of the MA at UEA? It was the best year I had had in a long time – the first time I was able to just write. Do you believe in ghosts? Yeah, I do. I think if I actually saw ghosts I’d be very frightened but I believe in ghosts like some people believe in God, purely on faith, not on evidence. We have to go somewhere and it just makes sense to me that some people are ready to leave – they’ve made their peace – but that [other] people don’t know how to. Are you working on your second novel? Yes. It’s set in the same world as When We Were Birds and I’m delving down more explicitly into the idea of inheritance and houses. Houses as capital, houses as domestic space, memory space, dream space. The novel looks at a house that has been passed down through five generations of women, and the protagonist has returned home to inherit this house. She’s going to sell it off because her life is not in Trinidad any more and then finds that she can’t for various mysterious, supernatural reasons. It tracks a relationship with a house that doesn’t want to be parted from her. Ashish Ghadiali Emilie Pine Ruth &amp; Pen (Hamish Hamilton, 5 May) Fiction is hard… at least with my own life I knew the plot On 7 December 2019, the academic and essayist Emilie Pine stepped out of her workplace and into the streets of Dublin where a climate crisis protest – one of many around the world – was in full swing. “I was on my lunch break, and there were marchers, speeches and so many young people who were really passionate about it all, and I thought: this, this is the day that it needs to be set on.” “It” is her debut novel, Ruth &amp; Pen, a tale of two women set over the course of a single day. Ruth is a therapist floored by her failure to have a child after IVF. Pen is a neurodivergent 16-year-old, negotiating a first date as well as the protest. Pine is a professor of modern drama at University College Dublin and the author of a celebrated collection of personal essays called Notes to Self. Her novel is urgent and uplifting; these women are unknown to each other but united in an insistence that they will be themselves, in grief and love, whatever the outcome. How did you arrive at the women? I started with Ruth. I always had her; I’d had her in my mind as a character for years and I had [the book taking place] over a much larger span of time, and then the more I thought about it, the more I thought so many decisions come down to one day and those moments that look like ordinary moments. And then I thought, I need another character and I want a teenager. I wanted that idea of different points in our lives. Where did Pen come from? I had the first line of Pen, which is two girls kissing on Instagram, in my head, and that was it, she just went from there. I suppose some of Pen’s characteristics are mine, from when I was a very bookish teenager. I wasn’t very good with people, and was very serious and very political. Pen is in many ways a typical 16-year-old. She is really curious and eager to join the world, and yet brings her own insecurities with her. What I think about neurodiversity is that it shines a spotlight on everybody’s neurodiversity, and some people just have some characteristics that put them within the autism bracket. What Pen shows are the problems with adhering to norms. The journey that Pen goes on in the novel feels to me like one where she inhabits the idea that – as her therapist says to her – neurodiversity is a strength. You wrote about your own experience of infertility in Notes to Self. Did you draw on that for Ruth? I worried a lot about this, and there were points writing Ruth’s story when I thought: I can’t do this, I can’t go back there, I can’t rehearse the emotions all over again, it’s too hard. And then I thought, the reason I chose [what happens to] Ruth was as a way of not writing my story. It may sound contradictory but it was a way for me to imagine a different trajectory through that experience of trying and not being able to have children, and also to kind of come out the other side. Which did you find easier to do – the novel or your essays? It’s so much harder to write fiction! Because at least with my own life I knew the plot. You write in longhand. Yes, in exercise books. One of the reasons for that is because the pages are quite small so I feel like I’m making progress. But also, I can’t read back; I don’t read back what I’m writing. If I write on screen I instantly start editing. What do you do when you’re not working? I go to the theatre all the time. Theatre is the highest art form. Ursula Kenny Daniel Wiles Mercia’s Take (Swift Press, 2 February) Finding the screenplay for Pulp Fiction was huge: I’d no idea you could do that in writing Hilary Mantel is among the early admirers of Daniel Wiles’s feverishly compulsive first novel, Mercia’s Take, which takes place during the Industrial Revolution and centres on Michael, an exhausted Black Country miner desperate to spare his young son from having to follow him into the pit. Narrated with spectacular economy, in a thudding, rhythmic staccato studded with local vernacular, the book deftly folds themes of pride, masculinity and ecological ruin into its central story: the visceral vengeance quest that ensues after a fellow miner makes off with Michael’s life-changing haul of gold. Wiles, who lives in his home town of Walsall, wrote it during a master’s degree at the University of East Anglia, funded by a Booker Prize Foundation scholarship, which pays all costs and is awarded to one writing student a year. “I wouldn’t have been able to do the course otherwise, so it was lucky,” he says. He applied after an undergraduate writing course at Wolverhampton, where he tried to write American crime screenplays under the lingering spell of the Quentin Tarantino movies he first watched with his older brothers. “It wasn’t until the last year of that degree that I thought: I’ve got this huge breadth of material right here. I started to become more proud of the area and its history, and the way people talk.” Having dug into the archives of his local library, Wiles honed his manuscript under lockdown while living in Norwich near the UEA campus. But a classmate told him it wasn’t long enough to be a novel, and agents agreed. One night he decided to email the book straight to Mark Richards, the publisher of Swift Press, without a pitch or synopsis; Richards rang the next morning with an offer. Wiles says his family didn’t believe him when he said he was publishing a novel. “They were like: ‘You can’t do that. How much do you have to pay to get the books printed?’ But by the time there was a preorder link, they really got onboard with it.” What led you to mining as a subject? I was drawn to the idea of the Earth as a living thing that’s being sort of killed. Mining gave so much to the country and the world in that period of time; now we’re seeing the lasting effects. Definitely the main thing that people will take away from this novel is that it’s a revenge story about a father trying to look after his son and make a better future for him. I don’t think many people will pick up on the book as a commentary on global warming but that was strongly in my mind when I was writing. What did you read growing up? I never really grew up interested in books. Finding the screenplay for Pulp Fiction was huge: I’d no idea you could do that in writing. Later I was blown away by The Friends of Eddie Coyle by George V Higgins. The whole novel was in this Boston dialect, moving the narrative in the most economic way; looking back, it definitely had an effect. What are you writing now? I’ve been working on another novel, set just after the Romans left Britain. If somebody said to me, write about anything in the modern day or in your own fantasy world, I’d be like, OK, where are my constraints? Finding out how I can say something about today with this alien past world is just something that attracts me. AC Bonnie Garmus Lessons in Chemistry (Doubleday, 5 April) I can’t be one of those writers who goes to a coffee shop, because I read everything out loud An American in London, Bonnie Garmus had an itinerant childhood as the daughter of an entomologist whose work took the family to places including Colombia, the Everglades and, for just one week before war broke out, Pakistan. Her humorous novel Lessons in Chemistry is set in California in the early 1960s and centres on one-of-a-kind heroine Elizabeth Zott – chemist, single mum, and reluctant star of a TV cooking show called Supper at Six – and her mission to challenge the status quo. An ex-copywriter, Garmus landed herself a top-tier agent even before she’d finished a draft; the book would take six years to complete, and has since been optioned by Apple TV+, with Brie Larson attached to star. Despite having announced she was going to be a novelist when she was just five, Garmus makes her debut aged 64, and is thrilled to be proof that it’s never too late. To aspiring authors of any age, her advice is simple: “Never, ever, ever give up. You cannot quit – that’s the death of it, right there.” How did the novel come about? Honestly, the whole book came from a bad mood. I’d been in an all-men meeting and felt a lot of garden-variety dismissiveness. Elizabeth Zott was a minor character in another book I’d shelved years earlier, and as soon as I got home, I heard her. I felt like she was sitting across from me, saying: “Me, I have a story to tell you, and it’s much worse than what you’re experiencing.” I wrote the first chapter instead of doing my work. How would you sum the book up in a sentence? I would say Elizabeth Zott is a rational person who exists in an irrational society – that’s why she doesn’t fit in, that’s what makes her so interesting, and that’s why we need her more than ever, because our society has become more and more irrational. What’s the secret to comic writing? It’s really hard but keep slimming it down. It’s all in the timing of the sentence and it has to be brief and quick to work. When and where do you write? Early in the morning. A lot of the time, I wake up because a character is saying something. We live in a fairly small flat and I usually sit at our dining room table – I can’t be one of those writers who goes to a coffee shop, because I read everything out loud. My husband sits three feet away and has to wear noise-cancelling headphones. I don’t write every day but I work every day, just thinking, thinking, thinking. If I write from an outline it’s like having a to-do list – the creativity goes away, the characters will not talk to me. What’s the worst thing about being a writer? The worst thing is when nothing comes. It’s so defeating and so discouraging. You just have to allow yourself to hear your characters – don’t decide what they’re going to say beforehand, let them tell you what happened to them. And the best? I love having my characters teach me things about me that I didn’t even know. Name a favourite debut novel. I have two: Harriet the Spy by Louise Fitzhugh, which I read as a kid, and The Secret History by Donna Tartt, which I still revisit because I love it so much. Hephzibah Anderson Moses McKenzie An Olive Grove in Ends (Wildfire, 28 April) A lot of my bredrin have come up to me and said: ‘Your book will be the first book I ever read’ Moses McKenzie, 23, never thought of writing a novel until he had to read Cormac McCarthy at university. He smiles to recall his “completely misplaced arrogance”. “I’ve generally got a lot of opinions, and if I’m not liking what I’m reading... I wasn’t feeling it. I was just thinking, I’m better than this; if my man can do it, I can do it! So I went home to write a book.” He shakes his head at the memory of the result. “It was horrible, convoluted, all over the place.” But he realised that he had enjoyed the process and soon wrote two further manuscripts before landing an agent and a two-book deal with An Olive Grove in Ends, drafted in three months in 2019, the year he graduated. Set among a richly drawn cast in a Jamaican-Somali community in Bristol, it follows the turbulent, often painful childhood and teens of Sayon, a drug dealer trying to keep his crimes secret from the pastor’s daughter he’s in love with. His engrossing first-person narrative, lyrical and slangy by turns, is the vehicle for a tough yet tender story of faith and friendship, as well as money, knife crime and the failings of the British education system. McKenzie calls it an ode to Easton, the Bristol neighbourhood he grew up in after his father emigrated from Jamaica. Lately the area has witnessed rapid gentrification. “I’ve never seen anything happen so brutally,” he says. “Growing up, it was just a bubble of blackness. This is where I first felt safe, this is where I first felt happy, this is where I made the majority of my connections in my life.” His second book, which he’s writing now, will also be set in Bristol, this time during the St Pauls riot of 1980. “But after that I won’t write about Bristol in a novel again. I don’t want to be ‘a Bristol writer’. I intend to write until I die.” How did the novel’s voice come about? Very naturally. Everyone’s talking how I talk or how the person next to me talks. If I’m writing for myself, people similar to me will understand. Whoever else can tap into it is an extra blessing. Was it uncomfortable to write about an antihero? Not at all. If someone like Sayon sees violence everywhere he looks, perpetrating it is normal. Rather than punishing someone, it makes more sense to rehabilitate them. For most of the story the police are absent: the book isn’t about the punishment other humans can give, it’s about whether God will punish us. In self-governed places, there are often no consequences. I’ve seen people do crazy things and get away with it. It won’t make the news, it won’t make any noise whatsoever. Did you worry about how to portray your area? Creators have a responsibility to be accurate, especially when you’re black, but you can’t tell every single story in one story. The Somali community is a community I have a lot of friends in and that I’ve grown up around, but I have to be careful writing about it because I’m on the outside. With the Jamaican community I can speak more freely. How have your friends responded to the book? It makes me happy that a lot of my bredrin have come up to me and said: “Your book will be the first book I ever read.” For a lot of them I think it will be. That goes back to the education system teaching black boys differently to how they teach others, not taking an interest, policing us, setting incredibly low expectations. What was the last novel you read? One Hundred Years of Solitude. I’m researching my third novel at the moment. I really like magical realism so I had to go to the source. AC Jo Browning Wroe A Terrible Kindness (Faber, 16 January) With writing, you have to know the smells, the sounds When she was a child, Jo Browning Wroe and her family went to live in a crematorium in Birmingham where her father had got a job as superintendent. Growing up, she was aware that her home was unusual, but there were advantages; the grounds were beautiful, and after 6pm she and her sister had them to themselves. She also developed an early understanding of what happens when someone dies. She knew not to be seen playing when hearses were on the move, to avoid treading on the ashes from the cremators, and she appreciated the seriousness with which the undertakers took their roles, the quiet commitment. It was this dignity of labour that she wanted to honour in her highly accomplished and affecting debut, A Terrible Kindness. The novel is set in the world of embalming, and draws on the experience of embalmers sent to Aberfan in the aftermath of the 1966 landslide, when coal slurry buried a school, claiming 144 victims, most of whom were children. Wroe lives in Cambridge and worked in publishing before taking an MA in creative writing at UEA in 2000. Since then she has been teaching, editing and “learning my craft… It’s just taken this long, it really has, and I’ve loved the process.” Did writing about Aberfan feel a somewhat daunting responsibility? I was very aware that it was a responsibility with every sentence I wrote, but the book is about somebody who goes to help there and then leaves, it’s not trying to inhabit the experience of somebody from Aberfan. It all started when I came across an article about the embalmers’ contribution there. I was incredibly moved, and my background just made me absolutely lean into this story and think: Oh my goodness. Did you learn a lot about embalming? I did. I got to know a local embalmer, a delightful chap who loved talking about it, about all the funny things, the difficult things, and I said to him: “Can I actually come and watch?” I knew I had to because of that thing about writing; you have to know the smells, the sounds. I’m a bit of a fainter so they put a great big leather armchair in the room so that I could just go over and fall into it if needs be. It was fine. I didn’t faint, I found it very moving; the tenderness and kindness. WG Sebald was your tutor at UEA. What did you learn from him? It was the term that he died, so it was all quite dramatic and sad. He was very dry and droll, very likable but sort of Eeyore-ish, and he said on the very first session: you should think carefully about doing this writing business because you’re miserable if you’re writing, and you’re even more miserable if you’re not. You don’t sound very miserable. No, I’m not! I’m definitely a different personality type, but the most helpful thing he taught us was when he asked us all to bring in our favourite passage from literature, so we all brought in what we thought were these gleaming, shining lines, and I brought in Michael Cunningham’s The Hours. And basically he encouraged everyone else to rip into it. And for every piece there was somebody in the room who would say “I can’t stand it, it’s overdone”, it’s too this, it’s too that. And his simple point was that you’re never going to get a piece that everybody likes. A lot of people seem to like your book… The past few days have been exciting. Simon Mayo said: “I’m going to call this early – book of the year 2022”, which was nice. It’s also going to be adapted for TV but I’m not allowed to talk about that. UK Louise Kennedy Trespasses (Bloomsbury, 14 April) I thought, maybe I don’t have 25 years to arse around and write a novel Set in Northern Ireland in 1975, Trespasses, by Louise Kennedy, is the story of Cushla, a young Catholic primary school teacher who gets in over her head trying to help Davy, a working-class pupil whose father is a victim of sectarian violence. She’s also caring for her mother, helping run the family pub and, most urgently, falling for a married barrister twice her age. It’s a layered, involving story, told with artfully quiet symbolism and remarkable narrative control as it stages a creeping clash between Cushla’s roles as a daughter, lover and teacher at a time of political tumult. “I think we all have all sorts of lives that we’re living at the same time,” says Kennedy, 54. She was diagnosed with melanoma shortly after starting the book in March 2019. “I had fairly horrible surgery and was off work for about three months. I thought, maybe I don’t have 25 years to arse around and write a novel.” It took nine drafts. “I had to push myself every single day even though I just wanted to bowk all over the laptop.” Her agent sought Kennedy out in 2018 after reading a story published in a Belfast literary magazine. In Silhouette went on to be shortlisted for the Sunday Times short story award and became part of her 2021 collection, The End of the World Is a Cul de Sac, sold to Bloomsbury together with Trespasses after a nine-way auction. Kennedy lives in Sligo and has two children. Previously she had worked for nearly 30 years as a chef, only starting to write in 2014 after a friend persuaded her to tag along to a workshop. “The first meeting was mortifying,” says Kennedy. “The others had been writing since school. I said: ‘Oh, I’m only here because she made me come.’ I agreed to try and write something. I hadn’t a clue what I was doing, but by the end of the first paragraph I just thought: I don’t want to get out of this seat.” Where did Trespasses come from? My family had a bar in the north in a place similar to the one in the novel. I wasn’t taught by anybody like Cushla but I could’ve been one of Davy’s classmates. The novel maybe isn’t a view of the north people see often. These [Cushla’s family] are middle-class Catholics: they’re not being pulled out of their beds by soldiers every night. They’re trying to find a way to keep their heads down in an area where they’re in the minority, but at the same time they’re aspirational. There absolutely are snobberies within those Catholic communities; it’s not “we’re all downtrodden together”. Had you always wanted to write? No! I was roaring in a kitchen every Saturday night, prodding steaks and this sort of carry-on. Before I had kids I was probably out every night after work. That’s what chefs do. Then I’d get up and lie in bed and read for a few hours. I worked in a big bookshop in Dublin part-time for a couple of years in the early 90s and that was probably good for my reading. I read all of Ellen Gilchrist, I liked her. I liked Isabel Allende’s stories. I read Raymond Carver as well. What was the value of working in a writers’ group? As the weeks passed, nobody missed a deadline, nobody added in anything that was shit; you didn’t want to be the one to do it. That said, pretty quickly all of us were writing about the same things and nobody realised. There were several stories about drowning, and we were thinking, OK… There was this weird stuff going on around trees as well, so that had to stop. You need to pull back and work on your own, but for the first while it was amazing. AC Lauren John Joseph At Certain Points We Touch (Bloomsbury, 3 March) It was like being possessed and it was incredibly cathartic. I cried the entire time Ahead of the publication of At Certain Points We Touch, Lauren John Joseph, 39, has been hailed by one critic as “a shocking new talent” and their book as “a stone-cold masterpiece”. A lot to live up to, but Joseph seems ready to take it in their stride having had two years to anticipate this moment since the manuscript was picked up by Bloomsbury. Born in Liverpool and hailing from “a background of striking dock workers and long-term unemployed”, Joseph was the eldest of eight children and became the first in their family to go to university (reading American Studies at King’s College London and Berkeley). At Certain Points We Touch moves between backdrops of contemporary queer London, San Francisco and New York and draws on the tragic autobiographical material of a friend and lover’s premature death to deliver a moving portrait of youth, friendship and first love. Who are your literary influences? One of the big influences on this book is Edmund White’s Nocturnes for the King of Naples, which is written with the same narrative framing. Also, Olivia Laing’s Crudo, which was liberating, and Toni Morrison’s Song of Solomon. I love how that book moves between violence and tenderness and how she modulates between a real world and a magical world so effortlessly. Your novel comes out of incredibly personal material. Was that hard? I felt compelled to write it. I didn’t want to write it. I thought: leave this in the past, this is too dark, too heavy. It will destroy you. [But] I couldn’t not. It was like being possessed and it was incredibly cathartic. I cried the entire time. I was crying as I wrote it, as I edited it, but I’ve come out the other side now with a better understanding and it’s been a healing process. What have you learned about healing? That you have to circulate your feelings. How did you first get into writing? I remember being on the estate when I was maybe six, seven, eight and I had a neighbour called Winnie, who would buy me exercise books to write stories in. Also, my mother just read all the time – she never watched television [and so] I didn’t watch television myself until I went to college. I read whatever she was reading. Shakespeare and Tolkien and Terry Pratchett. Tell me more about your process. Are you disciplined or haphazard? Very disciplined. I have to be completely isolated to write. For At Certain Points We Touch, I went away to any place that would have me. I spent time in Norway, Costa Rica, Mexico. I would go for a month at a time, write and do nothing else – just leave the house once a day to find something to eat, find a Coke and then get back to it. Three months of travelling and solitude. So novel-writing for you is not part of everyday life? I’m constantly writing, but the actual construction of the sentences, I’m not doing that every day. I’m kind of fascinated by someone like Donna Tartt, who says she can just do it on the bus. I can’t do that. With the actual construction of the sentences, I almost don’t feel like I’m writing at all – I feel like I’m a body and my hands are moving over the keyboard. It’s really a trip. AG Rosie Andrews The Leviathan (Bloomsbury, 17 February) Political sovereignty was a question in the 17th century… and it still hasn’t been resolved Rosie Andrews, 38, is a secondary school English teacher, based in Hertfordshire, who started writing in earnest in 2018 and was immediately shortlisted in the HG Wells short story competition. She then signed up to a 12-month fiction writing course with Cambridge Writers, out of which came the idea for The Leviathan, written over nine or 10 months and then picked up by Bloomsbury’s Raven Books, which will publish the novel next month. “I don’t mean to make it sound easy,” Andrews says, describing a process that has been as methodical and attentive to historical detail as it has been carried on favourable winds. The end result is a supernatural mystery spanning the age of enlightenment and combining big ideas with an insistent narrative drive. You’ve split the story between 1643, the year of a significant turning point in the English civil war, and 1703. Why? I find the civil war interesting in terms of the landscape of belief that started to transform [society], particularly in Britain. People fundamentally believing in religious principles and believing in the idea of the supernatural started to think in a more rational way. But that transition was so chaotic and so turbulent. One of the events that happens in the 1703 narrative is a great storm, which was a real event that people thought happened as a punishment – to punish them for moving away from God. I thought that was interesting and that it framed the story quite nicely. Is there a contemporary resonance for you, or do we just immerse ourselves in the past? I love the past for its own sake, but we’re also living through some of the most chaotic political and social times we might remember, and you can’t help but think about those resonances. One of the things they were thinking about in the 17th century was this question of political sovereignty – who gets to rule whom, and on what basis, and how far do people get to decide their own destiny versus putting it into the hands of a monarchical or democratic structure. If you look at events like Brexit, the coming to power of Trump, the pandemic and the question of individual rights versus our responsibilities to wider society, it’s clear that these questions from the 17th century haven’t been resolved. Where did the impulse to start writing come from?I was a full-time teacher for a while. Then I had my daughter and when I went back to work I went back full-time. Having my daughter led me to question what I really enjoyed, where I really wanted to spend the limited amount of free time that you have when you have a child, and I’d started to get more interested, because I was teaching it, in how a story works, what makes it work, and I started to think, well could I try that… That’s where that came from. An idea of limited time. Which writers have most influenced you? My absolute favourites are Tolkien and Orwell. Tolkien was an early love. It’s the escapism that really attracted me [as a teenager]. With Orwell, on the other hand, it’s his lucidity. What he wanted to convey is exactly what comes across in his writing – there’s no ambiguity. Charlotte Brontë’s Jane Eyre was an important book for me as well. That was my first experience in fiction of what I’d call psychological realism – the feeling of being inside the character’s head. Not all writers can do it. And I love CS Lewis. I love the magic. AGSouthampton are holding talks with Chelsea over the possible transfer of Armando Broja, who has impressed since moving to St Mary’s on loan. The 20-year-old has scored five league goals since joining Ralph Hasenhüttl’s side at the start of the season and Southampton would like to sign the forward on a permanent basis. It remains to be seen if the Albania international is part of Chelsea’s long-term plans. The situation is expected to become clearer this week, with Southampton aware that other clubs will be interested if the forward becomes available. Broja, who spent last season on loan at Vitesse in the Netherlands, is a boyhood Chelsea fan and came through the Stamford Bridge club’s highly respected academy. He was handed his senior debut by Frank Lampard in March 2020 and his contract does not expire until 2026. Thomas Tuchel, who had a close look at Broja during pre-season last summer, may want to see if the Albanian is capable of making an impact for the European champions next season. There is a sense that Broja will be given an opportunity to break into Chelsea’s first team if he is still at the club next season. Chelsea’s forwards have struggled for consistency this season and Tuchel was critical of Romelu Lukaku after his side’s 1-0 defeat at Manchester City on Saturday. Lukaku, who became Chelsea’s record signing when he joined for £97.5m last summer, has only scored five league goals since his move. Chelsea fans will want Broja to be given a chance. They have seen academy graduates such as Mason Mount, Reece James, Trevoh Chalobah and Callum Hudson-Odoi establish themselves in the first team, but they were frustrated to see other youngsters leave last summer. Tino Livramento, the exciting 19-year-old right-back, joined Southampton, Marc Guéhi joined Crystal Palace, Leeds signed Lewis Bate and Tammy Abraham was sold to Roma.I admit that I’m not well up in the affairs of giant corporations, but I do think that my nose for bullshit is fairly well attuned. And so it twitched when I read that Unilever’s chief executive, Alan Jope, said that “in the future, every Unilever brand [including Hellmann’s mayonnaise] will be a brand with purpose”, adding that he would sell those that “are not able to stand for something more important than just making your hair shiny, your skin soft, your clothes whiter or your food tastier”. Even as I was digesting this corporate swill, I was delighted to read the following crusty riposte from Terry Smith, who is the manager of the £29bn Fundsmith Equity fund, and therefore something of a big cheese in the City: “The Hellmann’s brand has existed since 1913 so we would guess that by now consumers have figured out its purpose (spoiler alert – salads and sandwiches).” I raise my cap to Smith and his own well-honed bullshit detector. Reading about the continuing cladding saga last week, I was intrigued by a report that repeatedly used the word “remediation” in solving this vexing and expensive problem. A new one on me and I would have thought that the word “remedy” was perfectly acceptable. What is not acceptable under any circumstances is the following from my community website for neighbourhood nosy parkers and curtain twitchers: “Good morning. We’ve been told that a lady with children saw a deceased black cat on the side of the road in Liss on Andlers Ash by the temporary traffic lights.” I think the word you’re struggling for is “dead”. And finally, a case of nominative determinism if ever I saw one. The name of the first man to catch a new strain of bird flu in this country? Alan Gosling. • Jonathan Bouquet is an Observer columnistA parliamentary inquiry will conclude that John Bercow, the former Speaker, bullied three House of Commons members of staff, he has revealed, denouncing it as as “kangaroo court”. The parliamentary commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone, has found Bercow guilty on 21 counts out of 35 brought by Robert Lisvane, the former clerk of the Commons, and private secretaries Kate Emms and Angus Sinclair, he told the Sunday Times. The former Speaker, who stood down in 2019, said he is appealing against Stone’s ruling, with a final decision expected by the end of the month. Bercow said that after 18 months of being bound by confidentiality, he had decided to speak out because, despite participants being told they should not discuss the process, his accusers had not observed confidentiality and had criticised him publicly. If the verdict is upheld, he could be banned from parliament for life or face a censure motion. Bercow told the Sunday Times that the allegations against him were based largely on hearsay and that in many cases evidence was taken from people who were not present when the incidents under scrutiny took place. He also claimed that in seven cases, the investigators pronounced him innocent only for Stone to reverse the decision and find him guilty. The former Speaker said the burden of proof had effectively been reversed so he had to prove his innocence rather than his accusers having to prove his guilt. “I’m appealing on the basis that the investigations are materially flawed and that the decisions are unsound,” he said. “I resent massively my reputation being put through the wringer on the basis of a protracted, amateurish and unjust process.” Among the accusations, all of which he denies, that Bercow said had been made against him were: Throwing a mobile phone on two occasions nearly 12 years ago. Staring hatefully at an employee 11 years ago. ‘Ghosting’ a staffer on a plane. Swearing at an employee on an uncertain date in 2009. Making a racially and sexually discriminatory remark. Bercow admitted that he was a divisive – “Marmite” – figure and that he could be ratty and wind people up but insisted he had “hugely collegiate” relations with his team. Criticising the way the inquiry was conducted, he said: “To call it a kangaroo court is unfair to kangaroos.” Bercow said claims brought against him by David Leakey, a former parliamentary Black Rod, were rejected by the inquiry. Lord Lisvane criticised Bercow for making assertions “which are not true” and said the former Speaker had “casually broken” the confidentiality undertakings that bound everyone involved in the inquiry. He told the Sunday Times: “When I am released from the duty of confidentiality and all the documents in the inquiry are published, the record will be clear.” Bercow suggested there was animosity towards him because of his attempts to reform parliamentary procedure and modernise the operations of the Commons. Bercow was the first Speaker in more than two centuries to step down and not be nominated for the Lords by the government. Boris Johnson’s government resisted elevating Bercow, reportedly in part because of bullying claims but also because of his role in helping MPs to better scrutinise and amend the Brexit process. The former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn nominated Bercow for a peerage but it was refused. Last year, Bercow announced he was switching his political allegiance to Labour, describing the Conservative party under Johnson as ““reactionary, populist, nationalistic and sometimes even xenophobic”.Nokx Majozi Chief pie-maker, Holborn Dining Room, London Nokx Majozi remembers well the very first pie she cooked at the Holborn Dining Room. “It was a grouse, chicken mousse and girolles pithivier,” she says, looking slightly misty-eyed at the memory. That was back in 2014. Today, aged 42, she is number two to executive chef Calum Franklin. She runs the famed Pie Room with its slab marble work surfaces and its shiny copper moulds. The production of the bronzed pastry-clad wonders filled with pork or mutton or cheese and onion and many other things besides is down to her. She also regularly runs service for the whole dining room. “We call her Chief Pie Maker,” Franklin says simply. It’s all a very long way from her beginnings in Durban, South Africa. “My father was the one who cooked when I was kid,” Majozi says. “I started cooking with him because it meant I got to spend time alone with him away from my four siblings.” Not that her parents were delighted when the kitchen became her choice of career. “They wanted me to be a nurse or a doctor.” But she was determined. She finished her training and went to work in hotels first in South Africa, then at Disney World in Florida before coming to London. “It was closest to France, but it was also a place where I spoke the language.” She stayed, putting in serious time at both the Intercontinental and then the Landmark hotels before arriving at the Holborn Dining Room and learning the way of the pie. “It’s the detail I love,” she says. “And the creativity. To be honest I now feel the pie room is mine. Not to be cocky but it’s my small palace.” She also runs the pie-making classes. “The first time I did that I did wonder how that had happened. But the people in the class just want to learn and don’t care where you have come from.” She recognises, however, that where she has come from and who she is, makes her a role model. There are not many women in such senior positions in London restaurant kitchens, let alone black African women. “Kitchens can be much more aggressive places when they are just men,” she says. “Half our brigade are women and they are from all over the world. It makes it a much calmer place. I want women to think of this as a career. We are here and we are doing it.” So, what of the future? “I would like my own cookery school back in South Africa,” she says. But that, she adds, is still some way in the future. She still has so much more to give to London. Holborn Dining Room, 252 High Holborn, London WC1; holborndiningroom.com Helen Graham Head chef, Bubala, London Helen Graham does not have a classic chef origin story. She did not learn to roll gnocchi with her mother, or make tarte tatin with her grandmother. “There were no spices in my house when I was growing up,” she says now, of her north-west London childhood home. Instead, she had to teach herself: at Bristol University where she focused more on cooking elaborate meals with like-minded friends than her art history course. Later, she worked as a freelance food stylist and recipe developer for Yotam Ottolenghi, before moving into restaurant kitchens. That began with a bang at the Palomar, London sibling of the cult Jerusalem restaurant Machneyuda. “I was terrified of going into a professional kitchen,” she says. “It was a hardcore kitchen.” But she held her own. That experience combined neatly with time at Berber &amp; Q, the Good Egg and Barbary, all dovetailing with her own Ashkenazi Jewish background and developing interest in the food of the Middle East. It led, in the autumn of 2019, at the age of 31, to her first head chef role at the vegetarian Middle Eastern restaurant Bubala, in London’s Spitalfields; to an engrossing menu of hummus with burnt butter and pine nuts, fried aubergine with zhoug and date syrup or halloumi with black seed honey. You notice the huge flavours first and the fact it’s meat-free second, so that it feels like vegetarianism by stealth. It has won her a huge and loyal fanbase. The meat-free idea for Bubala came, she says, from her partner in the business, restaurateur Marc Summers, though neither of them is fully vegetarian. “He’d worked out there was a gap in the market. It was clear from the start it was going to be vegetarian.” The impact of that decision has been felt far beyond just the words on the menu. “As soon as we started, I realised the kitchen was so much calmer,” Graham says. “I’m very protective of the Bubala kitchen as a vegetarian space. You can’t even bring a smoked salmon bagel in there.” Asked to nominate a dish that defines her cooking, she chooses pumpkin with braised dandelion, smoked harissa and a pumpkin seed salsa. “It employs some classic techniques I’ve picked up over the years. Italian vegetables such as violino pumpkin and chicory catalogna contrast bitter, sweet and spicy in a way that I love.” This, she says, is the right food for the times. “I’m really proud of what we’ve done. I hope there are more vegetarian restaurants like this.” Other Bubalas may be among them. “I can’t say much about that, but we are looking to expand. And there will definitely be a cookbook at some point.” No, Helen Graham may not have a grandiose origin story, a place where she started, but she knows exactly where she’s going. Bubala, 65 Commercial Street, London E1; bubala.co.uk Patrick Withington Head chef, Erst, Manchester Patrick Withington recognises the appeal of his story: that until he was 27 years old, he was a plumber; that he gave it all up and went into cooking professionally because he loved food more than he loved fitting radiators and calibrating boilers. But in truth, he says, he’d like the food he cooks at Erst, a wine bar and small plates restaurant in Manchester’s Ancoats, to be the thing that tells his story. “It’s about flavour,” he says. “It’s about the confidence to keep things simple.” And he does keep it simple, to dramatic effect: diners have swooned over his bubbled and blistered flatbreads, smeared with the glistening pulp of the very best of tomatoes, or with garlic butter and a quenelle of whipped lardo; over his beef tartare with tonnato sauce and his baked, then deep-fried potatoes, bursting lasciviously from their skins, or a pitch perfect bay leaf panna cotta. It’s a short menu, built on first principles. “There’s always a cured fish dish and a tartare and maybe a braised dish. And the flatbreads are always there.” Many of these dishes, he says, are ones he started cooking at supper clubs when he was working at Trove, the bakery in Levenshulme that he joined after deciding on a career change. Food has always been a part of his family’s culture. His dad was a big cook. At primary school, when required to give a talk, Withington decided to tell his classmates how to make a curry. The move into professional kitchens later in life seemed like a logical one to him. “When I got to Trove, I found like-minded people who were all in the same boat,” he says. “We’d all done other things first so we were all learning together. We had the freedom to do what we wanted to do.” That meant learning on the job. “For me it was about cooking my way through the Eagle cookbook or the Moro cookbook.” The interest in the Middle East and Spain provided by the latter, very much remains. And then there are the trips abroad. “I’d go to somewhere like Málaga and find my way to these unexpected and special places.” Erst, which opened in its stone and steel space in 2018, was designed to be one of those special places. “There was just nowhere in Manchester that was really informal,” Withington says. “Somewhere you could just go and have a plate or two of good food and leave.” At first it wasn’t easy. “We were really quiet. I’d go look at other restaurants doing more business and think, ‘We’re better than these places.’” But with time, customers found their way to his deft and direct cooking. “Too many places are constantly changing what they’re doing to try to please an imagined customer,” Withington says. Now 35, he’s determined to keep the business steady, while expanding his own culinary horizons and skills by looking to the classics. “Right now, I’m digging into the books of Marcella Hazan.” Those of us who have already had the pleasure of Withington’s cooking will be thrilled to see where that exploration takes him. Erst, 9 Murray Street, Ancoats, Manchester; erst-mcr.co.uk Sertaç Dirik Head chef, Mangal 2, London When Sertaç Dirik was a kid, he was made to work in his father’s north London Turkish grill restaurant, Mangal 2, as a punishment. “If I’d got into trouble,” he says. “I’d be sentenced to work there at weekends for three months. A bit of meze. A bit of front of house.” Today, aged 25, he is that restaurant’s head chef. By melding his Turkish heritage with his culinary experiences both here and in Copenhagen, he has made it one of the most talked about restaurants in London. The extensive grill menu of kebabs and dips, familiar not just to the original Mangal 2 but the many other Turkish restaurants that surround it in Dalston, has gone. It has been replaced by something pared back and refined. Yes, there is hummus, but it has a deep, rustic funk and comes with the pepperiest of olive oils. Grilled sweetbreads come glazed with pomegranate molasses. Vine leaves are stuffed with rice, but they are spun through with brown crab meat and decorated with scribbles of a langoustine cream. Lamb is on the menu but it comes from deeply flavoured Cornish Cull Yaw, or old ewes. It is all rich, restless and compelling. “The whole experience has been about finding our own identity,” says Dirik, whose brother Ferhat runs front of house. “We grew up with our parents’ food but also amid London’s burgeoning restaurant scene.” His father Ali came to London in 1987 to open his restaurants, escaping impoverished beginnings in Turkey. “I wanted to make linkages between where they started and the food preserving techniques they learned, and my own experiences in London,” Dirik says. “It’s all about not wasting things.” Getting to this point has not been straightforward. Dirik dropped out of university at 20. His older brother told him to travel, a journey that took him to Copenhagen and work experience at Restaurant 108, sibling to the world-renowned Noma. “Most of my knowledge was then Turkish grill cooking,” he says. “I was probably quite difficult to work with.” In the spring of 2020 Ferhat asked him to come back to help with the restaurant that he had taken over from his father amid the uncertainty of the pandemic. “We realised this was our moment,” Dirik says. “Ferhat and I knew what we wanted to do in terms of feeling. For years we’d bought in the hummus and taramasalata. Now we were going to make everything. It was going to be more of a Turkish bistro. Our dad was a bit scared because the restaurant supports so many livelihoods.” There was also an early backlash from regular customers and from other Turkish restaurants on the strip. But with time comes acceptance. “We’re getting a lot of love now,” Dirik says. That is not the end of the story, however. “We’re not even at 20% of where we can be,” he says. “I don’t ever want us to stop evolving.” There is, he says, still a lot of work to be done. Mangal 2, 4 Stoke Newington Road, London N16; mangal2.com Adrian Luck and Tony Cridland Co-head chefs, Land, Birmingham Adrian Luck and Tony Cridland are unlikely pioneers of meat-free cookery. Neither is vegan. Neither planned to become a culinary disrupter. But in Land, the small vegan restaurant they run in Birmingham, they have created a model for just how bold, striking and innovative plant-based cooking can be. Cridland, 31, had a standard classical training and worked his way around upmarket hotels before arriving at what was then the vegetarian Restaurant 1847. Luck, 35, was just looking for a job after a stint teaching English in Indonesia, when Cridland employed him. “To be honest I didn’t even know it was vegetarian when I came on board,” says Luck, who is self-taught. Not long after Luck joined, they took over the space inside Birmingham’s Great Western Arcade from its original owners. They renamed it Land, and decided to work as co-head chefs. Recently they crowdfunded a move to a smaller site within the same arcade, reducing the covers from 36 to a mere 22. “We just wanted to make it a better restaurant,” Luck says. “And so far, it’s worked. I actually think we’re doing better.” A meal at Land might start with crescents of roasted onion squash, on a bed of puy lentils, some of them deep fried to crisp, all of it bound in a mustard dressing. Or there could be Indian spiced carrots on a sweet-sour carrot and ginger puree, dressed with roasted seeds. It’s about sweet potato with a deep dark Mexican mole, or king oyster mushrooms with a white bean cassoulet. “I was pretty terrible at this sort of cooking at first,” Cridland says, honestly. Without the crutch of a lump of animal protein, he says, “you’ve got to be a lot more creative and thoughtful. It’s about putting depth and umami into a dish, about using fermentation and so on.” What it’s not about is using meat alternatives. “We don’t use any fake meats,” says Luck. “We want to showcase vegetables as best we can. We’ve developed a great repertoire of things we can use for texture. In truth we don’t even think of it as being vegan food any more. We’re just trying to make good food.” Today they offer a couple of tasting menus and divide up the dishes between themselves. Asked to describe a dish that exemplifies their food, Luck chooses wild mushrooms, slow cooked in dashi. “Then we add mushroom ketchup, parsley and tarragon and finish it with crisps of bean curd.” For Cridland it’s caramelised cauliflower with a spiced sauce and paprika oil. “Then we add puffed wild rice and dehydrated cauliflower leaves.” Both agree that they’d like national recognition for what they’re doing. “But that’s not the endgame,” Luck says. “It’s about the customer being happy.” Going by the healthy state of bookings, that goal has more than been achieved. Land, 30 Great Western Arcade, Colmore Row, Birmingham; land.restaurantThere’s only one way into Bell Canyon, and one way out. Winding cul-de-sacs peppered with multimillion-dollar homes snake up through the gated, hillside community, which overlooks southern California’s San Fernando Valley. It’s a picturesque and private place to call home that has attracted affluent families and celebrities like Alyssa Milano, Shaquille O’Neal and Joe Rogan. But the hills of Bell Canyon are also primed to burn. Blackened trees and melted trash cans can still be found here, relics that serve as reminders of the 2018 Woolsey Fire that tore through the region claiming 1,500 structures – including dozens in Bell Canyon – and three lives. Residents say the threat of another disaster lingers in their thoughts every time dry winds gust through the canyons. That’s why Bell Canyon has taken matters into its own hands. In 2020, they created their own fire department crewed by community members. What started out as a group of renegade residents has since grown into a highly organized and trained team. Some were emboldened after staying behind to fight the flames with garden hoses when Woolsey rained down on the community. Others were intrigued by the opportunities to learn emergency response skills. Most are in their mid-50s and many had no prior firefighting experience. But all of them – whether lawyers, creatives, or engineers by day – are now prepared to show up when it matters most. Garrett Clancy, the chief of the Bell Canyon fire crew, is a filmmaker with emergency response experience garnered in the military and views the crew like the minutemen in the Revolutionary war. “We are going to do something – we aren’t just going to sit around,” he says. “Because this is our home. So we are willing to take whatever risk is involved.” Clancy is clear that their role is secondary to that of county emergency crews. But as fires continue to grow in intensity, severity and frequency, firefighters are becoming strained. Now, more individuals and communities are taking protection and prevention into their own hands. “In some of the tragedies we are experiencing in California, no local fire department has enough resources and they have to figure out what they can save and what they can let burn,” says resident Greg McHugh, who has helped spearhead the community’s efforts to protect itself from fire. “Unfortunately that’s the truth – and you need to help yourself.” For neighborhoods like Bell Canyon, the proactive approach is also aided by affluence. A CalFire-affiliated non-profit made $1.3m available in 2021 to support risk-mitigation projects, with dedicated interest in aiding vulnerable communities. But both Bell Canyon’s volunteer department and its fire safety council, a group headed by McHugh that educates the public about protecting their homes from fires, have benefited from wealth within the community. The local Homeowners Association has contributed roughly $25,000 to the new fire department, and neighbors have thrown in hundreds of thousands more. Areas with fewer resources will likely face bigger obstacles that sets them apart from their wealthy neighbors, adding to the divide already being felt when disasters strike. “A substantially less affluent community with no homeowners association would have to find a fiduciary sponsor,” McHugh says, advising those communities to seek help from legal aid offices to procure their own risk-mitigating fire safe council. ‘First on the scene, last to leave’ The crew is staffed by 16 members. They have acquired three trucks, over a mile of hose and communication tools including radios at each of the members’ homes. They regularly run drills out of Bell Canyon’s Equestrian Center. There’s a joke in the department that they acquired their first fire truck only after a member got drunk and impulsively bought it. Clancy recalls when he got the call that the small burgeoning department was suddenly much better equipped. “That was the catalyst to taking a big step forward,” Clancy says. Some members also have official emergency response experience, including Boris Donia, who grew up in Bell Canyon and, at 24 years-old, is the crew’s youngest. Trained as a wildland firefighter, Donia was instrumental in teaching them how to use the equipment and connecting them to training opportunities. Clancy called him for help with their first truck. “They had no clue how to operate it or pump off of it,” Donia says. He now serves as an assistant chief. Even those who aren’t able to fight fires can help out, like 82-year-old Len, one of Bell Canyon’s longtime residents, who maintains the vehicles and outfits the trucks with parts built in a machine shop in his garage. The crew hasn’t fought a big fire yet. But it has performed other services. There have been close to 100 calls already for help. They have relocated rattlesnakes (a common complaint), aided during torrential rains that produced mud and floods, and were the first on the scene when an older man fell off a cliff (the man survived). “People in the community seem grateful that we are there,” Chief Clancy says. “We are doing all the things you might call the regular fire department for.” Noting that it takes county fire departments an additional 10-15 min to reach the community’s gate and another 8 min to get to the farthest homes in the canyon, Clancy is proud that his team acts quickly. “We can get to a scene in a matter of minutes,” he says. “Our motto is first on scene, last to leave,” Donia says of the volunteer crew. “In the event of another Woolsey fire or another small incident brush fire we are here for our community” he adds. “We have taken the time to learn the canyon inside and out.” ‘Now, we know what to do’ The crew has helped residents – both old and new – feel safer despite the increasing risks. “I don’t remember always living in fear every time the wind blew,” Ashley Forchelli says of their reality in the aftermath of the ferocious Woolsey Fire. “But I feel like the crew we have now could have stamped out the spread of the fire.” Forchelli said that residents who stayed behind to help fight the Woolsey fire were able to spare some homes, but without proper equipment and training, they did so “on a wing and a prayer”. “Now, people feel almost ready. Like, bring it. We know what to do. We’ve got equipment, we know who to call.” Jane Staley has been among the most vocal of residents in support of the crew. The home she lives in with her husband, where she raised her children, was damaged but not destroyed during the 2018 fire. They have spent years rebuilding, but despair and fear still grips her. “The feeling of helplessness was so extraordinary,” she says, recalling the fire and smoke that filled the sky and the sleepless night spent waiting it out in a nearby McDonalds parking lot. “Now that I have rebuilt, I don’t know,” she says. “I will go down with the ship next time.” But, she adds with a smile, “I feel like now wherever I am I can reach out to Garrett and he’ll give me the update.”The former Observer Washington editor and classical music critic Anthony Holden’s memoir of his prolific career is a rip-roaring salute to a bygone age of journalism, with Holden himself firmly at the centre of events. He sets the scene early on, citing Gyles Brandreth’s observation that “Tony Holden is one of my favourite people – except he smokes and drinks all the time.” This self-described “well-brought-up young product of the north-western petit bourgeoisie” is a committed observer, and sometime friend, of the famous. We meet everyone from Sartre to Humphrey Lyttelton in the opening chapters and countless actors, writers and princes appear in subsequent, often score-settling anecdotes. Holden’s rise to prominence came when long lunches with contacts and editors were de rigueur and where the ambitious and well-connected would be offered lucrative columnist gigs by their friends. Holden revels in this and depicts a time when a writer would be given a six-month paid sabbatical by the Sunday Times to write a book in exchange for the serial rights and where his resignation from the Times – forced out of his position by Murdoch, even as Harold Evans groomed him to be his successor – was front-page news. Some of his reminiscence is entertainingly buccaneering, chiefly his digs at his frequent biographical subject Prince Charles; not only was he one of the few republican royal writers, but his attacks on his subject made him “the most reviled man in England”. Some is baffling: “I would be delighted to work with Billy Bragg on his radical ideas for constitutional reform.” All of it is boastful. His editor might have suggested the removal of lines such as: “For some years now, six-figure advances would remain the sustaining subtext of my increasingly expensive life.” But just as you start to resent Holden’s apparently charmed and easy existence, the final chapters upend matters. He suffers a debilitating stroke, loses the ability to walk and is now based in an assisted living facility. His descriptions of his new life, far from his heyday, give this enjoyable, if vain, book a poignancy and pathos it might otherwise lack. • Based on a True Story: A Writer’s Life by Anthony Holden is published by Simon &amp; Schuster (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyFenugreek Nisha Katona, CEO and executive chef, Mowgli Street Food restaurants For me, fenugreek is the most alchemical ingredient in the Indian kitchen. It comes in four forms and each does something different to different ingredients. There are some areas of India that use it a lot, like the Punjabis, but we Bengalis use it sparingly and more with vegetables. There are the fenugreek seeds which you use with vegetables such as squashes and pumpkins and potatoes, all of those things that you look at and think, that’s a butter job. Fry the seeds, then toss in your pumpkin, a little bit of turmeric and salt, and cook it down until it’s soft. Heavenly. Then you have the powder. If you’re doing any marinating or barbecuing, like tandoori chicken or masala chops, it will give that extra punch. You only need half a teaspoon for about 10 lamb chops. The fresh leaves you would use in breads such as methi paratha. Chop the leaves and fold them into dough; it’s completely sublime. Then there are the dried leaves – kasoori methi – that go in things like butter chicken. This is the one that changes everything. They barely smell of anything, but add them to hot oil, a curry of any kind, and you can smell it down the driveway. Fenugreek imprints itself on your taste and scent memory. Some people when they smell it say they can smell maple. It doesn’t taste sweet but imagine leafy, woody, autumnal undertones. It enhances the flavours of whatever you cook. Lao Gan Ma crispy chilli in oil Tom Kerridge, chef-owner, The Hand &amp; Flowers, Marlow Honestly, this chilli oil is the naughtiest product in the world; it feels like it is everything that is lush about Chinese food. It’s not too hot and spicy, but it’s clearly chilli. It’s that crunch, that crispness, that saltiness, those lovely umami flavours. I put it on absolutely everything. I order four jars at a time. There’s a black bean one as well but the crispy chilli is texturally the best. I always use it as a condiment to finish, or as a seasoning, because it’s so salty. Anything that’s a bit soft, where you want a bit of crunch on the top, it’s perfect for. On cauliflower cheese, macaroni cheese, sprinkled on an omelette, on cold meats. A couple of nights ago I just put it on a piece of brie. Lush. Malt extract Ravneet Gill, chef, cookery writer and judge on Junior Bake Off In my house, we always have malt extract and malt powder because my grandma loves to drink it, but I didn’t know you could use it in desserts until I worked at St John. Weirdly, you see it in a lot of pharmacies and they sell it in Holland &amp; Barrett. I use it to add another dimension tocream-based things such as creme brulee and ice-cream, because the flavour of malt and cream and custard work well together. It’s almost like molasses, treacly, so also enhances the texture. It’s good with chocolate in a ganache, and I also like malt powder in a milkshake. It tastes a bit like Horlicks (because obviously that’s malt powder) and Maltesers. Use a hot spoon when you’re weighing it out, and if you want to add it to a recipe, start by taking out 20g of a sweet element and using malt extract instead. See how it tastes, then add as you go. Lea &amp; Perrins Worcestershire sauce Rukmini Iyer, cookery writer and author of the Roasting Tin series I use Lea &amp; Perrins in anything cheese- or tomato-based or in any kind of marinade. It doesn’t leave you with a detectable fish flavour, but with salt and a roundness of flavour and spice. I found out that my grandma in Kolkata cooked with it more than 50 years ago. She used it when marinating fish. Her secret recipe – which I am putting in my new book – is to marinate prawns in Worcestershire sauce before crumbing and frying them. I do it now and it’s absolutely delicious. It just has so much flavour as a marinade, it enhances the umami. I’ll always put a dash of Worcestershire sauce in cheddar muffins; I like to make everything taste like a Welsh rarebit. It’s a fairly simple mix: flour (I like to use a mixture of spelt and rye flour), grated cheese, yoghurt, a bit of milk, egg, a really good dash of Worcestershire, then sprinkle a bit more grated cheese and Worcestershire on top before baking them. Also, if I’m making something like a tomato sauce and I’ve run out of anchovies, Lea &amp; Perrins in place of them gives that lovely subtle depth of flavour. Just use it a teaspoon at a time to start with. Treat it as you would fish sauce. That is, with caution. Carob syrup Georgina Hayden, cookery writer, author of Taverna: Recipes from a Cypriot Kitchen Limassol, Cyprus, where my paternal yiayia (grandmother) is from, is famous for carob. Cypriots call it “black gold” because historically the production was a big part of the economy. Carob looks like a cross between fresh tamarind and vanilla pods, almost like a dark brown broad bean. They tend to grow in a cluster and the inside is squidgy. It plays an important role in Cypriot food culture. For about a third of the year, Orthodox Greeks fast – we don’t eat animal products – every Wednesday and Friday, and before Easter, Christmas and the Assumption of Mary. My yiayia fasts very strictly and she always has carob syrup in the kitchen, it’s like her sweet fix. It’s often added to cakes and doughs to enrichen them and to make them “healthier” without adding too much excessive sugar. Vegans use it as a chocolate alternative and I understand why. It has the richness you get from cocoa and it’s naturally sweet. I think it works with red meat. If I’m roasting lamb, I’ll finish it with a little bit of carob syrup at the end, to sort of caramelise it. It’s a similar combination to the way you would put a bit of dark chocolate in chilli. It goes really well with tahini. I put carob in tahinopita, swirly tahini breads and babka. Tahini and carob are essentially the original chocolate and peanut butter, an age-old version of Reese’s Pieces. I always add cinnamon too, for me, that’s the holy trinity. Cornish saffron Emily Scott, head chef, Emily Scott Food, Watergate Bay, Cornwall Saffron has been used in Cornish cooking for centuries. It is said that the Phoenicians bartered saffron for tin and copper. Saffron cake and yeasty saffron buns – that’s a really Cornish thing. It’s now grown by the Cornish Saffron Company, based on the Roseland peninsula on the south coast. It’s only about 25 miles from where I am, but it’s completely different; it’s not like the rugged north coast of Cornwall. For the crocuses, it’s the perfect environment. Seaweed is used as a fertiliser and the saffron is plucked by hand. It’s expensive, but a little goes a long way. I use it to make saffron aioli. Just add saffron to the mayonnaise and it turns that beautiful burnished yellow colour. It goes so well with tomatoey, fennel fish stew. It’s one of those fish suppers I crave. I love it in risotto as well. We do one in the restaurant; it’s a rich, deep, buttery, parmesan-y risotto with saffron, and we put a crisp fried hen’s egg on top. And I do a monkfish dish with shallots and spring onions as a base. You put monkfish tails into the pan, then add white wine, double cream and a couple of pinches of saffron and just let it reduce. You get the most creamy saffron sauce. It’s one of those ingredients that always feels quite luxurious but is quite versatile. Smoked water Anna Jones, cookery writer and author of One Pot, One Pan, One Planet I use smoked water to give smoky accents to food that I used to use smoked meats for. It gives a heady, malty, caramel flavour. You have to be gentle with how you use it, as too much can be overpowering. I use it where classically you might use prosciutto, such as vignarola, or vignole, which is covered in a lid of prosciutto. I love all of the spring vegetables in the dish but I’ve always missed that smoky back note. I make a version of vincisgrassi, the beautiful lasagne with mushrooms and prosciutto and use it in that to mimic the flavour. A few drops in an aioli would work brilliantly, and it’s incredible in risottos and my swede carbonara for people who are carbonara lovers but don’t want to eat meat. I often add some smoked water to homemade yoghurt flatbreads. They are quick-rise and easy. You mix 200g plain flour (you could use spelt flour), a good pinch of salt, and a teaspoon of baking powder, then you mix in about 200g Greek yoghurt, add a couple of drops of the smoked water and bring it together with your hands. You don’t need to knead it as you would a normal bread. Cut it into four and roll it out, then cook on a barbecue, in a dry frying pan or in a griddle pan for 3-4 minutes each side, or until they are puffed up and you can see they are cooked in the middle. Mirin Shuko Oda, co-founder and executive chef, Koya, London Mirin is an essential condiment in Japanese cooking, it’s used in pretty much every dish – you have to have it in your cupboard if you want to cook any Japanese food. It’s basically a sweetened sake, almost syrupy with a kick of alcohol. Because it isn’t as well known here as soy sauce, for example, I had a chance to think about the different ways you might use it. I always add a bit of mirin to salad dressings. If it’s a western dressing I’ll use olive oil, nice red-wine vinegar, salt, dijon mustard and a touch of mirin. If it’s an Asian kind of dressing I put sesame oil, rice vinegar, soy sauce, a bit of sugar and mirin. If you season fried noodles just with soy sauce, there’s no depth, but when you combine it with mirin, it brings more fullness and roundness to it. Agar agar James Cochran, chef-owner, 12:51 and Around The Cluck, London Agar agar is a natural seaweed extract. It’s a setting agent so is good for vegetarians and vegans. It’s completely flavourless and comes as a white powder. I discovered it when I was working at the Ledbury many moons ago. Because it has no taste, you can make super clean flavours. It’s great with desserts; I make a whipped cheesecake and use it instead of gelatine. For a recipe at home, add 10g of agar agar to 1 litre of clementine juice (it’s usually 1% of what the weight is), bring it to the boil, let it set, then blend it. You could have that with chicken liver parfait and brioche or you could have a confit duck leg, chicory salad, fresh clementines and the clementine gel. Or to make a lemon meringue pie, mix lemon juice, a bit of sugar and the agar agar. Blind bake a pastry case, add the lemon mix, pipe the meringue on and blowtorch it. Elisir di gambero rosso Giorgio Locatelli, chef-owner, Locanda Locatelli, London I am really attached to this product, as about 10 years ago I spent two nights and three days fishing for gambero rosso prawns in Italy. Their sweetness is unbelievable, a velvety flavour like a lobster that is trying to fall in love with you. They live at such a depth of the sea, that’s why they have this very red colouration. It takes about one hour and 20 minutes to let down the net. When the net comes out of the water, it’s 95% prawns, few other species – incredible. They freeze the prawns on board with a little bit of seawater. Obviously there are different sizes and some people want to buy them without the head (which is a big mistake because that’s where all the flavour is). For the elixir, they take the heads and practically dry freeze them, then they obtain a powder which gets mixed with the oil. A couple of little drops and a whole dish comes alive. Everything from a risotto to any type of pasta to some crostini. Our daughter is very allergic to fish and when she was living with us we didn’t even bring fish home, so this incredible fishy flavour was such a treat for Plaxy [Giorgio’s wife] and me, because even if our daughter was around we could put on a little bit and get that absolutely fantastic sweet flavour. Chintextle Edson Diaz-Fuentes, chef and co-owner, Santo Remedio, London Chintextle is a traditional Mexican paste, an old-fashioned condiment from Oaxaca. It’s made of a little oil, salt, vinegar, garlic, onion, dried shrimp and this beautiful chilli called pasilla de Oaxaca. It’s ground in a metate – a flat volcanic stone – with a pestle, a kind of mortar and pestle. Pasilla de Oaxaca are in danger of extinction as the farmers are not growing them any more, they are very expensive. It is also possible to use other chillies like chipotle – any other smoky chilli. Traditionally it’s used as a spread. In Oaxaca there are huge tortillas called tlayuda. It’s like a pizza in terms of size and topped with a little bit of chintextle, pork fat, beans, cheese, then lettuce and radishes. But it could be used in a sandwich, or rubbed on vegetables, fish or meat which is then grilled. It adds a smokiness without a smoker. You can mix it with minced meat for burgers, a spoonful of that into the mix will add a different flavour profile. It enhances any dish, it’s like Mexican umami. Vinegar Nathan Outlaw, chef-owner, Outlaw’s Fish Kitchen and Outlaw’s New Road, Port Isaac Vinegar is probably as important as salt and pepper. It gives balance to everything. We’re in Cornwall and there’s a local cider farm five miles from the restaurant, Haywood Farm. We use their apple cider vinegar for all our pickles. It has a roughness, an almost scrumpy-esque flavour and that acidity comes through nicely in dressings and goes really well with raw and cured fish. I’ve got a small herb garden at the restaurant and once a week I cut anything that’s raggedy and let it steep in the local vinegar. It’s continuous and there’s no recipe for it, it’s just making sure we don’t waste anything. We’ve got one made with hard herbs: rosemary, savory and thyme. And another that’s more aniseedy with tarragon and fennel. We use the herb vinegars as a base for dressings. We have this lovely lobster dressing on at the moment; we make stock from the old shells and heads, then balance it out with a bit of Cornish cream and cider vinegar.It’s one of life’s inevitabilities. The more sequels that stack up in a movie franchise, the more simmering displeasure is stoked within the loyal fanbase for the original film. Unless, of course, the movie takes the route adopted by James Vanderbilt and Guy Busick, the screenwriters of the exuberantly violent fifth film in the Scream series, and slyly harnesses that fan fury as a plot device. Scream – the film very pointedly shares a title with the original picture – is, as one horror-savvy character explains, “a requel”, a cross between a reboot and a sequel. As such it comes with a combination of “heritage characters” (Neve Campbell, Courteney Cox and David Arquette return) and new blood. Of the latter, Melissa Barrera is sparky but superficial as Sam, a Woodsboro native with an unfortunate past; Jenna Ortega is her younger sister, Tara, a fan of elevated horror rather than the more conventional “meta-slasher-whodunnit” genre typified by the Stab franchise (the Scream series’s self-referential alter ego). Directed by Matt Bettinelli-Olpin and Tyler Gillett (their comic-horror credentials already proved with the bracingly violent Ready or Not), this instalment revamps for a new generation of genre fans the tried and tested Scream formula of knowing movie references and horror tropes. While this is the smartest, funniest and stabbiest film since the 1996 original, it does feel as though Scream has come full circle, an ouroboros serpent of a franchise that is destined to endlessly devour itself until those testy toxic fans finally lose patience.No one knows what awaited Kim Woo-joo when he arrived back in North Korea, just over a year after he had fled the world’s most oppressive regime for a life of freedom in the South. Earlier this month, the 29-year-old former gymnast approached the border separating the two Koreas, scaled a tall barbed-wire fence and walked the 2.5 miles across the heavily armed demilitarised zone (DMZ), dodging landmines but not security cameras, which captured his escape no fewer than five times. His decision to cross the DMZ back to the North from the South was the latest chapter in an extraordinary series of journeys. In November 2020, Kim had made the same journey in the opposite direction, fleeing his homeland but shunning the route preferred by almost all defectors across the North’s border with China. Having denied that he was a spy, embarrassed officials in Seoul were forced to acknowledge that Kim had grown so disillusioned with life in South Korea that he was willing to face harassment and possible incarceration in the North by returning there. His daring flight prompted uncomfortable questions about the treatment of political and economic refugees from the North, for whom life in the democratic, capitalist South sometimes falls far short of expectations. Although the average monthly income of these arrivals from the North reached a record high in 2019, for instance, it still lags far behind that of South Koreans, according to the unification ministry. Last year, 1,582 defectors received financial help in addition to a welfare package they receive when they resettle in the South, while 47% said they were experiencing mental anguish, the ministry said. They may well have included Kim, a night-time office cleaner who did not appear to have any friends and never spoke to his neighbours, one of whom told reporters that he had dutifully left a mattress and other possessions out for collection before he fled. “If you worked in industry or for the government in North Korea, you can’t come to South Korea and expect to do an equivalent job,” says Sokeel Park, South Korea country director of Liberty in North Korea, which helps defectors. “You have to take a hit to your relative status, and that can have an effect on mental health, particularly for North Korean men.” New arrivals spend three months being debriefed to ensure they are not spies, followed by a similar period at Hanawon (house of unity), a settlement support centre where they are given counselling and coached in the practicalities of South Korean life. They are eligible for government subsidies of 20m won (£12,260) to find a home or a place at university, followed by monthly payments of 320,000 won for five years. What is lacking, says Park, is the sense of community that the North – for all its disadvantages – had given them, particularly among people from rural areas who struggle to cope with the anonymity of life in a megalopolis like Seoul. While defectors struggle financially and experience discrimination in education, housing and employment, it doesn’t necessarily follow that their thoughts will turn to redefection, says Park. “It is always a shock when a defector goes back to North Korea, even to other defectors,” he says. Double defections inevitably attract headlines, but they are relatively rare. Of the 33,800 North Koreans who have defected to the South, just 30 have returned to the North. “When you think of how many people are involved, human nature means it is inevitable that some people will have second thoughts,” Park says. “It would be very strange if none of those 30,000 defectors had gone back.” Joo Il-yong was 13 when he left North Korea with his mother and sister, less than a year after his father had arrived in Seoul, where he saved money to enable the rest of his family to escape. Joo, who graduated from Korea University in Seoul and will begin graduate studies there this spring, is a defector success story, but says he understands why a small number of other North Koreans end up back in the country they were once so desperate to leave. “One of the biggest obstacles is the systemic difference between the two countries,” says Joo, who arrived in the South in 2009 after his father decided he wanted his children to live in a country where they would have “opportunities and a future”. The perceived benefits of life in a rich, free society can quickly become a burden, Joo adds. “In North Korea we didn’t have to plan our lives – the state did that for us. But in the South, we have to take responsibility for our own lives. I know from my own experience that resettling in South Korea is a challenge, but it is nowhere near as difficult as living in North Korea.” Some North Koreans return after sustained emotional blackmail from left-behind relatives, under pressure from North Korea’s secret police. “In some cases, it is simply because they miss their families back in North Korea so much,” Joo says. “But I don’t see the challenges of life here as harsh or unfair. In fact, they have made me happier, because they motivate me to work and study even harder.” • This article was amended on 21 January 2022 to remove an incorrect sentence citing 20% as the unemployment rate among North Koreans who escape to the South.Twenty years ago an architectural bomb went off in Hackney, east London. It was a small and charming bomb, with no reported casualties, in a colour somewhere between baby blue and sky blue, with curious shapes – old Dutch gables inspired by a postcard of Amsterdam, the outline of a tree, a child’s idea of a house – cut into its boarded exterior. But it performed an act then outrageous in architectural circles, of reviving postmodernism, the decorative style tainted by its association with the bloated office buildings and shopping malls of 1980s corporate excess. The Blue House, as it is called, helped to bring some fame though not much fortune to its architects, Fashion Architecture Taste, or FAT, until they announced their breakup in 2013. It didn’t, though, greatly alter the trajectory of architecture. It didn’t launch a revolution of what you might call postpostmodernism. Its big idea was that architecture could be like pop art, that it could combine artistic sophistication with a direct appeal to everyday culture, that it could riff on themes from notable architects of the past while offering imagery that a child might get. So the gable and tree shapes came with a layered and complex interior that owes something to Adolf Loos and John Soane. The world somehow wasn’t ready for this. In the past few years, however, there has been a gradual exploration of the waters that FAT boldly entered when the century was young. Postpostpostmodernism, perhaps. One manifestation is the Red House, a new home in Dorset for an art dealer, his accountant husband and their young daughter. It is designed by David Kohn, the architect who, with the artist Fiona Banner, created a temporary one-room, boat-shaped hotel perched on the Queen Elizabeth Hall in London. Red House is a long, two-storey oblong with a big, oversailing slate roof. It has high chimneys, curving bays and openings in the shapes of circles and semi-circles. The windows and door of an end elevation recall the eyes and mouth of a face. Complementary colours zing off each other: a vibrant green for the metalwork and timber, and red brick walls. It plainly announces, almost cartoonishly, that it is a house. At the same time it offers clues and diversions for the architecturally learned. It has a clear debt to the Arts and Crafts houses of around 1900, built for enlightened patrons in such places as the Lake District, the Malvern hills or what is now the London green belt. It is particularly reminiscent of CFA Voysey, the leading exponent of that style. It also has a bit of the mid-century Philadelphian Louis Kahn, a romantic devotee of massive masonry, and something of James Stirling, the British architect who from the 1950s until his death in 1992 delighted in clashing powerful forms and colours. Inside, on the first floor, there’s a vaulted corridor inspired by the Villa Necchi Campiglio in Milan, whose exquisite 1930s interiors made a memorable setting for the Tilda Swinton-starring film I Am Love. The house is composed, as in a piece of music, with complexity and difference playing off an overall structure. Inside, there’s an axis running down the centre of the house, leading you towards the views of garden and landscape beyond, around which contrasting spaces are arrayed: a semi-circular dining space, a bright kitchen, a study alcove opening off the first-floor landing, a master bedroom in which the concave curve of the inside of a bay meets the triangular shape of the underside of the roof, to subtle and tent-like effect. A stair with rococo curves connects the two floors. Ample storage spaces, which help to keep the interiors uncluttered and orderly, punctuate the plan. Rooms are high or low, expansive or constricted, with light coming from different angles and views offered in multiple directions. The scale is a little surprising: passages and doors, partly out of a wish to make the house wheelchair accessible, are higher and wider than normal. At the same time the interior is finished with calm and consistent practicality – white-painted concrete block walls and wood block floors – which brings overall coherence to the variety of shapes and spaces. On the outside, bricks are laid horizontally, as is conventional, but sometimes vertically. There’s a logic to this that may be lost to the casual observer, which is that the vertical bricks denote the location of more functional spaces, such as bathrooms and store rooms, that serve the main living spaces. There’s also a slight overhang in the brickwork at first-floor level. Again, it’s a nicety that many won’t notice, but even though this and the brick patterns add to the cost, Kohn’s clients were happy to pay for it. The house is (among other things) a work of art, is their view, and its architect should be trusted to do it his way. Both the Blue House and the Red House play with your expectations of scale, surface and appearance. What looks flat might be substantial, and vice versa. In both, the outside tells you something about the inside, but not precisely. The Blue House, which included a studio as well as a home, has both the gridded windows of a workplace and domestic pitched-roof shapes, but they don’t correspond to the locations of these uses within. The Red House is the politer of the two, where the multiple elements are more assimilated with one another. The Blue House takes greater pleasure in its incongruities, to which another layer has now been added. It was originally built for Sean Griffiths, one of FAT’s founders, and his then-partner, the landscape architect Lynn Kinnear. The two no longer live together, but Griffiths has designed for Kinnear an internal makeover and an extension at the top of the house that includes a contemplative study opening on to a roof garden. The new work is completely different from the original, but it has the same spirit. Here, new materials and colours are added to what was already a rich palette – pebbledash walls, a profiled metal roof, pink, yellow, green. The rooftop structure adds another house shape to those already present, plus a somewhat brutalist projecting window. “A beach house on the roof”, Kinnear calls it, and the interior is a surprisingly serene escape, with views of London chimneys and towers. “What the rest would have been like if I’d been a good architect back then” is how Griffiths describes it. Kohn doesn’t see himself as a disciple of FAT, exactly, but he shares some of their interests and appreciates their “huge generosity”. He says that they “did a brilliant job of expanding architecture, of trying to prise open what’s fair game. It was a project for recovering a lot of lost fun.” Perhaps now, at last, the architectural world is ready to hear their messages.Guided hikes in Anglesey Head to Anglesey this winter and learn how shipwrecks, princes and tragic lovers shaped this idyllic island. Formerly a Bronze Age copper mine, then (thanks to its fertile soil), the breadbasket of Wales, Anglesey today has a nibbled coastline of tiny coves and fishing harbours, fronting a bosky interior where red squirrels thrive. You can fashion your day to suit your interests, or combine that guided hike with a headrush of thrilling experiences – all offered by Knowdownia, North Wales’s new, itinerary-free tour company. Try out the world’s fastest zipline, surf in remote bays, or admire Snowdonia’s mountain range while thundering over twisty dirt tracks on a gravity-driven quarry kart. Guided walks available all year. A one-day experience costs from £325 for four people and includes pickup and drop-off anywhere in North Wales; knowdonia.com Puffin-spotting in Northern Ireland For bird lovers, the half-day guided Gobbins Walk is an absolute gem. After falling into disrepair for decades, Northern Ireland’s classic trail has finally reopened – and walking in winter adds drama to its wild beauty. Trailing a path that cuts through narrow tunnels, bridges and staircases cut into the theCauseway’s coastal cliffs, you’ll witness the only mainland colony of puffins in Northern Ireland, plus kittiwakes, razorbills and guillemots. Add to this, the chance to spot dolphins, alongside atmospheric tails of smugglers and privateers, and you’ve pretty much a pitch-perfect family outing. The walk costs £20pp adults, £14pp children. Book through Ballygally Castle, which offers overnight stays from £60 B&amp;B; hastingshotels.com/ballygally-castle Foraging in the Malvern Hills Join this guided tour of dense woods, hedgerows and undulating hills in the frost-tinged Severn Valley with food writer Clare Knivett, and you’ll learn the sort of tips that were second nature to our ancestors. These walks focus mostly on plant identification and Clare’s knowledge of wild fruits, flowers and plants that can harm or heal, is second to none. In January and February, you can expect to forage for winter herbs such as cleavers (good for stimulating the lymphatic system to help ward off seasonal chills), alongside chickweed, nutrient-dense nettles, ground ivy and wild garlic. Afterwards, learn useful recipes as well as tips on living more seasonally. This two-and-a-half-hour walk costs £35pp (minimum of four booking); foodandforaging.com Stargaze on Exmoor Draw your kids’ eyes away from their screens and lift them to the star-filled skies of Exmoor. Thanks to minimal light pollution, Exmoor national park has some of the best dark skies in the UK, and on a cloud-free night you can expect to see thousands of dazzlers, even the Milky Way, just by using your eyes. The Pinkery Centre for outdoor learning here has a guided stargazing event in February that includes a fun bushcraft adventure. The centre has 15 en suite bunk-bed rooms sleeping four to six people. The Pinkery Night Sky and Bushcraft Adventure takes place on 21 February. More details from exmoor-nationalpark.gov.uk/enjoying/stargazing Mother and daughter bonding in Scotland Cut through those tricky adolescent tensions on this guided walk for mothers and teens around Lothian’s gorgeous Yellowcraigs beach, known for its sandy stretches surrounded by forest and grassland, and with views out to Fidra Island (the inspiration for Robert Louis Stevenson’s Treasure Island), this is the perfect setting to help clear away anycommunication cobwebs. Run by WanderWomen, the half-day bonding experience takes the focus off hot topics through mindfulness sessions, reflection, meditation, walking, fire-making, sea swimming and forest bathing. And with other mothers and daughters alongside, there’s also the chance to forge new friendships. Mama and Teen Daughter guided walk is on 23 January and costs £70pp (£20 with Visit Scotland discount). More information from wander-women.co.uk Discover the City’s secret gardens London’s Square Mile is home to 376 open and green spaces – and with offices and tower blocks currently swapped for WFH, now is the perfect time to uncover the quiet beauty of the City’s hidden treasures. The new City Secret Gardens walk, run by Blue Badge guide Katie Wignall, explores some of the best and most unusual gardens in the area. Each one, from hidden oases to the more famous spots like St Dunstan-in-the-East and Postman’s Park, has a fascinating history. The walk on 12 February costs £20pp. More information at lookup.london History walk in Manchester To uncover Manchester’s vibrant history, join the three-hour Rock and Goal Tour with insider guide Joe. Highlights include discovering how Manchester played a leading role in ending both slavery and the Second World War, the roots of music stars, and discovering where Hollywood movies were filmed. Some of those stairways and pavements are pure New York… The walk runs throughout winter and costs £9.99pp; tripadvisor.co.uk Bridgerton in Bath With series two of the lockdown favourite Bridgerton due to drop on Netflix in 2022, what better time to brush up on the stunning Bath locations in which it was set? Join the two-hour Bridgerton Experience walking tour, and your Blue Badge guide will point out film locations, and also unpack the social norms of family life during the Georgian and Regency periods, relating them to key Bridgerton scenes as you move around the city. Gems include Alfred Street, Abbey Green, The Royal Crescent, Beauford Square and more. The walk costs £15pp; more information at bathwalkingtours.co.uk Mind over matter in the Peaks There’s walking, and then there’s healing walking. If the legacy of the pandemic has been anxiety and isolation, consider joining Mind over Mountains’s six-hour walk in the Peak District this February. The charity offers therapeutic outdoor experiences for those experiencing mental health issues. Enjoy the company of like-minded yompers; seek tips from trained counsellors, or simply let the beauty of Hathersage Moor in the Dark Peak work its magic. The route starts from the National Trust’s Longshaw Estate and crosses the rocky outcrops of Higger Tor and Carl Wark, with fantastic views over Derwent valley. The walk on 26 February costs £39pp; mindovermountains.org.uk Ghost tours of Brighton Only in Brighton would a top-hatted gent in a swishy Victorian cape be practically ignored by locals. This seaside city breathes quirkiness, reflected in an unusual array of guided walks. The Ghost Tour of the Lanes is a prime example, with actor Rob Marks kitted out like Sherlock Holmes as he regales the eight ghost stories attached to those narrow, cobbled alleyways. The Lanes is the city’s old fishing quarter – best known for its antique shops; but Rob has a different tale to tell… The Ghost Walk of the Lanes runs Wednesdays to Saturdays and costs £8pp, adult; £4 children; family tickets, £20; ghostwalkbrighton.co.ukIn a business etiquette workshop designed to prepare prospective executives for potential encounters with their western counterparts, an instructor with a polished Stepford veneer briefs her class on hugging protocol and the correct number of teeth to show in a smile (the answer is eight). In a workshop in Zhongshan, a team of women lovingly craft bespoke silicone sex dolls. Meanwhile, in a food processing plant, workers in fat-splattered aprons sift through piles of entrails and duck carcass off-cuts. Trainee butlers, destined to work for China’s new ultra-wealthy, are briefed on cutlery use and the importance of remaining impassive in the face of unreasonable behaviour. And in a deserted mall in a ghost city, built by developers but subsequently abandoned, stands the world’s saddest ostrich, alone in a bleak petting zoo, an attraction for the shoppers who never came. Jessica Kingdon’s fascinating observational documentary, which looks at aspiration, manufacture, consumption and waste in China, is full of such intriguing snapshots. Accompanied by a lithe, organic score by Dan Deacon, which weaves the rhythms of industry and technology into the music, the film is a mosaic portrait of the realities and repercussions of “the Chinese dream”.Ella Hickson’s adaptation of JM Barrie’s world-famous story of “the boy who wouldn’t grow up” adjusts its emphasis towards Wendy. In Barrie’s 1904 play and 1911 novel, Wendy flies off from her London nursery, along with her two brothers, to follow Pan to Neverland. Once there, in an embodiment of Edwardian domestic virtues, she becomes a mother figure to Pan’s gang of Lost Boys. As Hickson points out in the programme, even in the early 20th century this was a limited view of a woman’s role: “Emmeline Pankhurst and the suffragettes would have been on the front page of all the newspapers when Barrie [was writing].” Hickson continues: “I wanted to give [Wendy] something to achieve, to strive for.” Here, therefore, Wendy is on a quest: to find her own “lost boy” – a third brother, Tom, who has died in the opening scenes of the play. Amber James skilfully brings out the complexities of Hickson’s Wendy: admirable in her courage and determination; moving in her vulnerability; trying to find her place in a boy-shaped world, and to make common cause with the bolshie Tink (Hope Kenna) and warrior-like Tiger Lily (Ami Okumura Jones). James’s Wendy is perfectly counterpointed by Pierro Niel-Mee’s Pan, crowingly committed to leading his Lost Boys into battle against David Birrell’s time-haunted Captain Hook and his pirate gang; fearless in the face of death, that “great adventure”, yet recoiling from responsibility and emotion. Hickson’s quest theme, however, never really meshes dramatically with Barrie’s story. In spite of dynamic direction from Jonathan Munby and Rupert Hands, the action moves in fits and starts. That said, the production always looks spectacular. Developed by Leeds Playhouse along with the Japanese organisation Bunkamura, and first performed in Tokyo last year, its shifting sets (by Colin Richmond) and space-cheating projections (Taiki Ueda) set imaginations flying. Wendy &amp; Peter Pan is at Leeds Playhouse until 22 JanuaryBoris Johnson is committed to changing the culture at Downing Street that led to staff partying and drinking while the country was in lockdown, the Conservative party co-chair Oliver Dowden has said. Dowden said the prime minister felt a “sincere sense of regret” over what happened and that he was “committed to upping our game”. But Dowden also said it would be wrong for him to step down as prime minister, and that a leadership contest was not what the public wanted. Dowden was speaking on Sky’s Trevor Phillips on Sunday as Conservative MPs continued to consider whether Johnson should be forced out of office because of the lockdown-busting partying at No 10, and its dire impact on the party’s poll ratings, and his own. Many MPs have said they want to read the findings of the report by the senior civil servant Sue Gray into what happened before taking a final decision. Gray’s report is expected within the next fortnight. In his interview, Dowden said that when Johnson responded to the findings of the report in a statement in the Commons, he would “make sure that we address the kind of culture that has allowed [the partying] to happen in the first place”. Dowden did not say what the necessary “change of culture” would involve, but it is expected that some senior officials will leave, particularly Martin Reynolds, Johnson’s principal private secretary, who sent the email to No 10 staff inviting them to the party on 20 May 2020 attended by Johnson himself. It has also been reported that Johnson will ban drinking at No 10, in response to suggestions that the parties were a consequence of an end-of-day drinking regime that has become normalised for some staff. Dowden rejected the argument that Johnson was so compromised by the rule-breaking that he would have to resign. He said he “should of course remain as our prime minister” because of the leadership he had shown over Covid, in particular in ordering the mass booster programme and resisting calls for a lockdown before Christmas. Dowden also said: “Going through a period of divisive leadership contest … is not the sense that I get of what British people want us to be focusing on.” During his interview, Dowden repeatedly stressed his own anger with what had been happening in No 10. But he seemed deeply uncomfortable when Phillips said that, on the weekend of Prince Philip’s funeral, which was proceeded the night before by two parties had taking place at Downing Street, his own daughter had died. Phillips was close to breaking down as he recalled how, shortly before his daughter died after a long struggle with anorexia, he had been unable to meet up with her and other members of his family because they were obeying the Covid restrictions then in place. He said his daughter had “stuck to the spirit and the letter of the rules”, that thousands of people had had similar experiences, and that promises about a civil servant’s inquiry would not address their anger. In response, Dowden said he knew how people had suffered. “It is totally wrong if there has been any way in which those rules have not been fully obeyed in Downing Street,” he said. On Saturday, Tim Loughton became the sixth Tory MP to call publicly for Johnson’s resignation, saying that the prime minister’s reputation had suffered “terminal damage” because of the way he had responded to the partygate revelations over recent weeks. “Obfuscation, prevarication and evasion have been the order of the day when clarity, honesty and contrition was what was needed and what the British people deserve,” Loughton said. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said on Sunday that he believed Johnson had broken the law by attending a party at Downing Street on 20 May 2020 and then lied about it. To justify his claim that Johnson had lied, Starmer said Johnson originally told MPs he had been assured no parties took place at No 10. Then, after the private video of staff discussing a party was broadcast, the prime minister told MPs he was angry to learn about this. Then he admitted he had been at the 20 May event, and he told MPs last week that in retrospect he realised he should have stopped the gathering that evening. Starmer said that showed his initial claim to have no knowledge of partying was false. The Labour leader said it was now “blindingly obvious” what had happened and that people did not need to wait for the Gray report to know Johnson broke the law. He also said he expected the Gray report to set out the facts and that he was “as certain as I can be” that she would not make a ruling about whether or not the law was broken because she would consider that a judgment for others.A group of criminologists, penal reformers and ex-offenders have expressed “dismay” at Cambridge University’s decision to scrap a programme that taught prisoners alongside students after the deadly attack at Fishmongers’ Hall at one of its events. They include some of the people who survived the attack by terrorist Usman Khan when he stabbed to death Jack Merritt, 25, and Saskia Jones, 23, while wearing a fake suicide vest. The November 2019 killings occurred at an event to mark the fifth anniversary of the prisoner education scheme Learning Together. Last week, the Guardian revealed that the university had decided to halt the programme following criticism by a coroner over its approach to safety. Now, an open letter to the university’s vice-chancellor, signed by more than 70 people, decries the move as a “betrayal” of the aims of Learning Together. It said: “This seeming retreat into its comfort zone … strikes us as a retrograde step, particularly for an institution putatively committed to ‘widening access’.” Among the signatories are John Crilly and Marc Conway, two former prisoners and Learning Together alumni who were at the Fishmongers’ Hall event and forced Khan on to nearby London Bridge where he was shot dead by police. At an inquest into the killings, Crilly and Conway were praised for their bravery. In a report on the prevention of future deaths, Judge Mark Lucraft QC said there were collective failures by the security services, police and probation officers to prevent the attack. But he was also critical of Learning Together’s lax attitude to security when it invited Khan to the event. The inquest had heard that Learning Together regarded Khan as a “poster boy” for the programme, and had appeared in one of its promotional videos after taking part in several of its courses while at Whitemoor high security prison. The inquest jury said the authorities had a “blind spot to Khan’s unique risks due to his ‘poster boy’ image and lack of psychological assessment post release from prison”. Last week, Cambridge University said there would be a “clear stop” to Learning Together after an internal review. Conway urged the university to reconsider. Speaking to Sky News on Sunday, he said: “This [the letter] is from people from all walks of life: professors, doctors, people that work in criminal justice system. We just don’t understand the rationale for the decision.” “It goes against the advice that the university itself commissioned which said Learning Together could feasibly be delivered in a way that minimises and appropriately manages its risk.” Conway added: “The Learning Together programme dramatically changed my life for the better. We we have real concern that people will miss out and not get the opportunity of that and could go on to reoffend.” Last week, Jack’s father, Dave Merritt, told the Guardian that he was saddened that programme was coming to an end, but said: “The course leaders were idealistic, ambitious for the programme and naive about the risks that dangerous, high-risk, category A, Terrorist Act offenders such as Khan pose.” He added: “All the agencies in managing Khan – prison, probation, police, MI5 – regarded his involvement with Learning Together as a ‘protective factor’, in the absence of any evidence to support this. In the words of our barrister, Nick Armstrong of Matrix Chambers, it was if they were intoxicated by the ‘fairy dust Learning Together sprinkled over them’.” Cambridge University referred to its statement from last week that acknowledged that Learning Together “helped change many lives for the better” but confirmed it would be scrapped.On Fridays, the pub next to Forest Gate community school in east London starts filling up from 1pm. It has not always been this way, but ever since the school went down to a four-and-a-half-day week, it has been flooded with exhausted teachers keen to take advantage of their shorter week as quickly as possible. Other teachers use the afternoon to spend more time with their children, go on a mini-break, catch up on work they would have done at the weekend, or attend the local mosque. The important thing is that the afternoon is theirs to choose how they spend it, says Simon Elliott, who leads the multi-academy trust that runs Forest Gate. The initiative has been so successful that the school is now consulting on whether to reduce the week further, to four days. Elliott opted to shorten the week after reading a series of alarming reports on professional stress and burnout for teachers. “If you look at the amount of work teachers do, they do more than similar professions and the workload is very high. I wanted to try and alleviate that pressure at a structural level,” he said. To achieve this, he removed two pastoral periods from the schedule on Friday and added the four other 50-minute lessons on to weekdays. Children can stay on site to do homework or extracurricular activities. Elliott said the change has resulted in happier, more energetic teachers – an internal survey showed 98% appreciated the change. Pupils, who often struggle to focus on Friday afternoons, say they enjoy the extra time to spend with friends, or doing extracurricular activities and homework, and have received higher grades since, leading to satisfied parents. Tom Leather, a PE teacher, said the shorter working week had transformed his life. Before Covid, he went on weekend breaks to Europe, and now his wife is pregnant he is looking forward to having more time to spend with his new child, and later to pick them up from nursery. “Knowing we’re allowed to leave at 12.10 on Friday means that morale is better. Happier teachers work harder and produce better days,” he said. The move to four days is the subject of a new report by thinktank Autonomy, which is making the case for all schools to adopt a four-day week, reflecting a growing trend in the US where 1,600 schools have already shortened timetables. The report argues that shortening the week would help reduce the high numbers of teachers who leave the profession by cutting their hours, which, at an average of 51, are among the longest in Europe. The UK’s Health and Safety Executive found that teaching staff report the highest rates of work-related stress, depression and anxiety in the UK. The idea is popular among teachers, at least theoretically. Autonomy’s survey of 500 found that three-quarters would be interested in a 32-hour four-day week if pay is not cut, and over two-thirds said it would encourage them to remain in the profession. Elliott said there were barriers to rolling this out at present, however, including childcare routines and longer days in school. “It would give people a lot of freedom, they can be creative in their spare time, and feel a bit more rested. The problems to solve are around the logistics of people’s lives.” Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said the union “would be happy to discuss any thinking about the structure of the school term and week”, although he has not received calls from members about a universal move to four days and the union’s main priorities to address retention are improved pay, flexible working and a supportive approach from government. “Any suggested change would need to be supported by evidence that it would have a positive impact on pupil outcomes,” he said. A Department for Education spokesperson said: “Maintained schools are legally required to operate at least 190 school days a year and, now more than ever as children get back on track, we want all schools to be offering at least an average of 32.5 hours a week.”Novak Djokovic has been deported from Australia ahead of the Australian Open after the full federal court dismissed the world No 1’s bid to restore his visa. The Serbian tennis player was seen boarding an Emirates flight from Melbourne to Dubai hours after the court rejected his challenge to the decision of Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, to cancel the visa. The flight left shortly after 10.30pm local time (11.30am GMT). Hawke had cancelled the visa on Friday on the basis Djokovic’s presence in Australia might risk “civil unrest” as he is a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment”. And on Sunday, Chief Justice James Allsop announced the court unanimously dismissed Djokovic’s application, with costs to be paid by the tennis star. Allsop explained the decision of the court did not reflect on “the merits or wisdom of the decision” but rather whether it was so irrational as to be unlawful. Full reasons will follow at a later date. The decision is a major setback for Djokovic’s quest to win a 10th Australian Open crown and a record 21st grand slam title. In a statement Djokovic said he was “extremely disappointed” with the ruling, acknowledging it meant he “cannot stay in Australia and participate in the Australian Open”. “I respect the court’s ruling and I will cooperate with the relevant authorities in relation to my departure from the country,” he said. “I am uncomfortable that the focus of the past weeks has been on me and I hope that we can all now focus on the game and tournament I love. “I would like to wish the players, tournament officials, staff, volunteers and fans all the best for the tournament.” Djokovic said he intended to take some time to “rest and recuperate” before making any further comment. Serbia’s prime minister on Sunday criticised the decision to cancel the visa as “scandalous”. Ana Brnabic told reporters in Belgrade: “I think the court decision is scandalous...I find it unbelievable that we have two completely contradictory court decisions within the span of just a few days. “I am disappointed...I think it demonstrated how the rule of law is functioning or better to say not functioning in some other countries. In any case, I can hardly wait to see Novak Djokovic in our own country, in Serbia.” Djokovic’s lawyers had argued Hawke’s decision was “illogical, irrational or unreasonable” and the minister based it on Djokovic’s public statements about vaccination without actually seeking his views. The ATP called the saga “a deeply regrettable series of events.” A statement added: “Ultimately, decisions of legal authorities regarding matters of public health must be respected. More time is required to take stock of the facts and to take the learnings from this situation. “Irrespective of how this point has been reached, Novak is one of our sport’s greatest champions and his absence from the Australian Open is a loss for the game. We know how turbulent the recent days have been for Novak and how much he wanted to defend his title in Melbourne. We wish him well and look forward to seeing him back on court soon. ATP continues to strongly recommend vaccination to all players.” In fresh submissions overnight, Djokovic’s lawyers added that Hawke had failed to consider the impact on anti-vaccination sentiment if his visa were cancelled. In court on Sunday, the minister’s counsel, Stephen Lloyd, argued Australia “must not be bound to suffer the presence of an alien for fear of what might happen if they were removed”. Use of the ministerial power to cancel a visa comes with a three-year ban on re-entering Australia, except in compelling circumstances, such as compassionate or Australian national interest grounds. Djokovic arrived in Australia on the evening of 5 January. He believed that a visa granted on 18 November and a medical exemption approved by Tennis Australia and a Victorian government independent expert panel would be sufficient to enter Australia. Djokovic’s visa was first cancelled by Australian Border Force hours after he arrived at Melbourne airport and he was taken to a detention hotel. On Monday a federal circuit court judge restored Djokovic’s visa, concluding it was unreasonable for the ABF to renege on a deal to give him more time at the airport to address the exemption issue. After a week’s deliberation, Hawke cancelled Djokovic’s visa again on Friday on the new ground that his presence might be a risk to “health and good order”. In a statement, Hawke welcomed the unanimous decision, arguing that Australia’s “strong border protection policies” had both “kept us safe during the pandemic” and “are fundamental to safeguarding Australia’s social cohesion”. “Australians have made great sacrifices to get to this point [in the pandemic] and the Morrison government is firmly committed to protecting this position, as the Australian people expect.” The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, welcomed “the decision to keep our borders strong and keep Australians safe”. “It’s now time to get on with the Australian Open and get back to enjoying tennis over the summer.” Reaction in Australia to the court result was mixed. The Labor opposition’s home affairs spokeswoman, Kristina Keneally, said the Morrison government had made itself “a laughing stock on the world stage”. “The Morrison government’s own argument before the court was that Mr Djokovic’s visa should be cancelled because his presence here may foster anti-vaccination sentiment based on what he did and said before he was granted a visa,” Keneally said. “This must prompt the question, why did Mr Morrison’s government grant him a visa to come to Australia in the first place?” Australian tennis star, Nick Kyrgios, expressed disappointment with a face-palm emoji. He was one of few players who had called for Djokovic to be allowed to stay and play. Liberty Victoria president, Michael Stanton, said the case had “drawn attention to Australia’s dysfunctional visa cancellation and detention regimes and to the troubling use of the minister’s God-like personal powers”.And that, my people, is a series. On behalf of all the OBO types, thanks for your company and comments – it’s been hilarious. Well done to Australia, I don’t even know what to England but I hope they get some time at home to enjoy, and see you again soon. Ta-ra. Here’s Ali Martin’s report of the final day. On the other hand... Chris Silverwood says first and foremost, the batting hasn’t been good enough, and they need to look at why that’s happening. Pushed for an explanation, he begins by blaming bubbles and schedules, then references “other things” making wooly comments about structures and such. He’s encouraged by the official acknowledgement that red-ball cricket needs a reset, and says that there are talented players coming through. Gower then presses him on mistakes off the pitch – selections, for example – but he says nothing specific, saying he’ll speak to people he trusts to get honest feedback, and pushed on his position, says there’ll be a review. He seems a nice enough bloke, but I’m afraid there was nothing in that interview – no insight, no fire, no vigour – that makes you think he can sort this, and there never really had been. Someone will pay for this with their job, and presumably it’ll be him. “Frustrating, that second innings,” Root tells David Gower. He notes that Australia got more runs than they ought to have done, scoring on both sides of the wicket, and England didn’t make the most of their starts, getting out to poor shots today. Asked if he’s had the support of those above him, he responds to an entirely different question, saying there’ll always be poor sessions and performances, but the batters haven’t posted a decent total and you can’t win Tests if you don’t get 200 in either innings. So Gower wonders what needs to change, and Root says he sympathises with the young guys, but they’ve got to learn quickly, though they’re not given much opportunity a level below this one. He won’t think about changing personnel now, as “there’s a lot of emotion flying around” – a proper sit-down is necessary. Root also notes that the pandemic and schedule take a toll – “it does wear you down” – saying that it’s a challenge no one’s ever had to wear before and England have done it more than anyone else, but that doesn’t excuse the performances. Back in the studio, we’re back on our old themes. Sort the system, be like New Zealand, pick the best players. And I don’t say that to denigrate the estimable Butcher and Cook, I say it because we all know what the answers and, yet we’re flailing about desperately because we also all know that those in charge have different priorities. Cummins raises the replica glass urn, while back in the studio, Cook notes that he played in two five-nillers, but this series is worse than those – in roughly the way that a taser to the dress circle is worse than a baseball bat to the face or a donkey kick to the solar plexus. Back in the studio, Mark Butcher says he wishes Gilchrist had gone as easy on his England team as he did on Root just there, but we’re now back in Hobart for Travis Head to get his player of the series award. Who saw that coming? He prefers his ton in this Test than at the Gabba because of the conditions - I’m surprised at that, because the one in Brisbane took that first match away from England. He’s glad to get another shy at international cricket now he knows what it’s about, and says the batting unit is excellent and there’s serious competition for places. He thanks England, and can’t wait for tonight – I’ll bet. Imagine the joy and love he’s feeling right now - I’m feeling emotional at the thought and I’m just an idiot in a box room 10,000 miles away. Cummins says these are the series in your diary as an international cricketer, and he extols his attacking options tough chortles that Lyon won’t be thrilled with his use of them. He also namechecks Boland, Green and Richardson, thanks the governing bodies for putting the series on in “unpreeecedented” circumstances, and thanks England for coming. Ouch. He finishes by thanking Australia for all the support, especially given the tough times many states are experiencing. What a mensch he is. Gosh, Gilchrist starts by thanking England for coming, then says we’ve been here before, him interviewing Root with a victory having been on the table only for ignominious defeat to follow. Root says England have played good cricket in parts - very small parts – but can’t sdo enough to get the win. It’s frustrating, he says, and the team need to go away from here ad stop making the same mistakes because there’s another series along soon. The the batters haven’t given the attack anything to bowl at, but ultimately his team have been outplayed and he praises Australia for that. Gilchrist then praises Mark Wood and tries to prompt Root to say he needs more pace in his team, but Root just congratulates his mate and the crowd applaud as obvious a top bloke as there can be in the world. Adam Gilchrist is on the dais taking us through the presentation and begins by congratulating Hobart on hosting its first ever Test, then calls Joe Root to interview, the poor man. “But at least the top brass keep their bonuses, eh?” emails Andrew Benton. Cricket is the winner. It’s the feel-food story of the winter! “We are making this look even easier than it is, which is quite a feat,” tweets Guy Hornsby. “Shot selection is an absolute joke today bar Root and perhaps Crawley. I know it’s not nice to criticise players, but if so, what on earth have Billings, Pope, Woakes, Stokes been doing then?” Criticism is part of the game I’m afraid, and the sad reality is that is barely matters what Pope and Billings did because the chances of them navigating the chase were so slim. Both have talent so it shouldn’t be that way, but it is. Sometimes in sporting institutions, a malaise - usually starting at the top – sets in, permeates and percolates down, rot overriding the talent therein. See United, Manchester. What I wouldn’t give for just one batsman from that side. It’s mad to think that not that long ago, England’s line-up read Cook, Strauss, Trott, Pietersen, Collingwood, Bell, Prior and now look. “What a magnificently close finish that could have been if Australia had simply forfeited their second innings,” muses Brian Withington. I think you’ve invented a new form of the game. Quick, contact a patent attorney then call the ECB and the dry ice manufacturers. I’m excited to see how this Australia side develops. They’ve got work to do with the batting, but Travis Head looks good to go and Cameron Green is a potential superstar. They go to Pakistan in March, and that series should be a belter. Australia have, of course, been superb: their attack are superb, and on the odd occasion they’ve needed it, their batters have found something superb enough. England, on the other hand, have been pitiful. They’ve given it everything, but in a way that’s even worse because it tells you how far off the standard they are. WICKET! Robinson b Cummins 0 (England 124 all out) It’s 10 for 56 in 22.5 overs! A golden duck to start, a golden duck to finish, and that is that! I believe they call it poetry! A Cummins full toss is far too good for Robinson, and finally, blessedly, this is over. Bye! Ta-ra! See ya! Indicate the way to my habitual abode, I’m fatigued and have a desire to retire. I consumed an alcoholic beverage 60 minutes ago and it’s penetrated my cerebrum. Wood premeditates a pull, drags on – that’s three in the innings - and this series is ending as it started and as it continued. That’s nine wickets lost for 56 in 22ish overs. 39th over: England 123-8 (Wood 11, Robinson 0) Target 271 Wood makes room to slash Cummins’ yorker for four, then does so again to hammer over cover for four more. the counter-attack is on! SCOTT BOLAND CANNOT BE REAL! Woakes makes room, swings hard, edges ... and Carey takes a screamer, still bending and flinging up a right hand to snaffle in the webbing. 38th over: England 115-7 (Woakes 5, Wood 3) Target 271 In recent times, the Ashes in Australia has been one of the biggest mismatches in sport, and strangely, England’s focus on it is one reason why. Instead of all the planning, they just need to find a good, balanced team: some pace, some swing, some spin, and some batters with technique. Wood takes one to cover and there’s that Woakesian drive I was rattling on about earlier, sent through midwicket for four. 37th over: England 110-7 (Woakes 1, Wood 2) Target 271 Also not that long ago, Wood was celebrating sixfer; what an absolute state. He forces a rib-tickler to fine leg for one, then Woakes adds one more and he misses with a huge hook before dropping to cover and scampering one more. Not that long ago, England were 68-0! Does that even need an exclamation? Pope wanders across towards off, looking to whip away, misses, and Cummins hits. It’s another horror show, of course it is, why wouldn’t it be? 36th over: England 107-6 (Pope 5, Woakes 0) Target 271 England are so England. Woakes plays out five dots, giving Boland a wicket maiden, and he must be wondering why they call it Test cricket. “Really impressed with Ricky Ponting’s analysis on Oz telly,” says Jim Oliver. “Any thoughts on getting him into the England set up? He knows the game inside out, has trophies/battle-scars galore, plus would not be afraid to ruffle feathers.” You never know how someone will do in the big chair until they’re in it, but I agree he’s great at explaining the game. Coaching is slightly different – you need to see what’s coming rather than discuss it while it’s going on, and he wasn’t the greatest captain – but this team could certainly use the kind of fibre he has. This one sticks in the pitch a little, but this is very tame from Billings, who checks his shot - confidence is a preference – and Cummins collects easily at mid on. Scott Boland, though, what a story! 35th over: England 107-5 (Pope 5, Billings 1) Target 271 Billings eases to gully for one, then Pope hauls another to square leg; we can go for another hour tonight, but two more wickets and you’d imagine Australia ask for the extra half hour so they can go out or sit about on the pitch, depending. Pope takes a further single, a leg bye follows, and runs are flowing again! 34th over: England 105-5 (Pope 4, Billings 0) Target 271 Billings thighs to square leg for a leg bye and runs are hard to find at this point with little chance of respite. At some point, Woakes will come in to play a few nice drives en route to a good-looking 34, but there are no signs of anything building; these two are surviving, waiting to leave the bad ball that never comes. Pope, though, flicks a pair to midwicket and they scamper two. “Just wanted to say how frustrating the performance is from England in this Test,” emails Gareth Wilson. “There IS ability in this team; if only England had been able to put Australia under pressure early on in the series. It is not a great Australian team; it may turn out to be one, but lots of their players needed to be put under the pump, and England just haven’t been able to do that. Even if they lose, this final Test has shown England can be, and should have been, competitive in Australia.” Yes, the big errors of selection and decision at the toss have been, as Rio Ferdinand would say, “well documented”. England don’t need to be as bad as they’ve been, and in some ways this has been the most embarrassing of the many clatterings because it’s not to an all-time great outfit. 33rd over: England 101-5 (Pope 2, Billings 0) Target 271 Joe Root ends the series as England’s top scorer, his 322 runs coming with a 32.2 average. I hate to say it, but that’s nowhere near good enough, which I don’t mean as a criticism of him, just that for his team to compete, he needed to continue batting like God. Meantime, Cummins rattles a maiden at Pope, and this is going to last much longer, I don’t think. “Why can’t England just let Australia bowl?” wonders Hugh Wake. “No need to score runs at the moment. Preserve the wicket at all costs, then worry about the score tomorrow morning. There’s still two whole days to get the total.” That ball to Root is one reason why: it’s a fourth innings against a brilliant attack. But also, as per Andy Flower, wickets come when scoring is slow. 32nd over: England 101-5 (Pope 2, Billings 0) Target 271 Goodness me what a state of affairs – Sam Billings it’s your big chance. He sees away two dots, as he sizes up a life-hanging knock. It never rains but sometimes it pours so hard it makes your soul bleed. Root gets a grubber that zips into the bottom of off stump, and all he can do is laugh ruefully. 32nd over: England 101-4 (Root 11, Pope 2) Target 271 Aha, Root’s trusty bat was bust - it was taped and all sorts, so he must’ve been keen on it – and his new one begins by clattering fresh air all the way to the fence. 32nd over: England 101-4 (Root 11, Pope 2) Target 271 Boland replaces Starc, but the over will be remembered for a beautiful “in and around off stump” from Steve Harmison in co-comms. I’m not sure what happens next, because my BT crashes, but they take drinks mid-over. 31st over: England 101-4 (Root 11, Pope 2) Target 271 Pope nurdles into the on side and raises England’s hundred; nearly there! Root then takes one to point before Pope ducks a bouncer that’s too high to put him in any serious jeopardy. England will be relishing tis quiet period, but so will Australia because the scoreboard is doing very little. “Maybe I’m a little biased because I live down here,” says Thomas Chick, “but I think this pitch has produced the most interesting game of the series. Absolutely rapt.” Yup, it’s partly the track – but partly the series being secure and partly Wood finally getting the breaks. 30th over: England 99-4 (Root 10, Pope 1) Target 271 Root shoves Starc down the ground, Khawaja dives over it at mid off, the ball dribbles to the fence for a sorely-needed four. That’s 5000 Test runs for England’s captain, who’ll be feeling his responsibility out there, or maybe out there is the only place he can not feel his responsibility. He tries a dab to third, removes the bat, can’t get it out the road in time and does well to see the ball clip into the pitch, then pulls two. He’s away, and this, right here, is the match. Expletive. 29th over: England 90-4 (Root 4, Pope 1) Target 271 The first time I saw Ollie Pope play for England I thought he’d be a fixture for a decade, but it’s not quite gone that way - he’s not as far along as I expected him to be, and we’ve not seen much to think he can navigate a route through this chase. Apart, that is, from a talent so pure it can manifest at any time; he’ll know that this could be his moment, and he acclimatises by playing out a maiden from Cummins. 28th over: England 90-4 (Root 4, Pope 1) Target 271 Well, it was fun while it lasted. Dearie me. Stokes has seen enough, pulling from outside leg, and he doesn’t get close to the power or elevation he’s after, Lyon running in from deep square and diving forward to hold on. I get that England can’t just let Australia bowl, but that was a profoundly unnecessary shot. 28th over: England 92-3 (Root 4, Stokes 5) Target 271 Still no Nathan Lyon, who’s yet to bowl in this match, as Starc bounds in again; Stokes turns his first ball to square leg for one, then Root chops to third man for one more. I wonder how long England will keep knocking it like this, because they’ve being trying to get them quickly until now. 27th over: England 90-3 (Root 3, Stokes 4) Target 271 And here we are: Cummins replaces Green, and we might just see the match settled in the next half-hour or so. His third delivery is a beaut, moving just enough off the seam and ripping past Root’s outside edge before beating Carey as well, then his final ball almost tempts the fated run-down. Maiden. “I say, here’s fun,” says Darrien Bold. “England team for the first test in WI? Who’s inked in?” Anything to divert attention from the tension in the middle, I say. Is there a chase on? Not as far as I know! I guess Crawley, Root, Stokes, Bairstow, Wood and Broad. 26th over: England 90-3 (Root 3, Stokes 4) Target 271 Stokes forces two through midwicket, and is looking more like himself now. In retrospect, it’s not surprising that it took him a while to get going in the series – at the time, it was hard not to expect that he’d personality the usual miracles – but he’ll be absolutely loving this, which is half the battle. Too many English batters play like they’re undergoing an ordeal, because they are. 25th over: England 88-3 (Root 3, Stokes 2) Target 271 England just need to see Green away, because when he finishes his spell Australia will be forced to bring Cummins back. Root adds one more to backward point, then Stokes steps across, gets through his pull while the ball sticks in the pitch, and wears it on the hip. No harm done, and single to cover ends the over. 24th over: England 86-3 (Root 2, Stokes 1) Target 271 “Yes” says Root as he tucks the returning Starc – the returning Starc, just what you need – to long leg for one. Starc then flings one on fifth-stump line, inciting Stokes to play and miss, and the squeeze is on. England need 185 to win, but that looks a monster for the now. “And now Green gets praised for getting Crawley out,” says Anthony Bradley. But Crawley played a walking shot with bat going from slip to mid on. Surely batsman error?” Not mutually exclusive, in mine. 23rd over: England 85-3 (Root 1, Stokes 1) Target 271 England have lost three for 15 in 6.2 overs and you fear for them now ... OK, you perpetually fear for them, but you fear for them particularly at this juncture. Stokes gets away first ball, guiding to point, then Root gloves one that lifts and scampers a start of his own. Cameron Green is a problem. It’s three for Green! He persuades Crawley to drive and this time he doesn’t get all of it, a little bit of movement off the seam doing the work, and what a spell this is! That’s the thing with this attack – there’s no respite, and this time it’s the second change getting it done! 22nd over: England 83-2 (Crawley 36, Root 0) Target 271 We are not, of course, unfamiliar with what we’re seeing, and you get the feeling this partnership will need to take their team most of the way; another quick wicket, and that might be it. Or, as the old English adage goes, one brings 10. A leg bye is all this Boland over yields. “Is it just me,” wonders Seth Levine, “or does Malan look like a proper Test batter in every format of the game except Test cricket?” Ha! He did pretty well to get into the side, I reckon – I doubt he expected to – but there was no one else, and they thought the pitches suited his game. In general, it’s hard to know where England go from here – you could make cases for this to be it for him, Burns and Buttler – but who comes in? 21st over: England 82-2 (Crawley 36, Root 0) Target 271 The crowd are up as Root comes in, but he calmly plays his first ball to point. Looking at the wicket again, Malan didn’t move his feet, and though we can perhaps blame the bouncer that hit him, he didn’t to that one either, so let’s just congratulate Green for a crucial spell. HERE WE GO! Malan tries another run-down, and this time – like Burns before him - he plays on! This is a bazzer of a spell from the brilliant Green, and this is cooking! 21st over: England 82-1 (Crawley 36, Malan 10) Target 271 It seems like England have decided, as a collective, to throw hands at this. Malan misses with a square cut, then Green cramps him as he tries to play a run-down. 20th over: England 82-1 (Crawley 36, Malan 10) Target 271 Malan sees off four dots, then drives a single to deep backward point; he looks recovered, which reminds us that these lads are not like the rest of us because not 10 minutes ago, a hard projectile clattered his swede. I’m still not recovered, and I’m sitting at a desk in my trackies. 19th over: England 81-1 (Crawley 36, Malan 9) Target 271 Off we go again, Malan taking his time to get settled again and rightly so – that rung his bell and I daresay his ears are going still going like he’s just come out of Fabric. He lets two alone, then chucks everything at a cover drive, edging in the opposite direction past leg stump, then Crawley comes forward to show him how it’s done. That’s a gorgeous shot, and he looks a proper batter now. 19th over: England 76-1 (Crawley 32, Malan 8) Target 271 Malan is pretty decent against the quick stuff, and he carts Green – coming around - on the up, through point; that’s a delicious thunk. So Green bangs his next one in and it skids then lifts, an absolute brute. Malan tries to get out the road, swaying back and twisting neck while turning head but transfixed into keeping his feet still. Goodness me, that is unpleasant, and he wears it on the side of the lid; there’s a break while he reorientates himself and gets a new one. Cricket is hard. 18th over: England 72-1 (Crawley 32, Malan 4) Target 271 Crawley plays out a maiden from Boland with composure that is extremely disconcerting. What on earth is going on? “More amapiano on the OBO please!” emails Gil Southwood. “Been a huge fan of Mas Musiq since I heard my neighbour blasting them out his window two years ago. Where do you put England’s chances of a win here? I’ve just woken up in a covid-riddled fugue state to 68-1, but with the openers actually doing their job, 271 seems doable. Maybe it’s the covid driving my optimism, who knows.” By West Indies there’ll be a Spotify playlist, I promise – I do have one already, but it’s interpolated with Ghanaian tunes – though I guess Amena is Ghanaian and Nigerian too. I’m not sure about you, though, but my experience of covid, admittedly right at the start of things, tells me that it’s the polar opposite of optimism, which makes this farrago all the harder to believe. 17th over: England 72-1 (Crawley 32, Malan 4) Target 271 Pink ball, final session, pitch doing plenty; this is why we’re here. And Malan has a slash at a wide one, but because he does it with intent, he sends the ball scooting wide of gully for four, crystallising part of England’s problem through this series: they’ve been tentative in attack and defence. On the other hand, even when you pick the wrong option, if you commit to it you’ve got a better chance of getting away with it. We go again, Green to bowl the five balls remaining in his over... As we know, the purpose of the OBO is to share joy, so please allow me to introduce the uninitiated to this. It’s a long old time since a tune smashed me in the face like this one did – I was in Accra over Christmas and new year, it came on in a restaurant I was in, and the whole place went off. England are so very England. That is tea, and the players troop off with Australia bouncing, despite a session and day that they’ve lost. England need 203 more to win in what’ll be an extended passage – it’s going to be an absolute jazzer, so don’t you go changing. YOU KNOW THE KOO! In the final over before tea, Burns plays, changes his mind, leaves, and plays on! We almost sat it a few overs ago, when one bounces over the stumps, and it’s done for him now; he’s done for himself, and how might that change things? 16th over: England 68-0 (Burns 26, Crawley 32) Target 271 Crawley’s playing nicely now, especially on the on side – his timing is excellent – and he flicks Boland off the hip for four. If he can just stop nicking off, he’ll really be in business, but it looks like through the course of the series, he’s got the mental approach sorted. Well, for now at least – for almost every batter, it’s an ongoing battle. 15th over: England 64-0 (Burns 26, Crawley 28) Target 271 Again, Burns resets well, and sees away the two remaining ball of the over. Two more before tea/dinner/cocktails. “Literally letting his hair down, Burns is playing more confidently and Crawley is naturally aggressive,” says Colum Fordham. “If England treat this as a chase – one-day style, we’re pretty good at this style of cricket – rather than grimly hanging on for survival, I think they’ve got much more of chance.” Agreed. If they’d’ve picked the 50-over team and told them to have at it, they’d’ve posted better totals than they have. “Nothing conclusive there,” says the umpire, and though we’re told there was a sound in Dan Norcross’ headphones, no evidence that said gone. This is close. It’s not obviously out, but not obviously not out, so the on-pitch decision will probably rule. 15th over: England 64-0 (Burns 26, Crawley 28) Target 271 Green into the attack - what a player he’s going to be when he puts it all together; what a player he already is. And what a shot that is from Burns, a cover drive that tempts Labuschagne into a run, chase and dive; he does really well to scoop away from the boundary, but his elbow was on it while his hand was on the ball and after a look the signal is four. Burns then fends at one outside off, is caught behind, and thinks it’s gone! The umpire says no and Cummins goes upstairs again! 14th over: England 60-0 (Burns 22, Crawley 28) Target 271 I’m sure he’d say to the contrary, but Burns could well be playing for his Test career here, a circumstance which must be lurking somewhere in his mind. Happily, his hair are his aerials, man. They pick up signals from the cosmos and direct them into his brain. Anyhow, Crawley, clips Boland finer than fine for four, before missing one outside off and proceeding like it never happened. I believe they call this competence. 13th over: England 56-0 (Burns 22, Crawley 24) Target 271 Burns nudges to cover and takes a single, then Cummins beats him outside off and he responds by squirting towards wide long on for three. What this pair are doing well is resetting after each decent delivery, and as I type that, Crawley misses with a swiping pull, wearing it on the midriff, then knocks one into the on side. The highest chase to win a day-nighter is 187. 12th over: England 51-0 (Burns 19, Crawley 22) Target 271 Boland tanks through another tight one that yields but a leg bye. It’s weird to say, but it’s extremely unfraught out there; it’s extremely disorientating and I don’t know where to put myself. It was clipping the top corner of leg, so umpire’s call and Crawley survives. 12th over: England 50-0 (Burns 19, Crawley 22) Target 271 Cummins slants one across that hits Crawley on the pad and there’s an appeal ... it’s rejected, then at the last moment the skip thinks he’d best have a look... 11th over: England 50-0 (Burns 19, Crawley 22) Target 271 Crawley takes one more to midwicket, raising the fifty partnership, and England are ticking these off. During a quieter over, let’s also pay our tribute to the heroic Virat Kohli, his brilliance, attitude and edge a life-lesson in taking attacking options a one-man advert for this thing of ours. 10th over: England 49-0 (Burns 189, Crawley 21) Target 271 A single to Burns, nudges to deep backward square, and a leg bye, keep England at it. Meantime, a row of fans – presumably those who marked the start of this innings by applauding themselves for singing Jerusalem and God Save the Queen – disturb the enjoyment of those around them. “This is all a bit unexpected, tweets Guy Hornsby. “Whatever happens - and it’ll probably be capitulation - I hope we can make a fist of it, if only for Mark Wood. He’s such a great guy and has bowled himself into the ground and finally he has figures he deserves. We’ll always have 40-0.” Agreed on all counts; he’s been England’s best player by far, and it’s a shame his mates have let him down. Just a few days ago, Aggers made a sage case for leaving him out in this Test, given a champo-style pitch that called for the nagging accuracy of Overton. Personally, I’d have flown Darren Stevens out. 9th over: England 47-0 (Burns 18, Crawley 21) Target 271 Ah, Cummins was just changing ends, and he beats Crawley outside off, then Crawley - who’s found his groove just in time to go home – steps down and across, getting outside off to whip through midwicket for four. His top level is a very useful level; if he can raise his modal level, he can be very serious; he then adds two more with a half-batter, is beaten outside off, then flicks four more through the aforementioned midwicket! Ten off the over, giving England their highest opening partnership of the series, and they’re all over this. Crawley, in particular, is doing a great job of ignoring the balls that beat him to make the most of those that don’t. 8th over: England 37-0 (Burns 18, Crawley 11) Target 271 Cummins thanks himself and brings on Boland’s golden arm; Crawley takes one to midwicket then Burns wears the over’s final ball on the back thigh. There’s a shout but no appeal which looks right to me – it was high, though very close to the stumps – and we see that it was going over the stumps, just. 7th over: England 36-0 (Burns 18, Crawley 10) Target 271 Burns shoves Starc through cover and they run three – England’s openers are building a fine platform for the inevitable collapse, and after Crawley adds one, Burns is beaten by one that leaves him. There’s an appeal for a caught behind, but he wasn’t quick enough to edge it so Cummins opts not to review, then a defensive shot into the ground bounces and it’s going to drop onto the bails ... no it isn’t! It lobs over the top as gizzard is swallowed and belched back up in time to clips for off the toes, for byes follow and that’s 12 off the over! Like I said a procession. “It was a real treat to wake up and see Wood has a well-deserved five-wicket haul,” emails Tom van der Gucht. “No doubt, there’ll be some comments about how if Archer and Stone had stayed fit we would’ve been more competitive. But, a simple look at the stats on Cricinfo show Robinson, Broad, Anderson and (after this haul fairly reflected the quality of his bowling) Wood show the bowlers have averaged under 30 for their wickets highlighting the disappointing batting displays and mishandling of the spine department. Who knows, if Leach had played more last summer and arrived with better rhythm and confidence, or, if Parkinson had been given a pop at the champ, the Aussie middle and lower order would’ve been restricted too.” Imagine the muddle England’s selectors would’ve got themselves into with a compliment from which to select! But yeah, Archer was a huge miss. 6th over: England 24-0 (Burns 11, Crawley 9) Target 271 This is terrific, intense stuff and the contest we hoped this series might be. That it’s gone differently reflects lots of things – bubble life, the excellence of Australia’s attack, the poverty of England’s batting, some poor calls from England’s brains trust. But what’s been disappointing is that England are capable of better – not better enough, but better – and Crawley comes forward to create a half0volley, driving Cummins down the ground for four, the only runs from the over. 5th over: England 20-0 (Burns 11, Crawley 5) Target 271 Burns drops Starc into the pitch and Crawley wants a single, but the now-wise Burns sends him back. His hair looks extremely lank under that lid, like an an early-70s dweeb thinking he’s Charlie George, and when Starc strays straight he clips him off the toes for four, then slashes at a wide one, so poorly he misses it. England have broken the back of this one now. 4th over: England 16-0 (Burns 7, Crawley 5) Target 271 Thanks Sam and, as the man who saw three holes in the ground, “Well, well, well.” Like you, I’m thinking yeah, England can do this, at the same time as thinking “Ahahahahahaha!”, and as I type that, a thick edge from Crawley flies past a diving Khawaja at three and scoots to the fence for four more. Furthermore, we now know that lb appeal in the previous over was out; it’s a procession! 3rd over: England 12-0 (Burns 7, Crawley 1) Starc appeals for LBW but Crawley’s inside edged onto pad. There’s no real interest. He has three slips and a gully, the usual set up. No sign of swing yet, maybe a little seam. He’s on Crawley’s hip and the youngster turns him easily to long leg. Starc nearly beats his defence as Burns comes across the ball, but again no real interest. Once Starc moves it, Burns looks to be struggling. That’s me! Dan Harris will take over now. Cheers for the company. 2nd over: England 11-0 (Burns 7, Crawley 0) Burns leaves the first two from Cummins, and the next hits him near the nethers. He seems fine, so it probably missed him. Burns’ outside edge gathers him two more as he runs it between slip and gully. 1st over: England 9-0 (Burns 5, Crawley 0) Mitchell Starc has four shadows spiking out from his person, which means it’s time for the lights. Burns takes strike, hair billowing from his helmet. The second ball squares him up and his edge flies between third slip and gully. He gets four. 267 to win. Starc responds with one that takes Burns’ stomach. Burns eventually punches one to cover for a run. Starc can’t get the radar right with his first to Crawley - it’s well down leg. The next flicks Crawley’s pad and races to the rope, too. Nine from the over. Colum writes in: Hi Sam, Lovely to see Mark Wood’s smile as he uproots Cummins’ stumps. Throroughly deserved 6-37. Brilliant bowling, ably supported by Broad. I hope it’s not the last smile we see from the England team as they tackle the not insignificant total of 271 against Cummins, Starc and co. I’d love to see Crawley counter-attacking but this is going to be tough. Best, Colum Fordham Sensational display from Mark Wood, and he’s given his country something in the realms of possibility to chase. It will be a phenomenal effort to do so in these conditions and in the context of the series, but they’re in with a chance. There’s still 58 overs left in the day - we’re going to get a good sense of things before the day’s done! Bang. Cummins slogs, shows all three stumps, Wood hits them. Six wickets for Mark Wood. Brilliant bowling. 6-37 all up. Career best for him. 56th over: Australia 155-9 (Cummins 13, Lyon 4) Carey goes, bringing Lyon to the crease. He looks great. He gets two to deep square, then middles a drive down the ground that Rory Burns somehow knees away at mid off, allowing Lyon to get two more. Wood’s going again. He deserves another. Carey’s caught behind! He falls one short of what would have been a well-deserved half century. He lunged forward to stroke Broad through cover, but it took his inside edge and was taken by Billings, who now has five dismissals. 55th over: Australia 151-8 (Carey 49, Cummins 13) Carey’s now farming the strike, refusing a single out to deep point half way through the over. He’s happy to sit back and defend. But then, as is always the way, Carey gets a single from the final ball, and keeps the strike. 54th over: Australia 150-8 (Carey 48, Cummins 13) Broad to Cummins and Wood to Carey is the “match-up” Australia wants. So England offers Cummins space on the off side - he finds it and takes a single. Australia wants the runs. Carey then flashes Broad to the point boundary sweeper and gets his own single. Cummins has to duck under the next. Cummins declines a run on the last ball. 53rd over: Australia 148-8 (Carey 47, Cummins 12) Wood is in to Carey with that sharp angle around the wicket, and he falls over as the first one flies past Carey on the leg side. Carey is nearly chest-on when Wood delivers - it’s not Shiv Chanderpaul but it’s a gateway to Chanderpaul. It’s working - Carey sways back and cuts Wood over point for four! He moves to 47, and Australia to 263 ahead. 52nd over: Australia 144-8 (Carey 43, Cummins 12) Broad takes up the mantle from the other end, and he’s in the Carey who steers him behind point and calls “two!” straight away. He gets them. He’s on the front foot and defending thereafter, and he’s able to open the face and gather one in front of point with a ball remaining. They may have wanted to keep him on strike there. Cummins defends the last, he’ll be happy up that end. 51st over: Australia 141-8 (Carey 40, Cummins 12) Wood around the wicket to Cummins with dark clouds overhead, and it’s nasty straight away. A few balls in and we see Cummins slapped with one on his left tricep. He’s jumping, bouncing, and using his bat to cover his face. He screams “no!” when refusing a run a little louder than normal. He ducks the fifth with more certitude - maybe that’s the way to go. A play and miss to finish the over off. On the face of it, that was an excellent session for England. They’ve found six wickets, and they’re so close to giving themselves something achievable to chase. Mark Wood was sensational, tearing in and terrorising the Australians with pace and bounce, getting himself five wickets in the process. He may yet nab two more. He’s been supported by Broad, who’s gone very close with a few LBW shouts, and Chris Woakes, whose no-ball dismissal of Alex Carey has the legal eagles scrambling for interpretation. In short, it was extremely close but for what it’s worth (little), this author didn’t see anything behind the line. Alex Carey has been the beneficiary of a bit of luck, but has played with toughness and positivity to finish 40 not out here. It’s been a crucial innings in the context of the match. Many will think Australia have more than enough already, and that may be so, but this has been an excellent effort from England this session to bring themselves back into the game. They need to finish off Australia quickly, and somehow navigate Cummins, Starc, Boland and Green under lights to give themselves a shot. We’ll be back to chronicle it all in half an hour or so. 50th over: Australia 141-8 (Carey 40, Cummins 12) Cummins hacks Broad to deep mid wicket and it’s cut off, but not before Cummins gets two. He then drives for one, left of mid off. Carey steers then next past gully and for three as Broad shouts “no!” Australia’s lead passes 250. Last ball before the dinner break, and Carey pulls Broad for four in front of mid wicket. 11 from the over to finish for Australia. 49th over: Australia 130-8 (Carey 33, Cummins 8) Wood is around the wicket to Cummins and Australia’s skipper dabs one behind point which goes all the way to the rope. Malan, sliding in, should have stopped that. Wood then slams one in to Cummins’ glove but there’s a run - he’s only centimetres away from breaking his arm, surely! Carey’s now backing away and trying to loft, but unsuccessfully. He goes inside the line of the next and pulls a single to deep backward square. Cummins fends one just past Pope at bat pad, and gets one. 48th over: Australia 123-8 (Carey 32, Cummins 2) Cummins leaves Broad’s first and it seams back prodigiously and flies just over the off bail. We’re in the final throes of this innings, I feel. How do England’s top order feel? The ball is still moving pretty sharply - it will be a hell of a chase if England can pull it off. 47th over: Australia 122-8 (Carey 32, Cummins 1) Wood gets Starc, and that’s five wicket! He then delivers a searing yorker to Cummins, around the wicket, which cannons into Cummins’ toe! It’s given! Cummins reviews, and it looks like it might be missing the stumps on the angle, and it is. Cummins laughs. My God, the double bluff at 147km/hr. Cummins is trying to survive by crabbing across and getting out of the way. Wood is over the wicket for the last ball - it’s short, and Cummins somehow scrambles a run with the ball landing in between what seems like 87 fielders on the leg side. Starc fends Wood from inside edge to thigh-pad and it pops up to Ollie Pope at bat pad. Too fast. That’s five for Wood, richly deserved. 46th over: Australia 121-7 (Carey 32, Starc 1) Starc tucks Broad to fine leg, Carey gets two to deep backward point, Broad is then up for another LBW, celebrappeal and all, and it looks adjacent. But Carey reviews and it’s pitching outside leg! Everything else looked very out, but the replay shows it was - in Brett Lee’s words - ‘a tenth of a millimetre’ outside leg. “Oh what?” says Stuart Broad. Carey gets two to midwicket. 45th over: Australia 116-7 (Carey 28, Starc 0) Carey gets a run to backward square leg and it means Wood gets a crack at Starc, but the first - a bouncer - is fumbled by Billings behind the stumps as it didn’t carry all the way. They get a run. Strange. Big shout for one down leg to Carey, but it’s flicked Carey’s jumper. Carey gets a nasty one later on that Carey doesn’t know much about, it hammers his glove and he survives. 44th over: Australia 112-7 (Carey 24, Starc 0) So Broad gets the breakthrough, and Starc comes to the crease. Let’s hold it there and go to Wood, who’s back on at the other end. He’s about to get peppered. Green is forward but he’s playing across Broad, who is zeroing in on off stump. He misses, it strikes the pad, and the review goes England’s way. This game is close! Broad into his work now, a new spell. Green is looking more assured on the front foot. Oh Lord, another celebrappeal from Broad is turned down by Umpire Wilson, and there’s four overthrows? Well they’ve reviewed. It’s close... 43rd over: Australia 111-6 (Green 23, Carey 24) Ooooh, Woakes gets Green’s outside edge and it hares past Crawley at second slip for four. Woakes then resumes the ascendancy, beating Green’s bat twice more in the same area. There’s another edge to finish and it too rolls past the slips and to the rope. Crucial runs, etc. From King Thonger: “Good morning Sam, Is it just the new technology that’s causing the problem. For example, Lillee and Botham didn’t bowl a single no ball in their entire careers. There are others equally famous. https://crickettimes.com/2020/07/cricketers-who-never-bowled-a-no-ball-in-their-international-career/ But would they have got through a career in the current era unchallenged? Discuss Also, can somebody smuggle a triple Jägerbomb out to Mark Wood pronto and get him back on? This is over otherwise.” 42nd over: Australia 103-6 (Green 15, Carey 24) More pressure as Robinson ties Carey in knots. Carey is getting forward but he can’t find a way out. At one point he’s trying to whip it from outside off to leg but it beats him. Eventually he squirts past gully, and there’s two runs. 41st over: Australia 101-6 (Green 15, Carey 21) Woakes is faithfully pursuing “the channel” and he’s beating Green’s outside edge repeatedly. Green just about hangs in there. Double maiden. Game very evenly poised here. 40th over: Australia 101-6 (Green 15, Carey 21) Carey is managing Robinson now, and it’s remarkable how often he inside edges the ball. He’s struggling to play the Englishman, playing and missing at a couple per over. Maiden. 39th over: Australia 101-6 (Green 15, Carey 21) Green tucks Woakes’s first behind square for two as Malan collects, and he does it again for one, later in the over. Australia bring up 100 and the lead is 215. 38th over: Australia 97-6 (Green 12, Carey 21) Carey is trying to get a big, deliberate stride in and is generally successful, but Robinson brings one back and almost cuts Carey in half. Carey is then advancing at Robinson to defend. A maiden. 37th over: Australia 97-6 (Green 12, Carey 21) Big moment as Woakes bowls Carey but replays confirm it was a no ball. A couple of the England players seem aghast at the decision, especially Stokes, but stump cam fails to show any heel behind the line. Did anyone see it differently? There may be one shot from side on that shows a very, very close call. Either way that ball was too full to pull for Carey, he’ll be breathing a huge sigh of relief to still be there. He gets a single soon after, Green gets a thick edge and runs three, and Carey gets another single behind backward point. Carey rocks back to pull, he chops on, and it’s a no ball! It’s very very close, but it’s hard to see any foot behind the line. Stump cam confirms it, even though Sam Billings can be heard saying “there’s a bit behind!” 35th over: Australia 91-6 (Green 9, Carey 19) Robinson continues, he looks dangerous when he finds that excellent length. One of them screams past Carey’s outside edge. The Australian keeper then pushes one through extra cover for one to conclude the over. Co Loef says: “That’s it. I don’t expect England to score 190 in the second innings.” 34th over: Australia 90-6 (Green 9, Carey 18) Woakes is wide and Carey chases it, crunching it through cover for four. Two balls, two boundaries for Australia. And again! This one was straighter and Carey opened the face to go through the same area, maybe a touch squarer. The lead goes past 200. Good counterpunch for Australia there. A newly installed deep point sweeps the final ball meaning Carey finishes it with a single. That’s drinks. Australia lost three wickets in that hour. 33rd over: Australia 81-6 (Green 9, Carey 9) Robinson jags one past a lunging Carey, moving away nicely. Carey plays the same shot again and it squeezes off the shoulder of his bat to square leg for one. Green is patient and eventually punches one to point for his own single. Carey tries to clip but a minor leading edge helps him with a single wide of mid off, where Wood is fielding. Then Robinson lets the pressure off by straying on to Green’s pads, and he flicks him for four. 32nd over: Australia 74-6 (Green 4, Carey 7) Woakes elicits an edge from Green but it bounces short of second slip. Another nearly breaches Green’s forward defence, and another almost takes off stump as Green leaves narrowly. He’s nipping it about sharply, this is the Woakes we know. Pope’s now under the lid at short leg. Green will want to get off strike. The next seams back and Green is in a tangle, it hits his thigh pad. A tight leave to finish. A good start for Woakes. 31st over: Australia 74-6 (Green 4, Carey 7) Conventional stuff here as Robinson attacks the off-stump, tailing a few back in. Green works one off the hip behind square. Carey finds two in the same spot. Does Wood come back on? He doesn’t - it’s Woakes. 30th over: Australia 71-6 (Green 3, Carey 5) Wood steaming in, looking for five wickets. Carey gets off strike with one to cover, and Green is facing leg theory here. Green looks okay, and finds a run of his own behind square. Is Wood losing a little bit of juice? It would be understandable. Wood then tries to beat Carey with a yorker and it almost went through his legs! Carey dug it out. Bouncer to finish and Carey ducks. That might be Wood’s spell, he looks spent! If so, he’s been magnificent. 29th over: Australia 69-6 (Green 2, Carey 4) Robinson replaces Broad. I mean, we’re really just marking time until Wood gets the ball. Carey flicks one behind square for two, as SEN commentator Alex Doolan notes that “this feels like a very important moment in his career”. Carey nearly beats Broad at mid-on but the veteran makes a great save, then stands up and throws the stumps down. Strong. Carey was home. Robinson pace watch: 127km. Simon Katich describes it as “gentle”. Green then pushes him through cover for two. 28th over: Australia 64-6 (Green 0, Carey 1) Wood has 4-18, he is essentially unplayable with the short ball here. Australia have no answers and we absolutely have a game on our hands now. Carey is essentially crouched as Wood bowls it, and he’s there at the end of the over, even if Green is scrambling make his ground as they scamper a leg bye. Would’ve been out had Root hit from behind square. Another for Wood! Smith top edges a hook shot straight down Malan’s throat. Wood will definitely get another over now. This is extraordinary. 28th over: Australia 63-5 (Smith 27, Green 0) Broad, decidedly slower than Wood, gets one to nip back and hit Green’s back pad, the appeal is half-hearted and it’s actually quite close, but there’s no review. There’s a leg bye then Smith clips one for a single. 27th over: Australia 60-5 (Smith 25, Green 0) Australia in some strife now, Wood gets Head and they just don’t have an answer to Wood’s short length and pace. Green is next to receive it, and the first hammers into the splice of his bat. Another bouncer takes off and it’s a wide. The next strikes Green hard in the shoulder. It’s bouncer after bouncer. Wood must be tired. Adam Collins on SEN notes that Mark Wood has taken 6-58 after starting with 0-75 in the first innings. Wood gets another! He’s caught down the leg side, it clips his glove, and Billings makes no mistake. Wood is ripping through them here. Head never looked at home there. 26th over: Australia 59-4 (Smith 25, Head 8) Smith inside edges onto his pad and gets himself a run as Broad continues to target his leg stump. Head crashes one square and Rory Burns, on the boundary, makes a sensational stop to prevent the boundary. Broad is up for LBW again, this time to Head, but it clearly pitched outside leg. 25th over: Australia 55-4 (Smith 24, Head 6) Wood wants to go short to Smith, and his field reflects it. It’s essentially leg theory. Smith paddles the second around the corner and gets off strike. Wood shortens Head up, and he’s ducking, one leg raised, gloves in front of face. It’s not pretty. So he’ll get another. He does, and Head tries to flip it fine, but it hits his glove. It was jumpy. More coming! Wrong, double-bluff, and Head misses a leg stump half volley that strikes the pad. 24th over: Australia 54-4 (Smith 23, Head 6) It doesn’t take long for Head to flash one square, he does so from Broad’s first but there’s a man on the boundary. Broad is very straight to Smith, who looks uncomfortable trying to defend him from there. But it’s fine margins, as Broad is one centimetre too straight and Smith flicks him to long leg. Head is looking to score, missing out on a cut that seems to go under his bat. The next is driven hard down the ground for four, Head’s bat flourish finishing over his shoulder. Broad might’ve got a hand on it, but the ball still made it. Broad follows up by beating him outside off. 23rd over: Australia 48-4 (Smith 22, Head 1) So Boland goes, and we’ll see whether Wood goes short to Travis Head. He does, and Head is jumping, riding it off his ribs, uppishly. No one’s there. They need a bat pad. Head flicks the next to deep square for one. Smith defends from his ribs and that’s the over. Nick, out! It’s through the chest, a cross-seamer, and Boland can only fend him behind. Boland’s done his job, and now Head’s at the wicket. 22nd over: Australia 47-3 (Smith 22, Boland 8) Smith defuses the first few before he whips Broad in front of square for four. Crisp. They move a man to that exact point on the boundary. He tries to work the next in to the onside and he misses, it strikes the pad, the appeal is turned down. It looks high, Broad wants the review, he doesn’t get it. Replay shows it’s high. The next looks much closer, same look, Broad celebrappeals, and Root doesn’t review. Also going over the top. Regardless, it’s encouraging for Broad. 21st over: Australia 43-3 (Smith 18, Boland 8) Wood to Boland, and it looks fast. There’s a bat pad, a man at a forward short point, and everything is through the chest, at least. The third is at Boland’s toes and he clips Wood beautifully through mid-on, full face of the bat, and they run four. The next is, of course, at his chest. Woof goes full again, Boland swings and it flies hard, fast and low to the left of Rory Burns who puts it down. It would have been the catch of the series, to be fair. He takes a single. Smith then takes one to deep mid wicket. 20th over: Australia 37-3 (Smith 17, Boland 3) Smith commences with a sleeveless vest, Boland only needs a shirt. A quiet start for Broad v Smith - a multitude of width, leaves and defence. A maiden to start, no pitch gremlins to report. The players are on their way... We’ll be underway in a short few minutes Unsurprisingly, a couple of counties are keen on Scott Boland! An excellent email from Robert Wilson to get you in the mood: “Dear Sam, Hello there. I’m feeling grateful tonight. Ok, I admit it’s been a big night. I confess that I’m fresh out of a bibulous Parisian dinner party. Quails have been quaffed and drinks have been drunk, Doesn’t matter. My current state of egregious euphoria has nothing to do with Chablis (nor my first cigarette in 18 months), this, this is immense. Thank the Lords and Gods of cricket happenstance that this last Ashes Test takes place at a ground from which on video you can see hills and houses and trees. No concrete bowl of anonymous, vacuum-sealed stadiumitis, the Blundstone is a location with a sense of place - with all the provincial excellence that this entails. It’s making me happier than I deserve to be. There is no five-fer nor unlooked-for ton that is not ennobled by the fact that some neighbouring resident is definitely watching it from their kitchen. Plus, my ludicrous euphoria is entirely justified. Now I’m not a passionate adherent of all things Nathan Lyon. I can take or leave him (he can be a big old drag in the newspapers before a series) but his three sixes against the fastest bowler of the series don’t just make me feel extremely unsuicidal, they make me feel glad to be concurrently alive in the way that people felt when Tolstoy was knocking his stuff out back in the day. I mean, oooooof. Every now and then, mere dignity compels you to stop complaining all the time and just admit that it’s pretty sensational to be alive right now. Thank you Hobart. Thank you Nathan. Robert Wilson” Geoff Lemon is out there in Hobart. The weather looks excellent right now. With the series in its final throes, we’re finally seeing some public advocacy for Justin Langer. Last night, Steve Waugh “took” to Instagram to back JL, and now his brother, Mark, seems to have done the same... Here’s a deeper, better account of yesterday’s cricket from The Guardian’s chief cricket correspondent, Ali Martin ... Hello again! Here we all are, this 23rd day on the Ashes calendar (give or take a few early finishes), gathered again for another round of story-making because we can’t get enough. If you’re doing this from the earliest of hours in the UK, more and all power to you. Though they bookended it with a bit of success, it was another reasonably rough day for the visitors yesterday. 17 wickets fell, 10 of them England’s, as another 2-out-all-out performance resulted in 188 runs on the board, 115 short of Australia’s total. Root briefly threatened. Cummins took 4. You know how it goes by now. There were some fireworks in the last hour as Broad continued his dominance over Warner, Marnus exited and Khawaja succumbed to Wood, and now England will be hoping the steamrolling can continue this afternoon. That England had yet to post in excess of 300 was the prevailing statistic yesterday, and with Australia 150 ahead, they’ll need to mobilise some wickets quickly to give themselves any sniff of an unlikely victory. The wicket is tough and Australia will look to build that lead however possible, but whatever the case, we can probably expect some explosive cricket because not only is the pitch willing, it may be that both teams are equally willing to finish things off soon, whatever the result.Up until pretty recently, Guy Garvey says, he couldn’t have sat very comfortably in a place like this. We are in Roka in Charlotte Street in London’s West End, flagship of the discreetly expensive chain of Japanese restaurants, where attentive staff bring artful platters of exquisitely sliced fish and explain precisely in which order you might best consume them. “Before I met my wife I had a difficult relationship with restaurants,” Garvey says. “I never was that happy being waited on – I’d always be apologising and all ‘if it’s not too much trouble’. When we were first going out, Rachel said, ‘Do you like sushi?’ I said, ‘No not really.’ And she said, ‘Have you ever had sushi?’ I said, ‘No not really.’ She took me to this fabulous sushi place and she is great at just being natural in these places and I was immediately a convert.” This newfound ease does not extend quite to ordering; we both, diehard provincials, are a bit flummoxed by the menu, so ask for recommendations and a procession of delicate sharing plates starts to arrive, fabulous morsels of yellow-tail tartare and crab gyoza and tiger prawn tempura, which, big-shouldered blokes, we carefully manipulate with chopsticks. Garvey and his band Elbow are in some eyes a byword for northern integrity and soul. He met his bandmates at school in Bury, Greater Manchester and they have, with one exception, stayed together for 30 years and nine albums. Their first gig was at the Corner Pin pub in Ramsbottom in 1990; they now fill arenas, but Garvey has long been wary of stardom. “I’ve never been a sort of ‘repel all boarders’ Mancunian,” he says. “But I used to really enjoy having a jibe about London. Not just London, south Manchester. I used to tell a story about slipping on an avocado skin in Chorlton. And then five years ago I fell for a Londoner and moved here. And it took me a while to realise what my problem used to be. I was a bit frightened of the scale of it. It just takes you a while to find your feet. I live in Norwood, just down the road from Brixton, and I love it.” The Londoner Garvey fell for was the actor Rachael Stirling, star of Tipping the Velvet. They have a son Jack, who is four. Lockdown has been an intensely emotional time for the family. Stirling is the daughter of Diana Rigg. On the day after the original shutdown – Stirling had just opened in a play at the Lyric, Elbow had been set to embark on a world tour – they discovered Rigg had terminal cancer, and she moved in with them. Stirling nursed her mother at home until her death in September 2020. “Diana was so incredibly brave – and cool about it,” Garvey says. “There were offers of treatment, but she was like, no, no, I’ve had enough. She was a hoot. She read to our son Jack for as long as she could in the evenings. She had lots of visitors and we had codes worked out for when to get rid of them. There were Camparis at three o’clock every day. By the end, her and Rach were practically thinking with the same mind.” Garvey found himself quite often awake in the night, writing bits of songs in the dark. The result is perhaps Elbow’s most mellow and heartfelt album, Flying Dream 1, which includes a lot of the raw emotion of that period. One love song, What Am I Without You, sounds like a father to son lyric, but was written with Stirling in mind. “It’s about watching this miracle of her care for Diana, watching her walk on the water and reminding her to eat and to sleep.” During the same period Elbow started to perform a series of Friday evening online sessions from their respective homes. Fans would request favourite songs – Magnificent, Mirrorball, Lippy Kids – and they’d do one a week. “On the first one my head was absolutely in the stars,” Garvey says. “I didn’t make the bed in the background and I was wearing my dressing gown. A friend sent me a message: ‘Great song, put some fucking clothes on.’” After that he wore Hawaiian shirts. They recorded the album in Brighton’s Theatre Royal, which by then had been shut down for longer than at any time in its 200-year history. Garvey suggests he wanted a place that echoed with lost laughter. “It’s a populist kind of theatre, you know, it smells of Gary Wilmot and Shane Richie. It was sad to see it dark.” The sudden, strange quiet seems preserved on the album, which finds Garvey in introspective moods (at a distance from the stadium-rocking joys of One Day Like This). Some of the songs take him back to his childhood growing up with five older sisters and a younger brother. Their dad worked as a proofreader at the Daily Mirror in Manchester – when we meet at Roka, Garvey has just come from a short interview with that paper, reminiscing about his old man, after a journalist spotted his lyric in the title track: “Dad’s across town tonight fixing the Mirror / Shaking his head at a richer man’s grammar”. “I like that idea that people don’t really die until the last time someone remembers them. My dad died not long after Jack was born; he’d have loved seeing himself in the Mirror.” Even as a teenager, Garvey says he was writing bits of poetry and lyrics, thinking of how they would age. “I think I realised very quickly that the further away in time you get from a diary entry or a note on a page makes it really emotionally interesting in ways that you can’t quite fathom.” We talk a little about the ways in which music is often all about nostalgia for a certain time and place. Garvey mentions that he was invited along to the premiere of Get Back, Peter Jackson’s film of unseen Beatles footage. Garvey was sitting two rows behind Paul McCartney and could see his face as he was watching himself “back there in the room again with his mates, just drinking it all in”. He doesn’t know McCartney, but he got an email off him once. “He said he was dropping off his grandkids at school, but he’d stayed in the car to listen to who a song on the radio was by, and it was our song Magnificent, so he sent us a note. I was like: ‘Our work here is done.’ If I’m having a dark tea time of the soul, I just remember that.” We realise the waiters are going to keep bringing plates until we tell them to stop. We call a halt at some plump scallops and sit into the late afternoon sipping beers. As anyone who has listened to his songs might imagine, Garvey is a warm and honest presence, quick to find a joke, curious, self-effacing. He talks frankly of depressive periods when Elbow became a Mercury award-winning success, and he was drinking a bottle of scotch just to get on stage. He had therapy which helped unearth some demons of doubt (“I’ve never met anyone who doesn’t benefit from that kind of digging,” he says of analysis) but growing up, growing older with the band also helped. I wonder if, 30 years on, they still have those moments of collective excitement, as depicted in the Beatles film, where the disparate individuals, hearing a melody, come together? “We don’t often write together like that these days,” Garvey says, “but certainly sometimes in the studio someone will try something and everyone picks it up.” He has learned over the years that inspiration might come at any time, but when it does, you have to be able to catch it. He had a moment like that a couple of days after Diana Rigg died. “If I find myself excited about an idea I immediately switch my phone off and don’t pause for anything until I’m at the piano. I just had this melody and those words ‘is it a bird, is it a plane?’ and I was thinking there weren’t many planes in the sky just then, and I realised I was singing about Diana, ‘or is it a beautiful jettisoned warrior’s soul?’.” What good songs can capture, Garvey suggests, is that “nobody feels one thing at one time. I was missing Diana and heartbroken for Rachael and Jack, but there was also this huge feeling of elation that I’d helped Rachael give her mother an amazing death. I think you can hear it all in that one loop.” Walking home, I listen to the track again and Garvey is not wrong, it’s all there, just as he hoped. Flying Dream 1 is out now on Polydor. For UK live dates visit elbow.co.ukBased on a true story, Save the Cinema is the kind of plucky underdog feelgood slop that the British film industry churns out on a regular basis, largely to the indifference of audiences. It tells of a small Welsh community that bands together to save their listed art deco cinema (which also doubles as the home for the local youth theatre) from shifty developers who want to pull it down and build a mall. It’s an Ealing-alike gentle comedy populated by lovable eccentrics, and in Samantha Morton and Jonathan Pryce punches considerably above its weight in terms of casting. But the film-making decisions – from a score that sounds as though it was borrowed from an advertisement for life insurance, to the toffee and treacle colour palette, to a screenplay that is amiable, inoffensive but rarely funny – suggest that perhaps the cinema wasn’t worth saving after all. • In cinemas and on Sky Home Cinema“Anything that you love can become a trap,” says the singer-songwriter Anaïs Mitchell. She’s talking about the career-defining stage musical Hadestown, an energetic Depression-era retelling of the myth of Orpheus and Eurydice which dominated her life for more than a decade. Mitchell first toured it as a lo-fi theatre production in 2006, travelling through Vermont in a converted school bus, turned it into a concept album in 2010, and then spent several years reworking it for the stage with director Rachel Chavkin. Since opening on Broadway in 2019, Hadestown’s timelessly American tapestry of folk, blues, jazz, gospel and cabaret has won her a Tony award (and collected eight in total), a Grammy and a place on Time magazine’s list of the 100 most influential people of 2020. But it left her facing the question: what now? Her new book of exhaustively annotated Hadestown lyrics, Working on a Song, feels like a final clearing of the decks prior to the release of her self-titled seventh album, her first collection of original songs since 2012 and her “escape pod” from the musical. “It’s so funny because I’d been working on that show for a third of my life and what did I do the moment I got done with it?” she says merrily. “I spent a year writing a book about it! But I needed to decompress and process it. It was so crazy. I had to be totally obsessed with it. If I worked on a different song, I felt like I was cheating on the show. A lot of times in the depths of rewriting I was like, I’m never fucking doing this again. I wanted to be free. But then when the show went up, there was a whole year when I could have done that and I just couldn’t.” Two years ago, circumstances conspired to give Mitchell a clean slate. She was nine months pregnant with her second daughter when Covid-19 struck, and she left New York with her husband, Noah Hahn, just before lockdown so that she could give birth in Vermont, where she grew up. She’s talking to me from the same rental where she recorded albums in her 20s. This, she says, is her “full-circle era”. Mitchell is an ecstatic talker, her face constantly suggesting imminent laughter, her hands a blur. When she’s especially excited by a thought, I half-expect them to spring through my laptop screen. The Hadestown star André De Shields, in his Time testimonial, wrote that “she seemed to be made entirely of magic”. Mitchell talks about making the new album as if it were a story that needed another draft. “I feel like all of us have created a tidy narrative about the pandemic,” she says. “You thought you’d made it make sense in the cosmology of your life and now, oh my God, it’s fucking still happening and it makes less sense.” She takes a breath. “In the tidy version of this album I left the city, I returned home, I became a mother of two, I did therapy and I wanted to make this album before I turned 40.” She had some help. Mitchell is part of 37d03d (a typographical riff on the word “people” turned upside down), the loose artistic collective founded by Bon Iver’s Justin Vernon and Aaron and Bryce Dessner from the National; she appears alongside Taylor Swift and Fleet Foxes on the latest album by Vernon and Aaron’s fluid supergroup Big Red Machine. As an early lockdown activity, some members committed to writing a song a day. To her surprise, Mitchell emerged with the bones of an album. “There was something about being completely removed from my milieu and also feeling a reconnection with my childhood,” she says. “I felt really invisible. I wasn’t doing it to prove anything. I wanted to do it before I even noticed what I was doing.” It could not be more different from Hadestown: a sprint rather than a marathon; intimate rather than epic. “This album isn’t larger than life,” she says. “It is life-sized.” Forming a bubble with old friends from Bon Iver and her folk band Bonny Light Horseman, she recorded the album in Woodstock in December 2020, three months before her 40th birthday. Confidently rooted in country, folk and pop, it’s a wise and lovely record which translates life into song with spring-like freshness even as the lyrics rustle with memories and the passage of time. “I feel my age in a way I didn’t have to in the city,” Mitchell says. “You see your friends and they look older and you’re their age so you must also look older.” She laughs. “Somehow in New York everyone is ageless.” Living back in Vermont has made Mitchell reflect on her unusual childhood. She is named after the French-American writer Anaïs Nin. Her father, Don, is a professor and author who bought a sheep farm from the proceeds of his script for the 1972 hippy road movie Thumb Tripping and her mother, Cheryl, is a social worker who served under Vermont governor Howard Dean. They moved to the state in the back-to-the-land spirit of the early 1970s, helping to establish a food cooperative and community theatre. The Black Lives Matter protests in the summer of 2020 prompted Mitchell to rework Backroads, one of her new songs, complicating its teenage nostalgia with an acknowledgment of how blessed she had been. “It hit me over the head how privileged the story I was telling was,” she says. “We think we’re living on the edge, drinking beer in the woods and then the cops come, but the truth is there are generous, loving adults surrounding us and giving us space, which is not the experience of a lot of black kids in this country. I noticed an appreciation for the safety, the love and the freedom that I was afforded as a kid.” Mitchell studied political science at college, spent a year in Egypt and considered becoming a journalist. Instead, she says, “I became a songwriter and I took off on a Greyhound bus and I never called home. I felt completely free.” While her first album, 2002’s The Song They Sang… When Rome Fell, has been expunged from the record (“Thank God you could bury albums back in the day”), 2004’s protest-minded Hymns for the Exiled landed her a deal with Ani DiFranco’s Righteous Babe Records. DiFranco, one of her musical heroes, wound up playing Persephone on the Hadestown album in 2010, with Justin Vernon as Orpheus and Mitchell herself as Eurydice. I wonder if she ever resented being consumed by one project for so long, however successful it became. “I had those feelings,” she agrees. “I certainly did. Now I can say I have nothing but gratitude for Hadestown. A lot of people will find my songwriter songs by way of Hadestown that would otherwise not care. But I sometimes felt like an impostor of myself. It feels incredible to sink into the mystery of a song: where does this song want to go? I’m gonna find out. Hadestown, too, came from a place of mystery but it became like a crossword puzzle where it can only be one thing.” Mitchell is writing an essay for the music journal No Depression about pre-digital life inspired by her gently joyful song Real World. “It seemed as if it referred to the pre-pandemic world,” she says, “but I’d been carrying around that phrase for a long time and it always meant to me the world before the phones: the huge, three-dimensional sensual world that used to be all there was and now it’s been reduced to this small, flat, curated reality for so many hours out of each day. The real world is there for us but it’s harder to access.” It figures that Mitchell is drawn to songs that predate not just smartphones but the entire industrial era. She has released an album of 17th- and 18th-century Child Ballads and also reworks old folk songs with Bonny Light Horseman, whose second album is due this year. “The traditional stuff has stuck around for a reason,” she says. “I have a desire to make songs that walk through the world on their own legs – that are useful to other people. I’m interested in the intersection of what makes me want to cry and what feels mythical. That’s where I want to live.” Mitchell’s post-New York life sounds rather blissful, this return to first principles surrounded by friends, family and fond memories, but when she went to see Hadestown reopen on Broadway last September, she was so wowed by the pageantry of it that she spent half the show brainstorming ideas for a new musical. “I want to stay in the flow,” she says. “But I do find myself casting around for a story to be told through songs because there’s nothing like it.” She laughs at the thought of doing it all again. “I think I could do it faster.” Anaïs Mitchell’s self-titled new album is released on 28 January through BMGIt was October 2020 when I realised I was going to have to ask for help. I’ve always been anxious, but thanks to the pandemic, I developed debilitating health anxiety. A dire winter was coming and any respite we’d had over the summer felt like it was slipping away. I couldn’t get to sleep and when I finally did, I had nightmares. My stomach churned and my hands shook so badly I had to give up caffeine. I developed a chronic reflux cough and, on more than one occasion, got into such an irrational spiral about it being Covid that I had to book a PCR test just to be able to function. “One of the most diabolical things about this pandemic is the on and on-ness of it all,” says Amanda Ripley, author of The Unthinkable: Who Survives When Disaster Strikes – and Why. “Humans can withstand a lot of turmoil and instability if they can recover.” Prior to Covid, Ripley studied people who survived tornadoes and terror attacks, emergencies for which the mental health consequences are much better understood than the long, slow-burn, seemingly endless one we find ourselves living through. As Ripley knows, this is not the first disaster humans have had to live through, so are there things we can learn from other disasters about what they do to our brains, relationships and communities? And, more importantly, how to make things better? “There’s a tremendous amount we can learn from how we’ve responded to previous emergencies,” say Dr Brandon Kohrt, professor of psychiatry at George Washington University, who works in Liberia, Uganda and Nepal, dealing with the mental health aftermath of everything from Ebola to earthquakes. “Many low- and middle-income countries, like South Africa, India and Uganda, immediately rolled out mental health and psychosocial plans in February, March and April 2020. They had experienced prior disasters, but these approaches could be just as beneficial in high-resource places like the US and UK,” he tells me, and I can’t help wondering, do we in the Global North think of ourselves with such superiority that we find it hard to learn from the experiences of the Global South? “With population-wide trauma, a war or a terrorist attack, we heal socially,” says Kohrt. “Being together when the awful thing happens and then healing together is really crucial. People who come together in that healing process tend to do better than those who either self-isolate as a response to distress or are ostracised. So I think what’s happened with Covid is that although the stress isn’t necessarily as acute or sudden as an earthquake or an explosion, the isolation we all experienced in the context of stress and trauma is eating away at us psychologically.” Not everyone who experiences a disaster will develop a mental health problem: people survive trauma well all the time, but “between 5 and 10% of people who’ve been through traumatic events such as a terrorist attack will go on to develop clinical levels of PTSD,” says Dr Sarita Robinson, who studies the psychobiology of survival at the University of Central Lancashire. Around one in five people who experience a humanitarian emergency will go on to develop a mental health problem (prevalence of common mental health problems in the global population is about 1 in 10), and rates of serious mental health disorders, such as schizophrenia, increase from 2-3% to 3-4%. “Research from 2018 suggested mental health problems double in emergency settings. I wouldn’t be surprised if that turned out to be the result of the pandemic, too,” says Ashley Nemiro, senior adviser for the global MHPSS Collaborative, which helps people working in crises. The psychological challenges of Covid are huge, but many practitioners feel they aren’t being addressed at all. Willem van de Put is co-founder of the Mental Health in Complex Emergencies course. “Covid has made things worse and, to the chagrin of leaders in global mental health, everybody is saying we should do something but, basically, absolutely nothing is happening. Governments are not willing to address it.” Investment in mental health is so low that, as Nemiro puts it: “Every country is a developing country when it comes to mental health services.” Research this year by the Centre for Mental Health, a thinktank, suggests that 8 million British adults and 1.5 million children will need mental health support in the next 10 years as a direct result of the pandemic. Office for National Statistics data already shows rates of depression doubling since the pandemic began, but it isn’t being evenly felt, says Leila Reyburn of mental health charity Mind. “The people who’ve been impacted the most and are continuing to feel that impact are people who had pre-existing mental health problems, people of colour, those living in deprivation and young people.” “In the UK, we have a system based on late intervention and crisis response,” says Andy Bell from the Centre for Mental Health. “Only a third of people with common mental health problems get support. We don’t offer it quickly and we tend to wait until people’s needs are so severe that they need specialised treatment.” But work by Kohrt and colleagues shows that early intervention is effective, especially for common mental health problems, such as depression and anxiety – and that it doesn’t always have to be carried out by highly trained professionals. He implements a community-level post-emergency support programme called Problem Management Plus, first developed by the World Health Organization in Pakistan and Kenya in 2015, which he then successfully trialled in Nepal (with similar programmes now running all over the middle- and lower-income world). Through the programme, anyone with a high-school education can be trained in just a few weeks to deliver psychological support to those who need it, often embedded in places where people seek help for problems with housing or employment, rather than specifically for mental health. Clients get five weekly 90-minute sessions, usually one-to-one, or longer sessions in a small group, and are taught stress-management skills, breath control, problem solving, how to overcome inertia and how to develop a social support network. The final session is about how not to relapse. “We’re taking interventions that were developed for earthquakes, floods or war, which we’ve used for years, and using them in New York City right now,” Kohrt says. “It doesn’t have to be by psychiatrists or psychologists in a specialised clinical location.” Similar early intervention projects do exist in the UK, but they’re few and far between. A coalition of charities, including the Children and Young People’s Mental Health Coalition, Mind, YoungMinds and the Children’s Society, is currently trying to push government to “Fund the Hubs’’ and create a network of informal community support centres for children and young people, to which they can self refer. One such hub, the Nest, is already up and running in the London borough of Southwark – and 78% of its users say their wellbeing has improved. This won’t shock you, but the ongoing nature of the pandemic really isn’t good for us. “Our brains operate in a very different way when they experience prolonged threats: you’re constantly on edge and alert, and that shrinks our ability to empathise with others,” says Kohrt. “We become much more focused on a very tight-knit group, and everybody else seems a threat. What’s most challenging about the pandemic is that even family members became threats – especially pre-vaccines. If kids are going to be a threat to their grandparents’ health or vice versa, suddenly we’re on alert even with people who should be helping us.” This disrupts our ability to be empathic in general. “We become more prejudiced, we become more stigmatising, we become more discriminating.” And if we’re discriminating against our loved ones, imagine how much worse our broader societal discrimination and stigmatisation is.” Which explains quite a lot about now, doesn’t it? Some of us may find it harder to regulate our emotions, too, says Kohrt, something I can identify with. “We call it ‘self-regulation’, but it’s always a mix of self-regulation and regulation with others. Total reliance on self-regulation of emotions doesn’t work. We’ve evolved to constantly regulate our emotions with our peers.” But even if you were locked down with your family, that might not have helped. “Family units are connected to many other people as well, and if they don’t have contact with extended family, friends, peers, then that family’s own emotional regulation gets disrupted.” “In humanitarian emergencies, one of the biggest things we do is make sure people have a sense of control and agency,” says Nemiro. “Often that is taken away when their social fabric is destroyed – and the pandemic did the same thing.” While schools, churches and community centres weren’t reduced to rubble, as they might have been in other disasters, they became so hard to access that they might as well have vanished. “Lack of social connection, lack of community and feeling out of control all break down mental health,” says Nemiro. “The first thing we need is to realise that we have to repair the social fabric,” says Amanda Ripley. “People come to me all the time saying: ‘We don’t know what to do – our church, our school, our town is exploding with conflict.’ There’s so much pent-up frustration, alienation and sadness that has not been dealt with – we will find a target of convenience. After every disaster, there’s a short golden hour of solidarity [rainbows in windows! Clap for carers!] followed by a deep valley of division. Repairing the social fabric needs to be an explicit mission.” Luckily, the repairs can be simple. “Say I’m a head teacher and I’m going to have parents come to an event in person. Afterwards, I don’t just let everybody go – these are opportunities for connection and we are in a deficit situation – so I serve drinks and snacks outside for half an hour afterward.” So is the casual socialising that we previously thought so little of – the school plays, the church fêtes – more important than we noticed at the time? “Those things are not just pleasant and fun: they’re investments in your future sanity and wellbeing. The way you build community resilience is through knowing each other so that we don’t assume the worst, so that it gets a little harder to demonise each other, and that prepares us for the next disaster,” says Ripley. Bruce Daisley, former VP of Twitter, has written a book about resilience, Fortitude. “Police and firefighters who were in the thick of the events of 9/11 have been well researched and generally the closer they report being to their colleagues, the better protection to their mental health they felt,” he says. “Resilience is social strength, and social connectedness helps us recover better from operations, prevents us from falling into depression and generally improves wellbeing.” “A huge part of emotional regulation requires positive interactions with others, including touch – if you look at other species, the way that that’s done is through grooming and other non-sexual touch among group members. We’ve had so little opportunity for that,” says Kohrt. Connecting when we’re in distress is even more powerful. “If I’m not the one in distress, I can help you regulate your distress,” he says. “There’s a feedback loop between the helper and the helpee with neurobiological changes that are health-promoting for both, to the point where helping others probably reduces our inflammatory responses and improves our antiviral responses.” If we remain in Ripley’s valley of division, though, then “we’re vulnerable to conflict entrepreneurs,” she says. “It is incredibly easy to turn us against each other, whether you’re a politician, pundit or social-media platform. We need to know that and remind ourselves that we don’t want to be played this way. We’re not going to be chumps.” One way to offset that particular danger as well as helping us to cope with the aftermath of an emergency is to deliberately tell ourselves a story of the experience which allows us to have agency within it. “Reappraisal is one of the main ways we manage our emotions as humans, and it’s probably one of the most sophisticated tricks of the mind,” says Ripley. “Are there stories we can tell ourselves that are true, but also leave us some hope? Yes there has been real suffering and hardship, but maybe you or your child showed remarkable resilience in finding a way to adapt or to be with that loss and still create new things.” Ripley suggests spending 15 minutes writing your own story of the pandemic, but as though you were a benign third party, observing (you can also do this with kids). “With writing there’s a kind of organisation of the experience that happens in the brain, that you don’t have the space to do when you’re in a disaster that keeps going on and on. Writing a story can create that space and since there’s not enough space for recovery in this type of slow disaster, we have to create it.” Coincidentally, I recently tried something similar, inspired by an article by Daisy Dowling in the Harvard Business Review. Rather than a story, she encourages us to list our achievements throughout the pandemic – which could include not snapping all your child’s pencils in an impotent rage while home schooling, or cooking 654 dinners in a row since March 2020, as well as more traditional wins. It was an uplifting way to look back and reframe the shitshow of the last two years. Does writing a story give the emergency a longed-for ending, too? “The brain wants an ending because the brain needs psychological certainty,” says Ripley. “There is no end, but by repeatedly creating a narrative that has a conclusion maybe we could give it an end.” Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org. You can also contact Mind at 0300 123 3393The former Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu is reportedly close to reaching a plea bargain in his corruption trial, a development that could mean an unexpectedly swift end to his turbulent political career and once again upend Israeli politics. Israeli media were dominated on Sunday by the news that Netanyahu, the chair of the Likud party and leader of the opposition since being ousted last year from a 12-year-stint in government, has reached advanced talks with the state attorney’s office. In the reported agreement, Netanyahu will admit to two counts of breach of trust, resulting in a suspended prison sentence and a few months of prison time that will be converted to community service. The major remaining sticking point appears to be the insistence of the attorney general, Avichai Mandelblit, on a charge of moral turpitude – a formal declaration that Netanyahu is desperate to avoid as it could bar him from political life for seven years. The former prime minister is on trial accused of trading preferential treatment for a major Israeli telecom company in exchange for positive articles on its Walla news site. He is also a defendant in a second case involving claims of soliciting favourable coverage, and a third alleging he received gifts worth hundreds of thousands of dollars from wealthy friends. The 72-year-old rejected calls to step down after he was indicted in 2019, using the podium as prime minister to repeatedly lash out at law enforcement, the media and the courts for conducting a “witch hunt” against him. His trial formally began in 2020 while the country was embroiled in a two-year-long political crisis during which time there were four elections, with voters deadlocked over Netanyahu’s leadership and indictment. Proceedings against him had been expected to drag on for years – but with Mandelblit’s term as attorney general due to end later this month, and his replacement unlikely to prioritise Netanyahu’s cases, it appears the former prime minister’s legal team has decided the window for a plea bargain is closing. The retired supreme court president Aharon Barak, a longstanding ally of Netanyahu, has reportedly acted as the liaison between the former prime minister and state prosecutors. Speaking to the Ynet news website, he said of his role in the negotiations: “In my view, this is a unique indictment and trial, which is causing a rift in the nation. In the attempt to heal that rift, a plea bargain is the preferable option. This position is positive and vital for the state of Israel.” A plea deal in which Netanyahu is banned from politics for several years would effectively end his career. It would also trigger a leadership contest for Likud, the fallout from which could reverberate in unpredictable ways. The Likud could descend into internal warfare over the election of a new chair, hindering its attempts to destabilise the diverse coalition government that was sworn in last June. However, if the party does manage to comprehensively agree on a new leader, rightwing elements of the governing coalition might consider scrapping the current arrangement in favour of a more politically coherent government with the new Likud chair at its head. The daily newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth on Sunday quoted a Likud source as saying that in recent months Netanyahu, who had kept the deal talks secret from his party, had “shifted into a lower gear”. It said the former prime minister was “less centred, less focused, he didn’t participate much in Knesset plenum meetings, he cancelled faction meetings. The only thing he did was attack senior party members and post childish videos on TikTok. That’s no way to lead the opposition.” As well as striking a deal over his corruption charges, Netanyahu is also considering a compromise in a defamation case against his predecessor as prime minister, Ehud Olmert. The Likud leader has demanded 837,000 shekels (£197,000) in damages from Olmert over allegations he made in interviews that Netanyahu, his wife Sara and eldest son, Yair – also rightwing public figures – are mentally ill. Judge Amit Yariv suggested in a hearing last week that Olmert state his comments were opinion rather than fact – a compromise that a Netanyahu family spokesperson said was acceptable, although there was no immediate indication that Olmert would accept it. Other than Netanyahu, Olmert is the only Israeli prime minister to face trial for corruption-related charges. He was found guilty in 2015 and served two-thirds of a 27-month sentence for fraud.An ambulance service has apologised after a man having a heart attack was advised to get himself to hospital or face a long wait. Graham Reagan said his son had to drive him to hospital after being told the nearest ambulance was 30 to 40 miles away. Reagan, from Malton in North Yorkshire, said he called 999 when his chest pains became unbearable and that he was collapsing when he arrived at York hospital in the early hours of 18 December. “What does an NHS crisis look like? If it’s 2 o’clock in the morning, you’re having a heart attack, and you can’t get an ambulance, is that a crisis? It’s not working. It certainly didn’t work for me,” he said. The army was last week drafted in to drive ambulances in parts of England, including Yorkshire and in the home counties, as the service comes under huge pressure amid staff absences of up to 20% due to Covid. Reagan said he was with his wife and son when they were advised to drive him to hospital as he suffered a suspected heart attack. “My wife doesn’t drive, but fortunately my son was with us and he drove me to York hospital. I’m in the back of the car – the pain is getting worse and I’m now getting quite upset,” he said. He said staff at the hospital were “absolutely brilliant” and arranged for him to be transferred to Hull for treatment after a heart attack was confirmed. However, he said he faced a further 35-minute wait for an ambulance to take him. Reagan said he wanted to share his experience to raise awareness: “I assume there will be deaths [due to ambulance delays]. Is that OK? “Today might be the day when there aren’t enough ambulances and you might be the person who is waiting for one. Today might not be your lucky day and you might not get the excellent care that you will get if you’re in hospital.” A spokesman for Yorkshire ambulance service NHS trust said they were sorry to hear of Reagan’s concerns. They said, in common with other ambulance services, they had been under “significant operational pressures for some time” and, while staff did their best to respond quickly, they acknowledged “some patients are having to wait longer for an ambulance response”.For proof of how dangerous Boris Johnson’s leadership has become, consider this: public health policy is now merely a subplot in the horrendous drama engulfing the Conservative party. Over the weekend, as government advisers urged caution over Covid restrictions, the prime minister’s allies suggested that the imminent lifting of England’s remaining curbs would launch his fightback. But an unnamed minister cited in the Spectator thought that binning the last rules could neatly coincide with the prime minister’s resignation. This, it was said, would give him an opportunity to claim a huge job had been done and “depart with dignity”. But as with most of what we are hearing from senior Tories, the suggestion seemed to have another meaning: his exit is imagined not just as the end of Johnson’s time at the top, but the curtain falling on a period of interventionist, big-spending government, so normal Tory service can be resumed. Clearly, the prime minister’s disgrace is entirely down to events in Downing Street, the dreadful symbolism of so many elements of the story, and an administration mired in arrogance, deceit and an awful absence of seriousness – a condition now to be cured by a staff-blaming effort which has been named “Operation Save Big Dog”. But in the surrounding mood music, there are also ideological elements. Over the past two years, as the Treasury funded people’s wages, austerity diminished as a political priority, and the state’s reach increased to an extent unseen outside wartime, there has been a lot of speculation about how those changes would permanently alter politics. For the Tories, such a shift would have gone hand-in-hand with what Johnson embraced, albeit in his usual half-arsed way: his embryonic “levelling up” drive, a readiness to put up taxes, the flexing of the state’s muscles in pursuit of net zero carbon emissions. But nearly two years on from the start of the pandemic, with the prime minister seemingly broken and potential successors on less than subtle manoeuvres, Conservatism does not feel like that at all. Rather than pushing their politics somewhere new, the Covid crisis seems to have sent terrified Tories back to their old beliefs – in small government, untrammelled business and the idea that even well-intentioned spending always leads to disaster. Back in December, when the government faced a huge parliamentary rebellion over new restrictions, Westminster journalists were picking up anxiety among Conservative MPs about a “Covid state”, and the risk of Johnson creating a “high-tax, high-spending, high-inflation country”. Steve Baker, the de facto leader of the Brexit backbench hardcore, thinks that “today’s Conservative party is in the wrong place and heading in the opposite direction of Conservatism”. Meanwhile, rightwing columnists rage at a government supposedly waging war “on cars, foreign travel and all other parts of the suburban dream”. As ever, a reliable indicator of Tory restlessness is how often people mention Margaret Thatcher. Baker has just relaunched the self-consciously Thatcherite pressure group Conservative Way Forward. Meanwhile, the frontrunners for Johnson’s job are routinely seen as inheritors of her mantle. According to the Economist, Rishi Sunak “has the same ingrained enthusiasm for balancing budgets and limiting expenditure as the grocer’s daughter had”. Liz Truss seems ecstatically happy to give the impression of someone starring in a school play about the blessed Margaret, and makes speeches about the dangers of “inexorably growing the size of the state”, as opposed to the wonders of “free trade and free enterprise”. Much the same instincts define potential candidates such as Kwasi Kwarteng, Nadhim Zahawi and Priti Patel. If Johnson’s more interventionist Toryism has any base of support, it probably lies among the new MPs elected in the so-called red wall seats, but they are too marginal and inexperienced to field a candidate, or exert much influence. So, when his fall comes, it looks set to herald a moment of ideological restoration. Johnson’s reckless authoritarianism – the one aspect of his record that does echo Thatcher – will presumably be retained; what will be thrown overboard will be the last meaningful traces of levelling up, and any pretence that Conservatism is interested in changing the economy for the good of society. Is this what 2022 really demands? Thatcherism may still define the Tory soul, the country it was designed to change has long gone thanks to Conservative victories in the 1980s. The revolution was not left half-finished but completed: there are no powerful unions to tame, no utilities to privatise, no big bang to detonate in the City, and not much else to deregulate. Some Conservatives would like to finally subject the NHS to the disciplines of profit and loss, but to do so would risk political calamity. The resumed cutting of public spending might gladden Thatcherite hearts, but more sensible Tories long ago realised that austerity had already gone way too far. The reason that there have been sporadic Tory attempts to move away from the politics of the free market – the fitful stirrings of “red Toryism”, the tilts in that direction under both Johnson and Theresa May – is because that approach has long since run out of road. Certainly, if whoever succeeds Johnson wants to sustain the electoral coalition that delivered victory two years ago, the need for different thinking should be obvious. Yet the self-styled inheritors of Thatcherism have always wanted to keep the revolution going, and their furious zeal has long since turned Conservative politics unhinged and strange. In the absence of a big, disruptive Thatcher-esque project, Brexit – along with the insane idea of turning the UK economy into “Singapore-on-Thames” – moved from the political fringes to the Tory mainstream and unsettled the party’s relationship with many of its old suburban heartlands, which are not just full of remainers but increasingly liberal and left-leaning. In the beliefs of Truss, Kwarteng, Patel and more, you see Thatcherism taken to its logical conclusion, as a cold credo that wants to completely subjugate life to the demands of the market. (Remember that notorious sentence in their book Britannia Unchained: “﻿Once they enter the workplace, the British are among the worst idlers in the world.”) In the hands of Baker and co, Thatcher’s legacy has ceased to be about ideas and policy, but has been reduced instead to a puritanical animus that leads people to endlessly scent betrayal and plot against the people at the top. The Tories may soon be on to their seventh leader in 20 years. This, perhaps, is what happens when a party simply doesn’t know what to do with itself. Among people on the left, there is a righteous relish about the prospect of Johnson’s departure, and with very good reason. But this should be seen as an uneasy moment, replete with both hope and danger. Even if he goes, it could be nearly two-and a half years until another general election. Any Conservative voices who might warn against their party’s resurgent right are so far conspicuously quiet. If the next occupant of Downing Street attempts the full-blown return of Tory ideas that have already torn Britain apart, could the weary public mood after Brexit and Covid allow them to succeed? Or will something so clearly out of step with its time soon fail? Whenever post-Johnson politics arrives, these will be its defining questions. John Harris is a Guardian columnist Join our journalists for a Guardian Live online event on the No 10 lockdown party and Boris Johnson’s future on Wednesday 19 January. Book hereThe Memory Monster Yishai Sarid (translated by Yardenne Greenspan) Serpent’s Tail, £12.99, pp176 Award-winning Yishai Sarid’s slender, elegantly translated novel grapples with some mighty questions, among them the myriad ways in which the Holocaust might be seen to have shaped Israel’s culture, and the complex existential politics of memorialisation and Holocaust education. It takes the form of an extended letter written to the chair of the board of Yad Vashem, Israel’s national Holocaust museum, by a nameless historian who’s found himself trapped in a career as a tour guide of Holocaust sites in Poland – immersive, horror-filled work that’s quite naturally driven him to a nervous breakdown. Where the book excels is in its readiness to court controversy without surrendering nuance, and in place of moralising it offers questioning that’s as necessary as it is unsettling. The Lives of Literature: Reading, Teaching, Knowing Arnold Weinstein Princeton University Press, £25, pp352 Why do we read literature? Because it allows us to be someone else, making it, quite simply, “the finest cultural bargain ever to come your way”. Veteran American literary scholar Arnold Weinstein presents an irresistible thesis in this agile, instantly engaging work of personal literary criticism. He anchors it in his early experiences as an identical twin, and, through works by authors from Sophocles to Toni Morrison, shows us how the shapeshifting that they enable alters and expands our own sense of self. As he notes: “We enter the bookstore, see all the books arrayed there, and think: so little time; but the truth goes the other way: books do not take time, they give time.” Delicacy: A Memoir About Cake and Death Katy Wix Headline, £9.99, pp288 (paperback) Comic actor Katy Wix’s hilarious, heartbreaking memoir is made up of 21 defining, variously devastating vignettes in which cakes – “weird, camp objects” – pop up in supporting roles. There’s the rose-covered royal icing on the cake that made her realise comedy was her calling, the bara brith she eats in hospital after a life-altering car crash, the homemade madeira cake that someone brings along to a grief therapy group. She’s a writer with an impressive range, and while the switches occasionally feel hectic, Delicacy is entertaining and affecting, filled with satisfying observations about body image, grief and memory. To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy of The Memory Monster or Delicacy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWho was Bice Lazzari? At the Estorick Collection in north London, the curator Renato Miracco puts the case for this too little-known Italian modernist with utmost straightforwardness. On display are 40 works, offered with next to nothing by way of commentary; should you want to know something of Lazzari’s family background, for instance, you’ll just have to do your own research. But if such an approach seems, at times, on the risky side – in the gallery, it’s hard to get your bearings at first – Miracco’s confidence that Lazzari’s art will ultimately speak for itself is surely not misplaced. What an exhibition! Down the years, I find that I’ve grown pretty weary of a certain kind of abstraction; whatever it might have meant at first, it seems ever more etiolated to me. Yet here is Lazzari, making the case for it all over again. Out of discord, whether internal or external, she creates a harmony so exquisite, her work seems at moments almost to vibrate. However fiercely suggestive it is of the “obscure forces” that drove her as an artist – primal instincts that would not let up even towards the end of her life, when she lost her sight – it’s also deeply and enduringly tranquil. Under their spell, I came to think of her paintings as answers to questions I did not know had even been asked. In photographs, Lazzari (1900-81) has something of the elfin look of Giulietta Masina, the star of Fellini’s 1954 masterpiece La Strada – or so I thought, struggling to put her in context. Very few artists captured the uncommon seclusion and poverty of postwar Italy as well as Fellini did, and this was the world that forged Lazzari, too. Only after the war did she find her way to abstraction, arriving there without the help of teachers or even of artist role models (Mussolini’s fascists had frowned on abstraction as a decadent foreign disease). “I knew nothing about painting abroad because of the provincial climate of cultural isolation that held sway at the time,” she later admitted. In the galleries at the Estorick, her work calls to mind – it’s almost too obvious – that of her near contemporaries Agnes Martin and (less often) Richard Diebenkorn, both of whom were associated with American abstract expressionism. But her minimalism and her sense of colour really were, it seems, the result of solitary exploration. She travelled alone, at first. Lazzari was born in Venice, where her parents were wholesalers; she studied to be an artist there and in Florence, the city to which her family moved between late 1917 and early 1918. As a woman, she was encouraged, on graduation, not to paint, but to work in design. But this seems not to have disheartened her. Quite the opposite, in fact. As she put it: “When my father died in 1928, I had to face life on a practical level and so, rather than walking around with a painting under my arm, I took a loom and started making applied art in order to continue living in the climate I so adored – namely, freedom.” On display at the Estorick are a striped, handwoven bag and belt from 1929 that still look so good – so boldly modern – they might as well be on sale in 21st-century Liberty or Selfridges. In the 1930s, Lazzari moved to Rome, supporting herself by collaborating with designers, and there she would remain for the rest of her life, save for a brief period during the war when she and her husband, Diego Rosa, worked with the architect Gio Ponti in Milan. But though her various projects were often exhibited – at the Estorick, one of her hand-sewn cushions has been placed in a frame, where it looks almost as beguiling as her work on canvas – it wasn’t until after 1945 that she was able to devote herself to painting. Before 1964, she worked mostly in oil; after that, having developed an allergic reaction to it, she switched to acrylic, “a thankless but strong, sturdy, resilient material” that eventually became her firm “friend”. It helped her, perhaps, to more clearly express her vision. As Miracco suggests in a catalogue essay, Lazzari’s late “apparitions” of colour, however ghostly, also have the quality of lightning: a suggestion of infinity. Her Agnes Martin-like austerity is matched with a bravura that is all her own. Some paintings are for the mind. But Lazzari’s are for the body: you absorb their mood as you would that of a person to whom you’re attracted, excitement gradually shading into a feeling of absolute rightness. The early work is energetically geometric: in Abstraction of a Line No 2 (1925), coloured rules scatter like pick-up-sticks; the repeated pattern of Continuous Rhythm (tempera on card, 1939) might work as wallpaper. But then things open up. White and Black (oil on canvas, 1954) is wilfully misnamed; its orange-red background is the thing, calling you like the sun. You know even before you read its title that Marine Tale (oil on canvas, 1956) is inspired by boats in a harbour, rectangles of every shade of blue and grey conjuring bobbing sails. What strange and elusive formula is it that makes Untitled (tempera and pencil on canvas, 1966) and Acrylic No 5 (acrylic on canvas, 1975) so alluring? Why did I find it so unexpectedly hard to turn my back on these barely-there lines and circles? This cannot, I’m afraid, be easily explained in words. All I can tell you is that leaving this exhibition induced in me a disproportionate feeling that was close to grief – and that you would be completely mad to miss it. • At the Estorick Collection, London N1 until 24 AprilIn the early summer of 2009, a team of archaeologists arrived at a construction site in a residential neighbourhood of Modena, Italy. Digging had started for a new building and in the process workers unearthed a cemetery, dating back 1,500 years. There were 11 graves, but it quickly became clear that one of them was not like the others. Instead of a single skeleton, Tomb 16 contained two and they were holding hands. “Here’s the demonstration of how love between a man and a woman can really be eternal,” wrote Gazzetta di Modena of the pair, instantly dubbed “the Lovers”. However, according to the original anthropological report, the sex of the Lovers was not obvious from the bones alone. At some point, someone tried to analyse their DNA, but “the data were so bad”, says Federico Lugli at the University of Bologna, that it looked like “just random noise”. For a decade, the assumption about the Lovers’ sex remained unchallenged. Then, in 2019, Lugli and his colleagues decided to try a newly available technique for determining the sex of human remains using proteins in tooth enamel. To their surprise, the Lovers were both male. The pair suddenly became potential evidence of a fifth-century same-sex relationship. The story of the Lovers is part of an ongoing sexual revolution in archaeology. For decades, archaeologists have had to rely on grave goods and the shape of bones to tell them whether a skeleton belonged to a man or a woman, but over the past five years, the use of new, sophisticated methods has resulted in a string of skeletons having their presumed sex overturned. The ensuing challenges to our ideas about sex, gender and love in past societies have not been without controversy. The wider debate on sex in archaeology took off in earnest with the now-famous 2017 paper about a Viking warrior, found in a grave full of weapons in Birka, Sweden. The grave had been known since the late 19th century and had been presumed to contain a man, but it wasn’t until Charlotte Hedenstierna-Jonson from Uppsala University, Sweden and her team tested a DNA sample that anyone could be sure. Traditionally with DNA analysis, you look for a gene linked to a sex chromosome, such as the AMELX gene on the X chromosome and its counterpart AMELY on the Y chromosome. As females usually have XX chromosomes and males usually XY, the logic goes that if there is significant AMELY present in the sample, it belongs to a male. Nowadays, the analysis takes into consideration much more of the genome, but the principle largely remains the same. And the DNA from the Birka Viking was clearly female. But the notion of a female warrior did not fit with the existing ideas about the Vikings. According to convention, weaponry, in particular, swords, belonged with men and jewellery belonged with women. If this skeleton was a woman, some argued, the weapons and the warrior status should be re-evaluated. Hedenstierna-Jonson found this baffling, because everyone was fine with the warrior interpretation when the skeleton was thought to be a man, she says. “That cannot change just because we find out it’s a woman.” Leszek Gardeła, an archaeologist at the National Museum of Denmark and author of the book Women and Weapons in the Viking World, does not want to take a stance either way. “I think she could have been a warrior,” he says, but underlines that 90% of graves with weapons contain biologically male individuals. Weaponry in women’s graves is also no guarantee that they were warriors; an axe, for example, could be used for many things, including various Norse magic rituals often associated with women. “There was space in the mental universe of the Vikings for women warriors,” he says, “[but] I don’t think it was the norm.” In any case, most agree that old ideas about “male” and “female” grave goods produce interpretations that are at best conventional and at worst biased. This is especially apparent when both feature in the same grave, such as the Viking grave discovered in 1867 at Santon Downham in Norfolk. “Most of the literature says it’s a double grave,” says Gareth Williams, a curator at the British Museum, “but there is no evidence to actually support that.” Only one skeleton, since lost, was originally reported. Rather than a double grave, the more obvious explanation could be a single grave of a person who did not strictly conform to gender norms. Williams thinks the grave probably contained a sword-wielding woman because “there were strict taboos against wearing anything that could be seen as effeminate” for Viking men. Without the missing skeleton, the truth will stay unknown, but others are tackling similar cases with the new methods. Last August, Ulla Moilanen from the University of Turku, Finland, led the reassessment of a proposed “double” burial from early medieval Finland, which contained a single skeleton in female dress with swords. DNA analysis revealed that the grave belonged to a person with XXY chromosomes, or Klinefelter syndrome, who probably looked no different from an XY male. That is what makes this grave so interesting, argues Moilanen, “because a male-looking individual was dressed in clothes and equipped with jewellery usually associated with females”. The obvious question to ask is: which long-standing analysis will be next to fall? After the Lovers of Modena paper, Lugli says, the team thought about testing other “lovers” buried across Italy. Contenders included the Lovers of Valdaro, housed at the National Archaeological Museum of Mantua, just an hour’s drive from Modena. The 6,000-year-old couple were buried nose to nose and with their arms pressed between their chests. When they were first found, the Lovers were sexed by osteology, a visual examination of the bones that is still the most common way to sex remains. However, the technique is far from perfect. Some bones differ between males and females, but these changes are hormone-driven, says Rebecca Gowland, a bioarchaeologist at Durham University. Skeletons “have to have gone through puberty”, she says, so teens can be ambiguous. Additionally, skeletons are rarely complete and without key bones, such as the pelvis, osteology becomes a lot less reliable, even for adults. The Lovers of Valdaro were teenagers when they died, one possibly as young as 16, so the osteological examination that declared them “female” and “probably male” could use some modern back-up – and it’s on its way. In the new year, a DNA project based at Tor Vergata University of Rome is set to reveal its results on the Lovers’ sex and potential familial relationships. Beyond Lover couples, of which there are only a handful worldwide, two other groups will probably see more “sex reveals” in the future. One is hominids, the group of living and extinct apes that humans belong to. “[With] hominids, you’ve got poorly preserved skeletons of a species where you don’t know what the range of sexual dimorphism is, because you might just have bits of one or two of them,” explains Gowland. One very famous hominid known as Lucy, for example, was sexed by half a pelvis. “What if Lucy was Larry?” While DNA analysis of hominids is possible, it can be tricky as the DNA can degrade to the point where there is little left to analyse. This is where tooth enamel comes into its own. “Compared to DNA, [enamel] survives really well,” says Gowland, who was part of the team that developed the technique. Tooth enamel analysis exploits the same genetic difference as the traditional DNA approach. The AMELX and AMELY genes produce a protein called amelogenin, a component of tooth enamel. Parts of the protein, known as peptides, can be lifted from the tooth using a gentle acid and their chemical make-up, which is also sex-dependent, detected. “It’s revolutionising bioanthropology,” says Lugli, “because we now have an instrument for rapidly and inexpensively determining the sex of humans.” The other group likely to see an increase in sex determinations is children, because they are otherwise so hard to sex reliably. Last December, a team led by researchers from the University of Colorado Denver established the sex of a 10,000-year-old infant girl from her tooth enamel. She had been found in a rich grave full of shell beads and stone pendants, showing not only that babies were dearly valued in the Mesolithic age, but specifically that girls were too. So, are the Lovers of Modena evidence of a same-sex relationship 1,500 years ago? Similar to how the Birka Viking’s warrior credentials became the subject of controversy when her sex was published, the love of the Lovers is now being called into question. They could be brothers, which, because of the failed DNA analysis, cannot be ruled out. The authors of the 2019 study themselves propose that they might have been comrades-in-arms. However, previous work by Lugli’s colleagues rejected the idea that they were buried in a military cemetery. The dead didn’t show signs of repeated combat, there were both men and women, and a six-year-old child. So why revive the soldier hypothesis? Lugli says that certain things changed: there was an in-depth analysis of the injuries and a skeleton that they thought was a young woman was actually a man. But, he says, “our interpretation was mostly from a historical perspective”. He thinks it’s unlikely that their parents would put the pair hand in hand to show their love, at that time. “But anything’s possible.” In other words, the dead don’t bury themselves. But clearly they don’t excavate themselves either. “There’s a real lack of creativity about how other people lived their lives,” says Pamela L Geller, a bioarchaeologist specialising in queer and feminist studies at the University of Miami, “because we are so wedded to the categories that we have in place now.” At the same time, although scientific methods can take away some of the guesswork, “there’s just some stuff we’re not going to know about the past”, Geller says. Who loved whom is one of those things, as is people’s sense of identity. Archaeologists can only try, as best they can, to reconstruct the lives of past people based on the available data. Gardeła says it is a matter of respect for the people of the past. “Every grave tells a different story,” he says, “because they were all real humans. They had their own unique lives.” • This article was amended on 16 January 2022. In an earlier version, an image was captioned as showing a facial reconstruction of the Viking woman found at Birka, Sweden. In fact, the face is that of a Viking woman buried at Nordre Kjølen, Norway.Midway through Abel Tesfaye’s fifth album as the Weeknd, the former blog-friendly miserabilist turned Super Bowl-starring megastar muses: “Catalogue lookin’ legendary”. It’s hard to disagree. His last album, 2020’s After Hours, spawned the record-breaking Blinding Lights, a glorious slice of electro-pop that joined Can’t Feel My Face and Starboy in the modern pop canon. While Dawn FM doesn’t feature anything that screams global ubiquity – although disco-tinged lead single Take My Breath comes close – it also represents his most pleasingly cohesive album. Built around a retro radio station soundtracking purgatory, its featherlight, 80s-style pop – created alongside the likes of hitmaker Max Martin and electronic experimentalist Oneohtrix Point Never – is juxtaposed with lyrics that toy with annihilation. On eerie opener Gasoline, Tesfaye asks a lover to literally set him on fire, while songs such as Sacrifice and the shimmering Less Than Zero wrestle with past misdeeds and the sense that emotional destruction is all he knows. Musically, Dawn FM mirrors Tesfaye’s disquiet, its buffed electronic sheen ruptured by moments of discord, as when ballad Starry Eyes teeters on the brink of implosion. It’s a state that Tesfaye seems to relish, with often stunning results.General Tso’s golden hake by Ching-He Huang Traditionally, a whole fish is steamed at the new year to symbolise abundance and unity, because the homonym for fish means “abundance”. I’m using sustainable hake fillets which are tender and succulent. They belong to the cod family so they still have a wonderful texture, slightly smaller flakes than cod but still a delicious sweet taste. For this recipe, I am using hake fillets with the skin on (to keep their shape), sliced into 2cm chunks. I love to shallow fry the fish pieces, make a hot, sour and sweet General Tso’s sauce with dried red chillies, peppers and onions, and then toss the fish pieces back into the dish. There are many variations of the sauce invented by chef Peng Chang-kuei who fled China in 1949 and ended up in America, where it’s thought he added tomato paste to cater for a sweet-sour taste to suit the American palate. For vegan friends, you can use cauliflower or tofu instead of the hake and it works just as well. I love this alternative lunar new year dish – the fish of abundance, fried golden to symbolise prosperity, and then red peppers in the reddish sauce bring the luck. As a final garnish, I like to sprinkle over some black sesame seeds. The homonym for “sons” is tze which is also the homonym for “seeds” therefore blessing you with plenty of offspring. Serves 4 to share For the hake cornflour 80g large egg white 1 (yolk saved for another recipe) sea salt 2 pinches ground white pepper 2 pinches fresh hake fillets 2 x 200g, skin on, descaled, rinsed, dried, cut into 2cm x 2cm cubes vegetable oil 500ml, for shallow-frying For the stir fry rapeseed oil 2 tbsp garlic 2 cloves, crushed, peeled and finely chopped dried Sichuan chillies 5 whole white onion 1 large, peeled, cut into 1cm cubes red peppers 2 medium, washed, deseeded and cut into 1.5cm cubes spring onions 4, washed, topped and tailed, trimmed, sliced into 2.5cm pieces on the slant For the sauce yellow soybean sauce 1 heaped tsp light soy sauce 3 tbsp clear rice vinegar 3 tbsp tomato paste 1 tbsp golden syrup 3 tbsp sriracha chilli sauce 1 tbsp dark soy sauce 1 tbsp For the garnish and to serve unsalted peanuts 80g, toasted black sesame seeds Prepare all the fresh ingredients and set aside. Next, whisk together all the ingredients for the sauce in a bowl, then set aside. For the hake, make a batter by combining the cornflour and egg white, season it with sea salt and ground white pepper. Place the hake pieces into a container, pour over the batter and leave for 2-3 minutes. Fill a medium deep pan with the 500ml of vegetable oil. Heat the oil to 180C or until a piece of bread dropped in turns golden brown in 15 seconds, or a wooden chopstick starts to bubble furiously in the pan. Using a pair of heatproof tongs, very gently add the hake pieces, one by one, cooking for about 4-5 minutes until all the hake pieces are golden brown, then remove and place on a plate lined with kitchen paper to drain any excess oil. (Once the oil has cooled, pour it through a metal strainer, drain and collect it in a heatproof bowl to use again.) For the stir fry, heat a wok over a high heat and when it starts to smoke, add the rapeseed oil. Add the garlic, dried chillies and white onion, and give that a good stir. Then add the red peppers and stir for 1 minute. Pour in the sauce and cook until it has reduced and has a slightly sticky consistency. Add the spring onions and toss well. Toss in the fried hake and gently mix well. Transfer to a serving plate and garnish with the unsalted toasted peanuts. Finally, sprinkle with black sesame seeds and serve immediately. Pork and crab dumplings with spicy sour sauce Dumplings are traditionally served at the lunar new year feast because their shape resembles ingots of gold. So, it’s important to have a dumpling course. I love the simplicity of these dumplings; and boiling them means the flavours of the pork and crab shine through. Dress the dumplings with a spicy sour chilli sauce and garnish with aromatic coriander. Makes 30 dumplings (5 each for 6 people) minced pork 250g ground sea salt ½ tsp caster sugar ½ tsp ground white pepper ¼ tsp bouillon powder ½ tsp pure sesame oil ¼ tsp Shaoxing rice wine ¼ tsp, or dry sherry fresh root ginger 2.5cm, peeled and finely grated Chinese leaf 100g, washed and finely chopped spring onions 40g, topped, tailed, washed and finely chopped tinned water chestnut 80g, drained and finely chopped fresh white and brown crab meat 100g gyoza dumpling skins 30 shop-bought, frozen, defrosted For the dressing sauce light soy sauce 3 tbsp black rice vinegar 3 tbsp chiu chow chilli oil 2 tbsp pure sesame oil 1 tbsp coriander stems 5g, finely chopped (see garnish below) For the garnish fresh coriander 15g, washed and leaves picked (reserve the stems for the dressing, see above) Mix the minced pork with the salt, sugar, white pepper, bouillon powder, sesame oil, rice wine and grated ginger. Using your hand, squeeze the mixture through your fingers a few times so all the ingredients are well combined. Then take the mixture in your hand, and throw it into the bowl. Repeat this process a few times. You will notice the mixture starts to form a ball. (This throwing process will give the filling more texture when cooked.) Add the Chinese leaf, spring onions and water chestnut. Again, using your hand, mix the mince thoroughly with the vegetables. Cover with a plate and leave in the fridge for around 30 minutes. Remove the dumpling filling from the fridge, discard any water at the bottom. Add the crab meat and gently fold into the mixture. Remove the gyoza dumpling wrappers from the packet. Place a dampened tea towel over the pack while you work with each wrapper – this prevents them from drying out. Place one dumpling sheet between your palm and fingers, and put 2 generous teaspoons of filling in the middle. Gently bring one half of the dumpling sheet over the other half and squeeze the edges. To make the dumpling more decorative, add some folds crimping around the edges. Continue until the remaining 29 dumpling sheets are filled. Place them on a lightly floured tray. Make the dressing for the dumplings by stirring the soy, black rice vinegar, chiu chow chilli oil and pure sesame oil together. Just before serving, sprinkle in the chopped coriander stems. Bring a large pan filled with a litre of water to the boil. Turn the heat to medium-high and then gently add the dumplings. Cook in two batches. The dumplings will float to the surface after cooking for 4-5 minutes. Remove with a slotted spoon and transfer to warm serving bowls. Dress with a teaspoon of the dressing, sprinkle over some chopped coriander and serve immediately. Ching-He Huang’s tip for crispy Guo-Tieh dumplings Heat a wide pan on medium heat, add 2 tablespoons of rapeseed oil. Place the dumplings in a clockwise direction around the pan. Cook for 1 minute until the bottom starts to turn golden. In a cup of around 200ml of water, add 1 tablespoon of plain flour and mix until most lumps are gone. Then pour over the frying dumplings. Turn the heat to medium and cover with a tight fitting lid until the water has evaporated. The dumplings are cooked when it turns more opaque and see through in colour. Gently remove from the pan and serve with dipping sauce immediately. (The flour water will turn into a crispy delicate sheet and may brake easily when lifting the dumplings out from the pan. Or just use plain water to cook the dumplings without the flour part, to just have golden pan fried dumplings, without the crispy flour sheet - it’s up to you). Ching-He Huang is a food writer, broadcaster and author of Asian Green and Wok On • The image accompanying the recipe for pork and crab dumplings was amended on 17 January 2022 to remove joss paper shown next to the plate in the original picture. Such paper is burned for the dead at funerals and in other rituals in China and other parts of Asia. We apologise for this cultural error, and would also like to clarify that chef Ching-He Huang was not involved in this mistake. The article was further amended to add cooking tips for pan-frying the dumplings. Fuchsia Dunlop’s pipa tofu in a Sichuanese sauce This Sichuan version of a Cantonese classicmakes a fine vegetarian centrepiece for the new year meal, and echoes the pork meatballs that are often included in festive stews. The dish is named because the quenelle-shaped tofu balls are supposed to resemble the pipa, or Chinese lute. Use the blocks of plain white tofu, usually immersed in water, that are sold in most Chinese supermarkets (not silken tofu). It varies in consistency, but the finished tofu balls should be delicious whether firmer or more custardy in texture. You can deep-fry the balls a few hours in advance, and finish the dish when you are ready to serve it. Serves 4 as part of a Chinese meal with rice and about 3 other dishes To make the tofu balls dried shiitake mushrooms 2 plain white tofu 450g egg whites 2 medium potato flour or cornstarch 4 tbsp salt and ground pepper ½ tsp to taste carrot ½ of 1 medium, peeled and coarsely grated or very finely chopped. cooking oil at least 200ml To finish cooking oil 2 tbsp Sichuan chilli bean paste 2 tbsp garlic 1½ tbsp, finely chopped ginger 1 tbsp, finely chopped unsalted vegetarian stock or hot water 300ml caster sugar 2 tsp light soy sauce ½ tsp potato flour or cornstarch 1 tsp mixed with 4 tsp cold water Chinkiang vinegar 2 tsp spring onion greens 5 tbsp, green parts only, finely sliced toasted sesame oil 1 tsp Place the dried mushrooms in a bowl, cover with boiling water from the kettle and leave to soak for at least half an hour. When the mushrooms are fully reconstituted, slice off and discard the stems, and then finely chop the caps. Place in a wok with the soaking water, topped up if necessary to make 200ml. Heat over a high flame, then simmer, stirring often, for about five minutes, until the water has evaporated. Set aside. Roughly chop the tofu and place in a food processor with the egg whites, potato starch or cornflour, and ½ tsp salt and white pepper to taste. Place in a bowl, add the prepared carrot and mushrooms and mix well. Heat at least 200ml of cooking oil in a wok to 190C. Use a spoon to drop balls of the mixture (about 1½ tbsp in size) into the hot oil. Fry the tofu balls in batches. With a slotted spoon or cooking chopsticks, separate so they don’t stick together. Fry for 1-2 minutes on both sides until deeply golden, then remove with a slotted spoon and set aside on kitchen paper to drain. This step can be done a few hours in advance. When you wish to serve the dish, heat the 2 tablespoons of oil in a seasoned wok over a medium flame. Add the chilli bean paste and stir fry until it smells delicious and the oil has reddened, taking care not to burn. Then add the garlic and ginger and continue to fry until they smell wonderful too. Add the stock or water with the sugar, light soy sauce and tofu balls, bring to the boil and then boil for a few minutes, stirring and spooning the liquid over the tofu, until the sauce has reduced by about half. Give the starch mixture a stir and, in two or three stages, mix in just enough to thicken the sauce to a gravy-like consistency. Add the vinegar and spring onion greens and stir for a few seconds to fuse the flavours. Off the heat, stir in the sesame oil and then turn into a serving dish. Cool buckwheat noodles with chicken and mixed vegetables These cool yet spicy noodles can be eaten as a side dish or a snack in the lazy days of the new lunar year. Substitute smoked or spiced firm tofu, cut into slivers, for the chicken to make it vegan. Spice it up according to your tastes (Sichuanese chilli oil is usually not excessively hot, while bought Cantonese chilli oil can be pretty peppy, and Sichuan pepper varies in its tingliness). You can use pure buckwheat noodles, sold in Japanese shops as soba, or noodles made with a mixture of wheat and buckwheat flours, which are less fragile and easier to handle. Serves 4 as part of a Chinese meal with rice and about 3 other dishes red pepper ¼ green pepper ¼ cooked chicken 200g beansprouts 100g dried buckwheat noodles 160g sunflower or rapeseed oil 1 tsp For the seasonings caster sugar ½ tsp fine salt ½ tsp light soy sauce 1½ tbsp Chinkiang vinegar 2 tbsp chilli oil 4 tbsp with chilli sediment, to taste toasted sesame oil 1 tsp Sichuan pepper ¼-½ tsp, roasted and ground, or 1 tsp Sichuan pepper oil, to taste garlic finely chopped 1-2 tsp (optional) Cut the red and green peppers into fine slivers, and the chicken into thin strips (a little thicker than the peppers, so it doesn’t fall apart). Bring a large pan of water to the boil. Add the peppers and beansprouts and blanch for about a minute, then remove with a slotted spoon to a colander and cool under the cold tap: they should retain a little crunch. Drain well and set aside. Add the noodles to the water and stir to prevent sticking. Boil until just cooked (usually 4-5 minutes). Then tip into the colander and cool under the cold tap. Drain well. Sprinkle the sunflower or rapeseed oil over the noodles and stir it in swiftly, so they don’t stick together. Place the noodles, blanched vegetables and chicken in a big mixing bowl. In a small bowl, combine the sugar, salt, soy sauce and vinegar and stir well. Add the remaining ingredients, then pour the sauce over the noodle mixture. Toss everything together and serve. Fuchsia Dunlop is a food writer and author of The Food of Sichuan and Land of Fish and Rice Erchen Chang’s white cut poached chicken For lunar new year, we would always get together and celebrate with a banquet-style meal. At home in Taiwan we would have the chicken dish chilled and earlier on in the meal, whereas at my partner Shing’s celebrations they would have it warm and nearer the end. I prefer the chilled chicken as it gives the flesh that nice consolidated flavour and a different texture. Make sure when first cooking, dip it in and out to tauten the skin: to achieve that jelly layer in between the skin, flash it in ice after cooking. Serves 4 For brining the chicken whole chicken 1 (1.3kg) water 2 litres table salt soy sauce sugar star anise 3 pieces spring onions 2 ginger 2cm sea salt For ginger spring onion oil ginger 90g, peeled garlic 5g, peeled spring onion 40g rapeseed oil 100g salt to taste sugar to taste Prepare the liquid for brining and poaching. You’ll need enough water to cover the chicken. I normally go for a 1:1 ratio (chicken weight to brine weight), but it depends on what size pot you have to poach the chicken in. So to be safe, go for 1:1.5 (chicken:brine). For example, a 1.3kg bird will need nearly 2kg of liquid. For every 1 litre of water, add 5% table salt, 2% soy sauce and 1% sugar. Add the star anise, spring onion and peeled ginger, and leave overnight in the fridge. You can substitute the water with chicken stock if you have it. You can prepare the ginger spring onion oil earlier. If not, make it while the chicken is cooking. To prepare the ginger spring onion oil, finely dice the ginger, garlic and the whites of the spring onion. Heat the oil in a pan to a high temperature, then add the ginger and spring onion. Let it cook for only 5-10 seconds. Take the pan off the heat and season heavily with salt and sugar, decant into a bowl and set aside. Take the chicken out of the fridge an hour before cooking and remove it from the liquid, so the chicken reaches room temperature. Put the brine liquid in a saucepan with deep sides and bring it to the boil. Dip the chicken in for around 30 seconds, then take it out for a minute. Repeat this process 2 more times and skim any impurities that have come to the surface. On the last dip, keep the water simmering and leave it in for 5 minutes. I use an S-shaped metal butcher hook that allows you to pierce the chicken at the top to lift it out of the liquid, but if you don’t have a hook and you have a small 1.3kg chicken, then use metal tongs and clamp it from inside the cavity and lift out. For larger birds, you can use a spatula with the other hand to hold the base of the chicken when lifting it out of the liquid. If you struggle, then you can skip the dipping and continue to simmer for 5 minutes. Take the pan off the heat and keep the lid on. Leave the chicken in the poaching liquid for about 40 minutes (if using a 1.3kg bird). If you have a larger chicken, add 15 minutes more cooking time for every 300g extra in weight. A large 2kg chicken would take about 70 minutes. If you have a thermometer probe to check the internal temperature, it should be 75C. If there isn’t a thermometer available, pierce the chicken at the thickest part to see if the juice runs clear. Once the poaching time is up, place the chicken in iced water immediately to stop the cooking. When the chicken has rested for a minimum of 15 minutes (you can leave it for longer if you want to eat the chicken chilled), carve the meat into slices and eat by dipping them into the ginger oil, served along with boiled rice. Char siu pork Banquet-style meat or fish dishes are cooked to celebrate and to wish for an abundant year to come. Char siu is definitely a classic, its redness and its sweetness symbolising joy and good luck. This is a traditional Cantonese recipe that was passed on to me by a Cantonese friend. You can find all the ingredients online or from Chinese supermarkets. To get a true complexity of flavour, we use three kinds of fermented sauce. The miso gives a light fragrance, the tofuru beancurd for the mid-tone and the yellow bean paste gives a deep rich flavour. Serves 4 For the marinade caster sugar 380g salt 90g onion 60g, minced garlic 60g, minced mei kuei lu chiew 60g (a Chinese rose-flavoured sorghum liquor) soy sauce 60g sesame sauce 30g, or tahini miso paste 30g yellow bean paste 30g tofuru or fermented beancurd 30g shallot 30g, minced beetroot powder 20g pork neck fillets 2 x 200g (preferably Iberico pork for the flavour and the well distributed marbles of fat, but normal pork neck works perfectly too) For the cucumber dressing soy sauce 100g rice wine vinegar 25g Sichuan chilli oil 50g To serve cucumbers 2 toasted sesame seeds 1 tbsp To make the marinade, put all the ingredients except the pork into a blender and blitz until smooth. Cover the pork neck with it and put it in the fridge overnight. The next day, take the pork neck out of the fridge and bring to room temperature. Set the grill in your oven to its highest setting. Mix the soy sauce, rice wine vinegar and Sichuan oil together to make the dressing and set aside. Place the marinated pork neck on a metal rack above a tray, making sure it’s covered excessively with the marinade. This recipe has a high sugar content so when the marinade drips, it burns quite quickly. Make sure you line your tray with a baking sheet or foil under the rack to catch the marinade for easier washing up later. Once the grill is as hot as it can be, cook the pork neck for 5 minutes. Flip and brush more marinade over the pork neck and cook for 5 more minutes. Switch off the grill and let the meat rest for another 2 minutes in the oven. You are looking for an internal temperature of 65C. You should get a char siu pork neck with nicely charred edges. Take the fillets out of the oven and start preparing your cucumbers. Peel and cut each cucumber into 2 rectangles roughly 3cm x 7cm x 1cm. Sear the cucumber pieces on both sides in a hot pan, until the surface turns brown and juicy. To serve, arrange 2 pieces of seared cucumber on each plate, sprinkle over some toasted sesame seeds, and spoon on some cucumber dressing. Cut the grilled pork neck into 5mm slices and equally distribute the sliced pork neck into 4 portions over the cucumber. Serve immediately. Erchen Chang is creative director and co-founder, Bao, London The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. Check ratings in your region: UK; Australia; USKevin Raub is an American travel journalist based in Bologna. He is co-author of more than 100 Lonely Planet guidebooks. Food Bologna is the capital of arguably Italy’s most important food region, Emilia-Romagna, a storied territory whose kitchens have given birth to a long list of specialities famous the world over. Lasagne, ragù, tortellini, mortadella, parmesan cheese and balsamic vinegar all hail from here. At Pasta Fresca Naldi, a tiny shop/cafe west of the historic centre, pastaphiles line up for the hand-rolled specialities of owner Valeria and her team of nonne (grandmothers). Daily-changing offerings (from around €7) like tagliatelle with ragù or prosciutto and lemon; tortellini al pasticcio (baked with pork and cream); and gramigna alla salsiccia (curly pasta with sausage) will floor you. With just six stools inside, most people opt for a takeaway package. For a sit-down experience, Trattoria Bertozzi regularly tops Bologna’s long list of excellent traditional restaurants. It’s almost a mile from the centre, far enough away to maintain its authentic ethos, with local dishes such as gramigna with cured pork, courgettes, saffron and shaved parmesan. Inspiration For five decades, until his death in 2012, Lucio Dalla was Italy’s most revered singer-songwriter. In 2019, his mesmerising home inside the 15th-century Palazzo Casa Fontana poi Gamberini, was opened to the public. Casa di Lucio Dalla (€15pp) is a wild ride through the eccentric mind of a musical genius, complete with a head-spinning potpourri of provocative bric-a-brac, personal artefacts and treasured art. Neighbourhood Bolognina (“Little Bologna”) sits behind the main train station and is a hub of working-class life. Bolognina is fairly short on attractions – they comprise a (free) museum about the mysterious 1980 Ustica plane crash, and the 19th-century Sacred Heart church with its huge cupola – but long on personality. It’s an up-and-coming, multicultural neighbourhood of markets, ethnic eateries and innumerable accents. Gentrification hasn’t quite dug its heels in here, but streets such as Via Luigi Serra (home to the fantastic, and fantastic value, Trattoria di Via Serra; hip bar/cafe Fermento; artisanal bakery Forno Brisa and organic gelateria Stefino) give a sense of Bolognina’s direction of travel, and reward those who venture out of the centre. Green space No Bologna park fulfils green-space hankerings like Giardini Margherita, a 26-hectare expanse inaugurated in 1879 and inspired by English landscape gardens. The city’s former municipal greenhouses have been repurposed into one of Bologna’s coolest venues, home to Vetro (for drinks and vegan bites) and Le Serre (with co-working spaces exhibitions and cultural events). Be it for happy hour or an hour or two of alfresco work, it’s easy to laze away an afternoon here. Nightlife Via del Pratello is Bologna’s famous nightlife street, but for a bit more character with your cocktails, set a date with Davo, Don, Jack and Ricky at Ruggine on Vicolo Alemagna. Four friends from various corners of northern Italy opened this cocktail bar on a narrow, glow-orange alley 450 metres from Piazza Maggiore. You won’t find Campari, Aperol or fancy garnishes here, but locally driven craft mixology. To tap into Italy’s excellent craft beer scene, head a short way west to Il Punto, which has an array of ales on draught (including one hand-pump), with a focus on local birra artigianale. Fans of sours and wild ales should try a tipple at Ca’ del Brado, a top-notch craft brewery a few miles south of the city centre. Stay Close to the old town, art historian Maria Ketty runs the charming Bologna nel Cuore, a B&amp;B with two doubles and two one-bedroom apartments, offering bright interiors, high ceilings, colourfully tiled bathrooms and very generous breakfasts. Doubles from €125, bolognanelcuore.itCome at the king, you’d best not miss. But Romelu Lukaku did, twice. First before half-time when, on the charge and with the ball on his stronger left foot, he opted, bafflingly, to try to lay in Hakim Ziyech, who was offside even if the pass had been accurate; and then in the second half when, laid through by Mateo Kovacic, he opened his body to try to curl an effort round Ederson, only to find that the keeper had read his barely disguised intentions and was diving to make a save that was far more comfortable than it ought to have been. And that’s the problem when you’ve recently given a television interview questioning the formation, especially when the team you’ve joined are European champions: it places scrutiny on your own performance that isn’t tremendously helpful. Little wonder that Thomas Tuchel was unwilling to spare his £97.5m striker afterwards. Was Lukaku the only reason Chelsea lost to Manchester City on Saturday? Clearly not but, for all City appeared dominant, that game was not that far from following the pattern of last season’s Champions League final or FA Cup semi-final between the sides: City with lots of the ball but unable to break down a well-organised Chelsea and undone on the counterattack. Had Kepa Arrizabalaga not given that little skip to his right before Kevin De Bruyne’s shot, had Lukaku made more of either of his two big opportunities, this might easily have been regarded as another Tuchel masterclass. To an extent, that only highlights how result-driven a lot of analysis is: as Juanma Lillo, City’s assistant coach, once observed, what is praised is not what is done well but what ends well. But this was not like the game between the sides at Stamford Bridge earlier in the season; City were not so superior on Saturday as they had been then. They are a supremely talented side and there are limits to what an opposing manager can do against them, even with a squad like Chelsea’s. On Saturday, Chelsea did largely contain City and they did cause occasional problems on the break; for all the understandable frustration that Chelsea weren’t more proactive given their need to win in order to remain with even a sniff of the title, there was not a huge amount more they could have done. Perhaps they could have gone a little more direct a little more often, perhaps they could have slung in a few more crosses for Lukaku to contest with John Stones and Aymeric Laporte, but retaining possession and with it the control that has characterised Tuchel’s Chelsea at their best was key to the plan. Little wonder, then, that Tuchel was frustrated with Lukaku, something apparent in his gesticulations on the touchline as well as his words after the match. “He had many ball losses without pressure and in very promising circumstances,” the manager said. “Of course we want to serve him but he is part of the team and sometimes he needs to do service as well. He had a huge chance so he’s included in this. “He is part of the team and the performances up front, especially in the first half, we can do much better and we need to do better. We had eight or nine attacking transitions in the first half and zero touches in the box. That is a big problem. There was a lack of timing and composure. We could have had more chances if we played with better precision.” Lukaku’s form is of more general concern. He’s not the only Chelsea forward underperforming. It’s only fair to acknowledge the impact of injuries and illness but none of Kai Havertz, Christian Pulisic, Timo Werner or Ziyech, brought in at a combined cost of £210m, have entirely convinced either. But his case is the most baffling. Lukaku had shown glimpses of talent in the Premier League before; the sense was that he was as much a victim of Manchester United’s malaise as a cause. He had shown with Belgium his tactical intelligence, his capacity for drifting wide to create space for advanced midfielders – which seemed to be just what Chelsea needed in a front man – allied to an immense physical presence. And then there were his goals: 47 of them in the league over two seasons in an Inter team based around pressing, albeit a more frenetic system than that favoured by Tuchel. But maybe a championship in which 40-year-old Zlatan Ibrahimovic and 35-year-old Edin Dzeko still stand out isn’t that much of a gauge. It’s early. Nobody should be written off six months into a move. Lukaku has scored five goals in nine Premier League starts. But the truth is that this feels a lot like his time at United. There are flickers of what he could be. The way he turned Stones before his ill-conceived pass to Ziyech was a demonstration of how terrifying he can be for defenders. But five of his 12 attempted passes failed to find a teammate. His one attempted dribble squandered possession. On the 42 occasions teammates attempted to find him with a pass, only 12 times did he claim possession. He lost all eight of his aerial duels (which may explain Chelsea’s reluctance to cross). He registered only one touch in the City box. Playing against City is difficult, but that was not the performance of a player who can be demanding formational changes to suit him. Lukaku is 28 now. His gifts are obvious and seem abundant, and perhaps that generates unreasonable expectation. But if it ever is going to really work for him in the Premier League, it is going to have to be soon.John Sainsbury, Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover, who has died aged 94, was the driving force behind the family supermarket chain for 23 years as its determined chairman. Perhaps more than anyone else he secured its position as one of the country’s leading food shops. “Mr JD”, as he was known within the company, was said to be a retailer to his fingertips, personally tasting each of the company’s product lines before it went on sale and approving all packaging designs. He was known to descend unannounced on stores for terrifying inspections and interrogations of local managers. He could be a temperamental boss. When he became chairman in 1969 – the fourth generation in the family firm since its foundation in the mid-19th century – its profit of £4.3m was half that of Tesco and a ninth of Marks and Spencer. When he retired on his 65th birthday in 1992, the company had overtaken its rivals to become the largest supermarket in Britain, had branched out into the Homebase do-it-yourself chain, launched in the US by taking over a supermarket group there, and was recording an annual profit of £628m. He retained the presidency of the company and led successful family opposition to a takeover bid by private equity companies in 2007. It was very much a family firm: he succeeded his uncle, Sir Robert Sainsbury, as head of the business, and on retirement passed the chairmanship on to Sir Robert’s son David Sainsbury: a not entirely happy arrangement, as his cousin, 13 years his junior, did not seem as committed to the grocery business as he was. John Sainsbury felt the business stagnated under his successor, whose chief interest was in science and who left the chairmanship in 1998 to become a minister in Tony Blair’s government. The older man was a staunch Tory, as was his younger brother, Tim, an MP and former business minister. John was the eldest son of Alan Sainsbury, who would also be chairman of the company in the 1960s and become a Labour life peer, and his first wife, Doreen Davan Adams. The couple divorced when their son was 12 and John was sent to Stowe school and subsequently studied history at Worcester College, Oxford, for which the family became major benefactors, supplying a residential block for students. After national service with the army in Palestine, he joined the family firm in 1950, becoming a buyer the following year and being put in charge of bacon purchases in 1956. He became a director two years later and vice-chairman following his father’s retirement in 1967. It was a period of rapid change in the grocery business. Alan Sainsbury had introduced the company’s first self-service store in Croydon in 1950 after seeing supermarkets in the US – an angry customer, affronted at having to serve herself, threw a wire basket at him on opening day – and had also started frozen food and own-brand lines. During John Sainsbury’s chairmanship all the remaining 82 counter-service branches were closed and 313 large supermarkets replaced the previous 244 stores. Branches more than quadrupled in size, from an average 8,000 sq ft to nearly 35,000 sq ft, and the range of products increased from 4,000 to 16,000, half of them own-brand. In 1973 the company was floated on the stock market in what was described as the biggest flotation to that time, the family owning 85% of the stock, though that decreased substantially over time as shares were redirected to the family’s web of charitable trusts and foundations. Between the flotation in 1973 and John Sainsbury’s retirement in 1992 the company’s market capitalisation rose from £117m to over £8bn. Sainsbury married the former ballet dancer Anya Linden in 1963 and the couple established the Linbury charitable trust – a combination of their two names – to channel donations eventually totalling more than £150m to projects largely devoted to art and the performing arts, heritage and educational projects. Among them, in collaboration with other family members, was the £50m Sainsbury wing to the National Gallery. There was also the Linbury studio theatre attached to the Royal Opera House, the Linbury biennial prize for stage design and a £25m donation to the British Museum. Other less high-profile donations were made for medical research including, partly for family reasons, research into chronic fatigue syndrome, and to the St John of Jerusalem eye hospital on the Palestinian West Bank, an interest dating back to Sainsbury’s national service days. He served on a wide range of boards and as a trustee for institutions including the Royal Ballet School, the Royal Opera House, Dulwich Picture Gallery, the National and Tate galleries, the Ashmolean Museum, the Rhodes Trust and the Nelson Mandela children’s fund. He was an honorary fellow of his old college for many years. He was knighted in 1980, and given a life peerage in 1989. He is survived by Anya, their two sons, John Julian and Mark, and a daughter, Sarah. • John Davan Sainsbury, Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover, businessman and philanthropist, born 2 November 1927; died 14 January 2022 • This article was amended on 17 January 2022. An earlier version said the £50m Sainsbury wing to the National Gallery was described by the Prince of Wales as a “monstrous carbuncle”, but that description related to a previous proposal to extend the building.Italian police have arrested a nurse in Palermo for allegedly pretending to give Covid vaccines to anti-vaxxer activists so they could benefit from official health certificates to travel and access bars, restaurants and public transport in the country. Investigators used a hidden camera to film the nurse, a 58-year-old woman working at an inoculation centre in the Sicilian capital. The clip, released on Saturday on Twitter, shows the health worker apparently loading up a dose of Covid-19 vaccine and then emptying the syringe into a tissue before pretending to inject it into the arms of anti-vaxxers. Police said the woman’s own booster dose was fake and arrested her on charges of forgery and embezzlement. It is not the first time a nurse has been arrested in Italy for pretending to inject Covid vaccines. Dozens of health workers, including at least three doctors, have been charged or investigated on suspicion of administering fake jabs to people in recent months, with some paying up to €400 (£330) each for the service. Last Wednesday, an Italian nurse in Ancona in the Marche region was arrested for allegedly giving fake Covid vaccines to at least 45 people. The health worker allegedly emptied vaccines into a medical waste bin. According to investigators, anti-vaccine protesters were willing to pay up to €300 for the service in order to receive the so-called “super green pass”, introduced by the Italian government last December and required to access cinemas, gyms, nightclubs and stadiums, as well as to be served indoors at bars and restaurants. The nurse arrested on Friday in Palermo is the second health worker from the same hospital in the city to end up in prison. On 21 December, Sicilian investigators uncovered another alleged scam with dozens of anti-vaccination holdouts, including a police officer, paying a nurse up to €400 to give them fake jabs. The woman, who faces charges of corruption and forgery, recently pleaded guilty and began to collaborate with authorities by revealing the details of the scam and the names of her accomplices. The woman told investigators she injected fake vaccines because she needed money to support her son at university. The nurse also confessed to providing anti-vaxxers with fake certificates with negative Covid swab results. “We have uncovered the dark and fraudulent plots of these diehard, no-vax people who do not hesitate to break the law,” the Palermo police commissioner, Leopoldo Laricchia, said in a statement. “This investigation also shows how, unfortunately, there are still unvaccinated health workers who work in hospitals in close contact with patients.” As countries in Europe scramble to impose stricter rules to halt the outbreak of the Omicron variant, increasing numbers of anti-vaxxers are attempting to skirt the law to obtain vaccine passports. Early in December, in Biella, a town close to Turin in the northern Piedmont region, a man turned up for his Covid-19 vaccine wearing a fake arm made of silicone. After completing the bureaucratic formalities, including signing a consent form in front of a doctor, the man, a 50-year-old dentist, sat down and lifted up the sleeve of his shirt as he prepared for a health worker to administer the jab. But after taking a closer look and touching the arm, the nurse asked the man to take off his shirt. His plan foiled, he then tried to persuade the health worker to turn a blind eye. The Omicron variant accounts for more than 80% of coronavirus cases in Italy as the daily number of new infections has begun to fall in recent days. Rome is expected to reach 95% vaccine coverage by May.Joe Root has declared himself ready to lead England’s Test team into a new and potentially more successful era after their latest miserable collapse saw them lose all 10 wickets for 56 runs under the Hobart floodlights to surrender the fifth Test and conclude a one-sided Ashes series with a final act that skirted the border between tragedy and farce. “I’d love the opportunity to take this team forward and turn things round,” said Root, who has now won 27 of 61 matches as captain over four and a half years. “At the minute we’re going through a real tough period. Performances haven’t been good. But I believe I’m the right man to take this team forward. If that decision is taken out of my hands then so be it, but I’d love the opportunity to take this team forward, and yes I do have the appetite to carry on and turn things around.” Root admitted that, while his commitment to the England captaincy has never wavered, there have been moments when he considered whether “the team needs a slightly different direction and a new voice”. But he has concluded that he can lead them beyond the review that will inevitably follow this tour, and insisted that “good can come out of this series, definitely, if we use it in the right way”. England’s ever-crowded schedule sees their next Test series start against the West Indies in Antigua in just over seven weeks, and though Root admitted that “we can’t keep playing our cricket the way we are – it’s clear as day some of the areas we have to improve on”, he insisted some immediate amelioration “will come from individuals taking a lot from this tour and becoming better players for this experience”. But the 31-year-old also said that long-term success will come only once the current situation, when “anyone that’s coming into the Test team is doing it in spite of county cricket, not because of it”, comes to an end. “Clearly there are some short-term things that need to change, but I think there’s a lot of things long-term that could lead to us having a successful team for a sustained period of time,” Root said. “When do young batters have the opportunity to go out with 450, 500 on the board and deal with scoreboard pressure? You don’t practice it in county cricket, the only time you’re exposed to it is in this environment. When have they had to go out to save a match against a turning ball in spinning conditions? They’ve never been exposed to it, and yet we’re expected to go to the subcontinent and win games against the best spinners in the world. We’re expected to come here and deal with pace and bounce when we might face one guy who bowls over 90mph a season.” Root listed a variety of changes to county cricket, from the schedule and the scoring to the ball itself, that would better prepare young players for Test cricket. “It’s very difficult when you get beaten as heavily as we have done on this tour to convince people I’m the right man,” he said of England’s next chapter. “But I can tell you one thing for sure – as long as I have the opportunity to captain this team, I will throw everything into it and give everything - for everyone supporting us, for the guys around me, for the players – to try and provide an environment that allows us to be successful.” Root also confirmed he has turned down the chance to enter the next Indian Premier League auction in February, adding: “There’s a lot that we need to do for this team, which deserves all of my energy. I’ll keep sacrificing as much as I can because I care so much about Test cricket in our country and trying to get us to where we want to be.”The title of The 4th Country presumably refers to the perceived hierarchy of the constituent nations of the UK: Ulster loyalists and nationalists find rare agreement in believing that Westminster governments prefer the English, Scots, and Welsh. Problematically, though, writer Kate Reid might have used the subtitle: Three Plays. In 80 minutes, she crams “Soldier F”, the only British army member to be charged with killing civil rights marchers during Derry’s Bloody Sunday in 1972; the outlawing of abortion in Northern Ireland for 51 years after it was legal in Great Britain; and the suspension of the devolved assembly at Stormont from 2017-20. Through a web of connections between lovers, siblings, and officials, the play forces all these issues into one story. But there is an editorial problem with the apparent equivalence given to the legacy of the Troubles and the lack of fertility rights. While the former is a consequence of British colonialism, Westminster long attempted liberalising interventions on abortion that were resisted by Northern Irish politicians. It may have suited all parties to have the 2019 law change effectively imposed from London, as even pro-choicers in Sinn Féin were nervous of resistance from their Catholic demographic. In those complexities of British rule, there might have been a bigger and more coherent play. The triple narrative also ambitiously switches between sharp naturalistic dialogue and Brechtian disruptions in which actors turn against each other and the script, ultimately questioning if drama is adequate to the material or the bald facts are stronger. This manoeuvre is increasingly common in political shows but feels like a cleric stopping mid-sermon to say that a brisk walk might do the congregation more good than church. A third star is earned by perky, versatile performances from Reid, Rachael Rooney, Aoife Kennan and Cormac Elliott. Each switches roles, with Kennan fluently moving between Derry dialect and two precise gradations of English posh, encouraging the audience to reflect on the conclusions we draw from vocal identities, but the play’s own tone is too diffuse and confused. The 4th Country is at the Park Theatre until 5 February. This article was amended on 16 January 2022. An earlier version misspelled Aoife Kennan’s first name as “Aiofe”.Why are the Tories pulled to the right by fringe parties, but Labour are pulled to the centre? Barry Kington, Worcester Post your answers (and new questions) below or send them to nq@theguardian.com. A selection will be published on Sunday.The physical isolation of chefs working in Michelin-starred kitchens can lead to violent misbehaviour and a feeling that “the rules don’t apply”, a study based on interviews with dozens of top chefs has found. Working long hours away from the bill-paying public in often windowless and cramped kitchens creates a parallel moral universe in which abuse and violence is the norm, the study of 47 chefs at restaurants in Europe, Asia, Australia and north America by academics at Cardiff University found. It follows a spate of allegations of misconduct in some kitchens in the UK, including at a restaurant in Edinburgh run by the Michelin-starred chef Tom Kitchin, which resulted in the suspension of two staff. His company launched an independent investigation after historical claims of bullying and physical assault last July. A spokesperson for Kitchin said it had since fully implemented recommendations from the investigation with “a group-wide external training programme, enhancing and reinforcing our ethos, policies and procedures to ensure best practice”. Other chefs from different restaurants also posted anonymous complaints on social media about abusive behaviour, in what was known as the hospitality industry’s #MeToo moment. It coincides with the release of Boiling Point, a film starring Stephen Graham about the high stress, aggression and threat of violence of working in a top-ranked kitchen. “People think what they see on TV is exaggerated but what happens is often more severe and has major implications for the mental health and wellbeing of these young, talented people,” said Dr Rebecca Scott, one of the study’s authors. Previous attempts to explain the misbehaviour of chefs have focused on militaristic kitchen cultures, hyper-masculine values and the brutality of physical, stressful, fast-paced work. But this one – in collaboration with a professor of sociology, David Courpasson, in the French culinary hub of Lyon – concludes anyone wanting to stop bullying, violence and intimidation should consider swapping confined kitchens that generate “the perceived ability to act in a generally disinhibited way” for open-plan working environments. Some chefs told researchers they would not misbehave or endure abuse directed at them outside the kitchen but found it “acceptable and normal” once through the swing doors. One chef, Anton, who worked in a restaurant with both an open and closed kitchen described “shouting”, “punching” and “throwing things” in the downstairs closed kitchen but upstairs “they put on a show … they cannot throw stuff”. Another chef told the researchers that being isolated in the kitchen meant “there is an element of kind of getting away with stuff … physical abuse, you know … Being out of sight definitely allows abuse to happen and you do get away without any real consequences.” Dr Robin Burrow, lecturer in organisational behaviour and management at Cardiff University, said isolation could “be experienced as a kind of freedom from scrutiny to do things that would not normally be possible”. Using a phrase from criminology, the study describes kitchen layouts as creating a “geography of deviance”. The majority of the chefs interviewed worked in “backstage” environments, in the least desirable parts of the building. Many had little or no natural light and would work between 12 and 20 hours a day. One chef said: “The isolation creates a backdrop, a stage where one can play up. So, there’s a really strong correlation between bad behaviour and isolation.” Another admitted he followed a junior chef into a room away from the main kitchen and “beat the crap out of him”’ for persistent lateness. “It’s like the army,” he said. “I mean what goes on behind those doors, behind those gates is what goes on.”Asif* has lost almost everything since the Taliban takeover in Afghanistan. His wife was shot dead. He fled to Pakistan but has no legal status there and is living in a mosque while seeking treatment for recurrent cancer. He worked for the United Nations and other international organisations including the former UK Department for International Development (DfID). Until 2016 he also worked for Adam Smith International on British government-funded projects. In September, my wife went to the house of one my relatives with another family member to collect some of our belongings – she was three months pregnant with our first child. They went at midnight, so they wouldn’t be seen or recognised. But someone must have reported them, because early in the morning the Taliban came to the house and started shooting. She had been asleep, and when she came out to see what was happening, one of the Taliban just shot her in the head. Three days later, she died in hospital. After she died they detained the other family member for a few days and said: “We won’t release you until you say where Asif is.” I worked with the United Nations and other international organisations including DfID for over 14 years. When I took on a senior role with Adam Smith International, often I was one of the only Afghans in leadership meetings. I travelled a lot around all the provinces for work, which made me a bit high profile, and I was implementing systemic reforms against corruption. There was a Taliban mullah in my home province who used to call me and ask for cash, for phone credit for his fighters. [In Afghanistan, under the now-fallen republic, many organisations and people paid off the Taliban for security.] He used to call me “bacha angrez” (son of the British) when I refused, saying I was not even Afghan. He called 10 or 20 times, but I always rejected their requests, because I never thought the Taliban would take over, I never thought I needed to take care of these people. Even when the Taliban took over, I was very confident that I wasn’t at risk, because I was not corrupt and I did nothing wrong. But in early August I found out that the mullah had asked people to find me at any cost. So I left my house, and contacted my former employers, told them these people wanted to kill me and they sent me the [UK government’s] Afghan relocations and assistance policy link. I applied the same day, and a few days later I got an email asking about my dependents. I replied straight away, but I never got any more calls or any response, and on 27 August the evacuation finished. In those 10 days I moved house four times, then when there were no more flights I decided I had to leave Afghanistan, at any cost and by any route. I came to Kandahar province where smugglers had made a hole under the border fence with Pakistan. We crossed and walked for around four hours, barefoot, so our shoes wouldn’t make a sound. It was then my wife went to the house to collect the belongings – she wanted to join me and had applied for a visa. It was a love marriage. We never thought they would attack her. She had two surgeries but passed away later in the month. I cannot go back. Family and friends all tell me when the Taliban see you they will not wait for one minute to kill you. But here I have no legal documents, I can’t go to the guesthouse, I can’t rent a room, this is really the problem. And doctors told me the cancer has returned. Sometimes I stay with friends. When I see there is no place, I go and pass my night in a mosque. The UK is not accepting us, I can’t go back to Afghanistan. So what to do? We were wrong to work for the UK. *The name has been changed for this article.The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, has said he was not breaching the rules in a photograph of him drinking a beer with staff in a constituency office last year, and that there was “no comparison” with the prime minister’s recent conduct. The image, captured through the window of a building in Durham in the run up to last year’s Hartlepool byelection, shows Starmer drinking a bottle of beer and standing close to two people, while another two people can be seen in the background. It was first published last spring, when indoor mixing between different households was not allowed except for work, but the picture has been republished by some media in the wake of a slew of revelations about apparent rule-breaking parties at No 10. Appearing on the BBC’s Sunday Morning programme, Starmer said: “I was in a constituency office just days before the election. We were very busy. We were working in the office. “We stopped for something to eat and then we carried on working. No party, no breach of the rules and absolutely no comparison with the prime minister.” He added: “It was perfectly lawful to meet for work, which is what we were doing. The party that was put to the prime minister on Wednesday happened because an invitation was sent to 100 people saying ‘let’s have some socially distant drinks in the garden and bring your own booze’. There is simply no comparison.” Starmer reiterated hat Johnson must resign in the public interest, saying he had “lost all authority”. He also told the prime minister that he should follow the science when it came to lifting plan B Covid measures and that he should not do it because he was “in a real mess and he’s desperately trying to get out of it”. Starmer said he hoped the restrictions could be lifted as soon as possible but Labour would vote to lift them only if it was the right thing to do. “We’ll be led by the science as we always have been, not by the politics of propping up a broken prime minister,” he said. In the Mail on Sunday, the Conservative MPs Andrew Bridgen and Iain Duncan Smith accused Labour of hypocrisy over the picture of Starmer. Duncan Smith said the Labour leader should apologise while Bridgen said he should refer himself and his colleagues in the photograph for investigation.In the days when I took small children on resort holidays, I’d make a point of reading at least one of the novels on the bookshelves. Some of them were terrible: frowsty clogs-and-shawls sagas, saucy doctors and nurses fantasies and oh so many dogeared Dan Browns. But that’s how I got to know about Danielle Steel, Marian Keyes and Julia Quinn, to name just three. And guess what? They’re still there, hugging the top of the sales charts, and helping to drive a 20% increase in fiction sales over the pandemic year. By far the biggest rise was in “romantic fiction and sagas”, sales of which leapt by 49% to nearly 6m. Even though that’s only a third of the number of “crime, thriller and adventure” novels devoured over the year, it adds up to a lot of fluttering hearts. And, given that in literary rather than sales terms, “romance and sagas” is another way of saying women’s fiction, while crime, thrillers and adventure are three genres with universal appeal, rather than just finding their readers from one half of the population, those figures seem all the more astonishing. So what is going on? The sales blurb for the latest from Marian Keyes points succinctly to one answer: “Fed up of being a grownup? Get away from it all …” However, the Irish author has long been promoted out of the ghetto of genre fiction and treated as a national treasure, and her novels have never been simple exercises in escapism. The best known of them, Rachel’s Holiday, threw serious drug addiction in the way of its happy ending. I discovered it in Corfu in the year 2000 and secretly enjoyed it rather more than the novel I’d brought with me – Yann Martel’s Life of Pi, which would go on to win the Booker. I’ll definitely be reading Keyes’s sequel, which is due out next month. On the other hand, I’d completely forgotten about the American romance author Julia Quinn until the series based on her books, Bridgerton, popped up on the TV. But yes, I was seduced by the dazzling Regency confection of The Duke and I – the first of the series – during an unseasonably wet break, in the early 2000s, when one or other of us kept having to take to bed. The forgettability of romantic fiction is part of the point: it’s like a holiday romance with no strings attached, or the fleeting treat of newspaper-wrapped fish and chips on the pier with the sunlight on your back. And sometimes that’s just what every reader needs. Interestingly, the only two fiction categories that declined in value to publishers during the year were “short stories and anthologies” and “horror and ghost stories”. It may be that the previous year’s sales were bolstered by a handful of high-sellers, but my unscientific take is that the former are too much like hard work, while – frankly, in this of all years – who needs more horror? We have, though, needed books to read in bed. Though I’ve never been a fan of Mills &amp; Boon (a publisher that has become a genre all of its own), I can see the appeal of its fanciful capers of bounty hunters and fugitive billionaires when lockdown has driven you back under your duvet and your fantasies are constrained by living in a household of bored and depressed others. Mills &amp; Boon efficiently parcels its romance into six categories: modern, medical, historical, heroes, true love and desire. And even before the pandemic, a Mills &amp; Boon novel was said to be sold every 10 seconds somewhere in the world. Undoubtedly, more prosaic issues have also contributed to this boom, not least that the bestsellers are sold through supermarkets, which remained open, while all else was forced to close. With fewer things to distract them, and fewer ways to spend their money, perhaps the British buying public turned to what was literally on the shelf in front of them. But there’s a serious point here about the place of books in popular culture. A wise colleague of mine once said, if the book was invented today it would be hailed as a piece of technological genius. It’s cheap, fits in a bag, doesn’t run out of battery and can easily be passed from hand to hand. It’s also surprisingly indestructible. Fun fact: there are still as many as 2m individual medieval manuscripts in existence – although I don’t know whether the mass-produced pulp airport novel would endure so long. Time will tell. Claire Armitstead is associate editor, culture, for the GuardianIt is a question being asked with increasing urgency by intelligence services, multinational companies and most citizens of Kazakhstan: where is Nursultan Nazarbayev? Kazakhstan’s leader from 1991 until 2019, Nazarbayev has long been the arbiter of all business and political decisions in the central Asian nation, and the purveyor of an all-encompassing personality cult. In 2019, he handpicked a successor, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, while retaining power behind the scenes. The capital city, along with its airport and main university were all renamed after him. But since the worst unrest since independence broke out earlier this month, Nazarbayev has been silent and absent from public view. Official figures say 225 people died in the unrest and subsequent crackdown. Meanwhile, the man who personified Kazakhstan for so long has simply disappeared. Some said he was hiding out on the shores of Lake Geneva. Others suspected he had fled to Dubai. A few whispered conspiratorially that he may be dead. In fact, according to a number of sources, he remains in Kazakhstan, probably in the capital, Nur-Sultan, the city that bears his name. “My best information as of today is that Nazarbayev is alive, and furious negotiations are under way with Tokayev about the redistribution of assets, spoils and rents,” said a former western government official who is well connected in Kazakhstan. Tokayev, once a loyalist, has used the crackdown to strip power from his former benefactor and members of Nazarbayev’s family, some of whom are accused of using the protest mood in the country to unseat Tokayev and seize power. “The power struggle continues. There is no guarantee things will end smoothly,” the former western official said. One source, claiming direct knowledge, insisted Nazarbayev is in China, but Yermukhamet Yertysbayev, a former minister and Nazarbayev adviser, said he believed his former boss was still in ~Kazakhstan. “Negotiations are ongoing, but it is clear the Nazarbayev era is over,” said Yertysbayev, adding that he blamed the recent violence on “reactionary and conservative forces from the Nazarbayev clan”. While Tokayev has not criticised the former leader by name, there are signs that the personality cult is over. A statue toppled during the riots has not been repaired; street signs for Nazarbayev Avenue that were pulled down in Almaty, the country’s largest city, have not been reaffixed. Authorities have arrested the former head of the security services, the Nazarbayev loyalist Karim Masimov, on charges of attempting to seize power. On Saturday, it was announced that two of Nazarbayev’s sons-in-law had been fired from their positions in key state companies. Other relatives are known to have fled the country. Many in the elite were now rushing to declare their loyalty to Tokayev, said one well-connected business source, adding that any purge would hopefully be limited to those in Nazarbayev’s family and inner circle. “Tokayev is a sensible guy and he knows how important the image of the country is. He will act smoothly and carefully. He will not spray bullets with a machine gun, he will pick people off accurately with a sniper rifle.” After the 2019 transition, it seemed Nazarbayev’s official status as “Leader of the Nation”, and his role as head of the powerful security council, meant his safety and revered status were guaranteed. Instead, the image that took 30 years to build has crumbled in the space of a few days. “Many people are moving from the Nazarbayev camp to the side of President Tokayev,” said Yertysbayev, who appeared to be engaged in exactly that manoeuvre himself, airing thoughts that would have been suicidal to utter publicly just a few weeks ago. “I think Nazarbayev didn’t watch the great film of Francis Ford Coppola The Godfather attentively enough,” said Yertysbayev. “There is no doubt that he is the father and founder of the Kazakh independent state, but he’s a living person and he has his minuses. And the biggest is his sentimental love for his family and clan. I think it’s unacceptable for a head of state.” The pervasion of Nazarbayev family members and their associates through state companies and various money-making enterprises was something that others in the elite found grating, and is one reason why supposedly loyal figures have been willing to change their tune so quickly. The spectacle is likely to prove instructive for other autocrats in the region, notably the Belarusian leader Alexander Lukashenko and Russia’s Vladimir Putin, both of whom were rumoured to be considering the “Nazarbayev option” as a transition scenario. Putin, whose current term expires in 2024, recently signed a law that would enable him to remain president until 2036, but analysts had also touted a Nazarbayev-like “father of the nation” role that would allow him a safe and prosperous retirement from frontline politics while retaining ultimate control. Suddenly, that looks a less secure option. Putin has thrown his weight behind Tokayev, offering him the military support of a Russia-led alliance to help regain control. It is likely that he made this support contingent on a safety guarantee for Nazarbayev. However, Putin will also have noted the speed at which Nazarbayev’s supposed devoted supporters deserted the former leader. “It will be used as an argument that no transition is possible, other than a transition from the current president to himself,” said Ekaterina Schulmann, a Moscow-based political scientist. In Kazakhstan, people are waiting to see whether Nazarbayev will ever appear publicly again, and whether Tokayev will fully disown his predecessor, resurrect the personality cult or simply remain silent. “We’ve had lots of small signals, but we are still waiting for the big one,” said Vyacheslav Abramov, the editor in chief of the vlast.kz news website.The publication of the Sue Gray report into “partygate” is expected to be followed by a clearout of some key officials from Downing Street, a plan reportedly referred to by the prime minister as “Operation Save Big Dog”. Oliver Dowden, the Conservative party co-chair, in effect confirmed this on Sunday when he said there was a need for a “change of culture” in the building. Many Tory MPs believe Boris Johnson himself is the person who most needs to go, but he hopes that if others take the blame he might be able to draw a line under the affair. Here are some of the officials most at risk. Martin Reynolds As Johnson’s principal private secretary (PPS), Reynolds is the civil servant with most influence over the prime minister’s day-to-day decision-making. (It’s the Bernard role from Yes Minister.) A career Foreign Office official, Reynolds did the same job for Johnson when he was foreign secretary before becoming ambassador to Libya. He is in the line of fire particularly for sending the email inviting staff to the “BYOB” party in the No 10 garden on 20 May 2020. Stuart Glassborow A former Treasury official who serves as deputy PPS, Glassborow is also in line to leave alongside Reynolds, according to some reports, as part of a planned overhaul of the private office. Dan Rosenfield A former PPS at the Treasury, who worked for Alistair Darling and George Osborne, Rosenfield left the civil service for investment banking but was lured back to Downing Street in late 2020 to be chief of staff, filling the gap left by the departure of Dominic Cummings and Eddie Lister. Since then, he has been the subject of negative briefing from colleagues who find his manner imperious, and he has failed to curb Johnson’s chaotic tendencies. He is blamed for approving the claim that no parties were held at No 10. Jack Doyle A former Daily Mail journalist, Doyle started working for Johnson in Downing Street in 2020 and he took over as director of communications last year, following the departure of Lee Cain and then James Slack. Many of the reports about the drinking culture at No 10 have centred on the press office, where a wine cooler was reportedly installed to facilitate “wine-time Fridays”, and last month it was claimed Doyle had offered to resign after ITV revealed he had given a speech at a lockdown-busting Christmas party on 18 December 2020. At the time, No 10 said the prime minister still had full confidence in Doyle.No arthouse cinema repertory programme in the 1980s was complete without regular screenings of the chic French thriller Diva (1981). The plot combined opera, murder and corruption, while the visual style had the sort of pizzazz more readily associated with advertising or pop videos. By the end of the same decade, the prospect of a student bedsit that did not have on its walls the poster for the erotic love story Betty Blue (1986) was as unthinkable as one without Pot Noodle and patchouli oil. Both films were directed by Jean-Jacques Beineix, who has died aged 75 after a long illness. Diva concerns Jules (Frédéric Andréi), a postal worker who makes an illegal bootleg tape of an American opera singer (Wilhelmenia Wiggins Fernandez) famous for refusing to allow her voice to be recorded. This cassette becomes mixed up with one containing testimony incriminating a high-ranking police officer, and soon Jules is being chased by cops and thugs alike. Fernandez initially rejected the script, which Beineix had adapted with Jean Van Hamme from the novel by Daniel Odier, who published it under the pseudonym Delacorta. “I was reading murder, prostitution and drugs, and I wanted nothing to do with it,” she said in 1983. “Jean-Jacques forced me to read it with him. Then I realised it was actually light, like a Disney treatment of a Hitchcock film.” She was relatively unknown at the time, and the singer’s profile was boosted by her performance, which included a rendition of the aria Ebben? Ne andrò lontana from the opera La Wally. Diva heralded the arrival of a flashy mode of film-making later termed “cinéma du look”. Reaction to the movie from French critics, however, was hostile. “I thought I had made two films for the price of one,” the director said in 2009. “My first and my last.” His producers were reluctant to submit Diva to the Toronto film festival, fearing that international exposure would further harm the movie’s reputation. “What damage can we do to this picture?” asked Beineix. “We’re already dead!” Stepping off the plane in Toronto, he went straight to the cinema where he found a standing ovation underway. “I thought, ‘Something’s wrong. I’m in another dimension.’” The film was acclaimed by international critics. David Denby in New York magazine praised its “rapturous pop beauty” and likened Beineix to Steven Spielberg and Brian De Palma. Still playing in Paris after a year, Diva won four César awards, including the prize for best first film. The Moon in the Gutter (1983) was a textbook case of the sophomore slump. Adapted by the director and Olivier Mergault from the pulp novel by David Goodis, whose work had previously been filmed by François Truffaut and Sam Fuller, it was a grandiose affair which prioritised slick, post-modern artifice over actors (including Gérard Depardieu and Nastassja Kinski) and made only the feeblest connection with audiences. Critics scoffed, including Pauline Kael, who had found his debut “genuinely sparkling” but now declared its follow-up “excruciatingly silly.” After the response to Diva, which Beineix called a “wonderful dream, where I was flying on the wings of victory”, he experienced a sudden fall. “Bang, bang, bang: I’m shot down. It was very scary.” He recovered with Betty Blue, which he adapted from Philippe Djian’s novel 37°2 le matin, about Zorg (Jean-Hugues Anglade), a house-painter and aspiring novelist, and his passionate, volatile girlfriend. The gifted 21-year-old newcomer Béatrice Dalle beat Isabelle Adjani to the title role. This tale of amour fou opens with an extended sex scene filmed in one take and beginning in wide shot before gradually moving in closer onto the lovers. In the script, the scene had occurred 10 minutes into the movie but Beineix changed his mind in the editing room. “I realised: That’s the base of everything.” He regarded it as “a political statement” but Dalle complained that he had not insisted on a closed set during her nude scenes. “I still have a grudge with Beineix about that,” she said in 2013. “[The crew] all stayed there, like they were on the set of an X-rated movie. Appalling. Horrible.” Her untamed performance is the highlight of a film which also boasts luminous cinematography by Jean-François Robin. It was he who steered the colour scheme away from the refrigerated blues of Diva and The Moon in the Gutter by pointing out that this was “a sun and sweat story” which might benefit from resembling “Kodachrome slides shot by amateurs. Holiday snapshots, warm and sunny.” The film takes a rather ugly turn – Zorg’s literary prospects improve only once Betty is in a psychiatric institution, where he finally smothers her with a pillow. It had enough admirers, though, to earn Oscar, Bafta and Golden Globe nominations for best foreign language film, and to warrant the release five years later of a director’s cut extending the running time from two hours to three. Beineix was born in Paris, the son of Madeleine (nee Maréchal) and Robert Beineix, an insurance salesman. He was educated at the Lycée Carnot and the Lycée Condorcet, both in Paris. He studied medicine, then quit to become an assistant director to film-makers such as Jean Becker, Claude Berri and Claude Zidi. He was second assistant director on Jerry Lewis’s controversial drama The Day the Clown Cried (1972), in which Lewis plays an entertainer leading Jewish children to the Nazi gas chambers; it has never been released, and Lewis stipulated that it cannot be shown until 2024. Beineix’s only directing credit prior to Diva was the short Le Chien de Monsieur Michel (1977). In the wake of his success with Diva, he was courted by US studios. “At first, Hollywood saw me as some kind of exotic puppet,” he said. A vampire comedy he wrote for Paramount was never made, a contract with the producer Edward R Pressman came to nought, and he declined offers to work as a hired hand. “The privilege of being a French director is that you are basically free to do what you want. The disaster is that you don’t understand that the rest of the world doesn’t work like this.” After Betty Blue, interest in his films began to wane outside France. Roselyne and the Lions (1989) was a meandering love story about a pair of circus workers. The whimsical IP5 (1992) featured Yves Montand’s final performance. Beineix moved into documentaries, among them Locked-In Syndrome (1997), which told the story of Jean-Dominique Bauby, who suffered a stroke which left him unable to communicate except by blinking one eyelid. Beineix turned down the invitation to make the dramatised version, The Diving Bell and the Butterfly, which was directed in 2007 by Julian Schnabel. His last fiction film was Mortal Transfer (2001), a macabre farce starring Anglade as a psychoanalyst who must dispose of a patient’s body; Beineix ploughed $2m of his own money into the project. In 2004, he co-wrote the vampire-themed graphic novel L’Affaire Du Siècle; a second instalment arrived in 2006 along with his first volume of memoir, Les Chantiers de la Gloire, which ran to 835 pages. A novel, Toboggan, was published in 2020. Beineix described himself in 2006 as “arrogant, a provocateur. I must be a little bit in love with failure because I provoke it. It happens that when you are afraid to be loved, you inspire hostility. It’s perverse.” He is survived by his wife, Agnès, and daughter, Frida. • Jean-Jacques Beineix, film director, born 8 October 1946; died 13 January 2022 • This article was amended on 18 January 2022 to correctly spell the first name of his mother as Madeleine, not Madeline, and the surname of the writer of 37°2 le matin as Djian, not Dijan.Millions of people’s credit cards will stop working on Amazon’s UK website from this week – unless there is an 11th-hour resolution to a bitter dispute between the retailer and payments giant Visa. In November, Amazon told customers that from 19 January it would stop accepting payments made with UK-issued Visa credit cards, in what has been described as a “game of corporate chicken”. It is not known how many people are affected by the payment ban, though in March 2021, Mintel said 89% of Britons shopped at Amazon, and its analysts estimated Amazon Prime membership in the UK at about 21 million. Last month it was claimed that Amazon faces losing nearly £1.4bn from UK shoppers as a result of its move. There is speculation, however, that a last-minute agreement could be reached between the two sides. On Friday, Amazon and Visa declined to provide an update on negotiations. Amazon blamed its decision on “the high fees Visa charges for processing credit card transactions”. The move potentially inconveniences millions of people who use a Visa credit card issued by providers including Barclaycard to buy items on the website or pay for their Amazon Prime membership. The retailer said it would continue to accept all debit cards (including Visa debit cards) and non-Visa credit cards, including Mastercard-branded ones and American Express. Affected customers who currently use a Visa credit card have been told they need to update their payment method, otherwise any new orders they place on the site will be rejected from 19 January onwards. They will also lose access to Amazon Prime benefits including faster delivery of items, thousands of TV shows and films on Prime Video, and the Amazon Music Prime streaming service. At the time of the announcement, Visa said it was “continuing to work toward a resolution,” while Martin Lewis, the founder of MoneySavingExpert.com, said he suspected the move was a possible negotiating tactic by Amazon to get Visa to lower its fees. To date there has been no news of any agreement, and on Thursday, a blog in trade journal the Grocer said this was a “game of corporate chicken” – a row where neither side wants to be the first to back down. Nevertheless, one credit card industry insider told the Guardian: “We are hopeful there will be an agreement.” In emails to customers, Amazon has acknowledged that removing the ability to pay for products with a Visa credit card and making people update their details may be inconvenient and “a bit of a bother”. Payments on cards attract a range of fees including interchange fees, which are paid by businesses to card issuers each time a card is used by a consumer, and are higher for credit card transactions. Card fees have long been an issue of contention between providers and retailers, and last week MPs waded into the row. The Commons Treasury select committee said that in October, a few weeks before Amazon’s announcement, both Mastercard and Visa hiked cross-border interchange fees for debit and credit card transactions, from 0.2% to 0.3% and from 1.15% to 1.5% respectively. It added that the fees paid by businesses to card payment operators for use of the service had also risen substantially. Visa said in November that it was “very disappointed that Amazon is threatening to restrict consumer choice in the future”. Many shoppers choose to use credit cards for large purchases online because of the extra protections offered if things go wrong. Amazon’s decision also deals a blow to people who use their Visa credit card to spread the cost of their spending, or to collect points, air miles or cashback.Amazon’s UK website has told customers it will stop accepting payments made with UK-issued Visa credit cards from 19 January. Why is Amazon doing this? It says this decision is “due to the high fees Visa charges for processing credit card transactions”. Who does it affect? Millions of people who use a Visa credit card to buy products on Amazon’s UK website and/or pay for their Amazon Prime membership are affected. Nevertheless, many will have already updated their payment details after the original announcement in November, and will now be using another card. Amazon said it would continue to accept all debit cards (including Visa debit cards) and non-Visa credit cards. Will this definitely happen on Wednesday? There has been speculation that an agreement may still be reached between the two sides that means the payment ban is modified or scrapped. Some customers who have yet to update their payment details say that, after receiving several emails from Amazon urging them to take action, they have not received any further emails since Christmas – leading them to wonder if the Visa credit card ban might not happen after all. Some also report that when they log into their Amazon account, the urgent warnings to act that were there before seem to have been watered down or removed. Are there any exceptions to the ban? The change does not apply to Amazon Business, the retailer’s physical stores or certain subsidiaries such as Audible. Will I have the plug pulled on my Amazon TV viewing if I do not do anything? I am only halfway through Mad Men. A Prime member who does not update their card details will not have the plug pulled immediately. When a Prime member’s payment is declined (most probably pay monthly), they have 30 days to provide a new eligible payment method or their membership will be cancelled. But it is good to pay for things with a credit card, isn’t it? Many shoppers choose to use credit cards for large purchases online because of the extra protections offered if things go wrong. Under section 75 of the Consumer Credit Act, if a retailer goes out of business or fails to deliver goods as promised and the items cost more than £100, the credit card provider has an obligation to refund the costs. Amazon’s decision also deals a blow to people who use their Visa credit card to spread the cost of their spending, or to collect points, air miles or cashback. Meanwhile, some people are using a so-called “credit-builder” credit card to rebuild their credit history, perhaps after experiencing financial problems in the past. I’m not sure what to do – I don’t want to use my debit card on Amazon. The move potentially leaves millions of credit card holders facing a dilemma. For example, Barclaycard is the UK’s biggest credit card company, and its credit cards only use the Visa network. An Amazon user who banks with Barclays and has a Barclaycard could decide to switch over to the bank’s debit card instead. But that will not suit some people financially – it means they will not benefit from what can be a cheap way of borrowing money for a short period, as well as other perks. If they do not wish to do that and do not own another credit card, their main option if they want to continue using Amazon would be to apply for a Mastercard credit card from another provider. Some may not wish to do this, or may be rejected. Will people quit Amazon over this? Some shoppers with concerns about the ethics of using Amazon may use the inconvenience caused by this week’s move – if it happens – as an opportunity to end their relationship with the online giant. For years campaigners have been urging shoppers to boycott Amazon over tax avoidance and other issues. To encourage affected Amazon users to update their payment method, Amazon has been offering some people up to £20 off their next purchase. To get this, they need to add a qualifying debit card, Mastercard or Amex card to their Amazon account.At every afterparty since 1988, at least one partygoer has fantasised about their friendship group growing old together in a rave retirement facility where they pipe mellow bangers through the intercom. Sesh pensioners, this is your ideal soundtrack. Since 2010’s breakthrough Black Sands, Bonobo’s Si Green has used what he calls “electronic methods to make non-electronic music” to richly satisfying effect, and Fragments is his peak production. As with the Cinematic Orchestra or Caribou, you settle into a Bonobo album or gig knowing roughly what the destination will be, yet never sure exactly how you’ll get there. Harps and strings are central to this year’s trip, but there’s ample space for skittery breaks, deep house and haunting choral samples. Green usually finds singers who dovetail with his music, as with previous collaborators Erykah Badu and Nick Murphy. Here, the promising Jordan Rakei impresses on Shadows. Poet Jamila Woods brings Tides, the best song, a swooning beauty that expertly blurs its acoustic and electronic elements. With less dissonance and psychedelic experimentation than Jon Hopkins or Four Tet, Fragments may be too care-home comfort for some, but it’s brilliant, wondrous work.Paul Myners, the City grandee and former Labour minister brought in to government to tackle the 2008 financial crisis, has died at the age of 73. Regarded as an influential figure in both the square mile and politics for his time advising the former prime minister Gordon Brown on the historic bailout of the British banking system, Baron Myners, of Truro in the county of Cornwall, died in the early hours of this morning. His family confirmed in a statement that Myners had “passed away peacefully” at Chelsea &amp; Westminster hospital in London. Adopted from a Bath orphanage by a Cornish couple at the age of three, he started as an inner city school teacher, then became a financial journalist for the Daily Telegraph before moving into finance with the storied London investment bank NM Rothschild. Myners was chairman of the Guardian Media Group (GMG), publisher of the Guardian and Observer newspapers, between 2000 and 2008 when he stood down to take his ministerial post in Brown’s government as the global financial system was imploding. The former prime minister led tributes to Myners, describing him as a “tower of strength” during the crisis. “My thoughts are with Paul’s family,” said Brown. “After a successful career in finance [he] was persuaded in 2008 to enter public service and was a tower of strength, helping nationalise key banks and producing a plan to overcome the global financial crisis. His charitable work in his native Cornwall will be long remembered.” Barely 20 days into his role as City minister, Myners was thrown into the deep end to help orchestrate Brown’s bank rescue, which led to the taxpayer taking multibillion-pound stakes in Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds Banking Group after its merger with HBOS. Nick Macpherson, the former permanent secretary to the Treasury, said drafting in Myners had been an “inspired appointment” during the emergency. “He played a leading role in resolving the financial crisis. Brilliant. Mercurial. Irreverent. Full of commercial acumen. It was a privilege to know him.” Carolyn McCall, the ITV chief executive who ran GMG while Myners was chairman, said he would be “greatly missed”. “Paul was formidable with a brilliant brain, an entrepreneurial spirit and a prodigious work ethic. He didn’t suffer fools at all, was a tough taskmaster and had a wicked sense of humour. I loved working with him and learned so much when he chaired GMG.” GMG chair Neil Berkett said: “We are saddened to hear of Paul Myners’ death. As chair, he led Guardian Media Group successfully during a period of great change in our industry.” Earlier in his career, Myners had been chair and previously chief executive of the City fund manager Gartmore, where he made his name in finance after growing the firm into a multibillion-pound investment house. Under his stewardship, its funds grew from £1.2bn in 1985 to £75bn in 2001. In 2000, he moved to positions as a non-executive director of several companies, including the chairmanship of Marks &amp; Spencer during a tense period when the high street stalwart faced down a potential bid from the retailer Philip Green. Stuart Rose, who Myners parachuted in as chief executive of M&amp;S in 2004 to revitalise the ailing high street stalwart, said he had lost his best friend. “He was a rare breed. Without overdoing it, how can I describe him? He really was a beacon in a sea of mediocrity,” said the Conservative peer, who is now the chairman of Asda. “He stood out, he was a man of immense wisdom. Intellectually very strong, a self-made man who was humble and loyal to the core. In this world we’re surrounded by today in business and public life, he had a massive moral compass. He knew instinctively what was right and wrong and stood up for the little man.” Myners refused to open formal talks over a sale of M&amp;S when approached by Green, before the former Arcadia retail tycoon dropped his multibillion-pound bid for the company in 2004. “He was irreverently funny. He could absolutely bring you to stitches, but he could be ruthless as well,” Rose said. Myners was also influential in compiling a landmark government review into institutional investment and chaired the Low Pay Commission. He entered the House of Lords in 2008 after being made a life peer, and remained on the Labour benches until 2014, when he became a crossbench peer. He was appointed chairman of the UK arm of the international public relations firm Edelman in 2015, a role he held until his death. “There are few people who bring such depth of knowledge and experience from the top of both the private and public sector, and Paul always did so with a strong social and moral conscience,” said Ed Williams, president of Edelman in Europe. “He also brought fun and laughter and was able to move effortlessly from plcs to pop culture. I wish to pay tribute to his amazing contribution to public life over many decades.” Myners is survived by his five children, and five grandchildren. In a statement, the family said: “With great sadness we announce the loss of our beloved father Lord Paul Myners (1948-2022). He passed away peacefully in the early hours of this morning (Sunday) at Chelsea &amp; Westminster hospital. He will be deeply missed and in our hearts forever.”Saturday Night Live returns from hiatus with a message from Joe Biden (James Austin Johnson). The President is exhausted and frustrated by our “cold, dark winter” of Covid resurgence, but he knows how to make the virus go away: “STOP. SEEING. SPIDER-MAN. Think about it: when did Spider-Man come out? December 17th. When did every single person get Omicron? The week after December 17th. Stop seeing Spider-Man!” Fielding questions from a skeptical press corps, Biden ties all of our continuing crises on Spider-Man: Inflation? “Spider-Man!” Voting rights? “You think people can focus on voting rights when Spider-Man’s Aunt May is a smokeshow?” Russian troops moving on the Ukrainian border? “If that doesn’t sound like a job for Spider-Man, I don’t know what is!” We’re then visited from an alternate version of Joe Biden (Pete Davidson) from a different world within the multiverse, who reveals that our collapsing timelines was started as “a joke in 2016 when the Chicago Cubs won the World Series”. He also reveals that everyone in the “real world” is better off … except for Pete Davidson. “Your world is maybe more fun for him,” he says, offering zero in the way explanation (or punchline). While not a great cold open by any means, it at least has an actual narrative arc. It certainly beats the rambling, walk-on riddled cold opens we were getting prior to the break. That makes it a step in the right direction. West Side Story co-star and Golden Globe winner Ariana DeBose hosts for the first time. The young breakout actor is proud to represent not only the Afro-Latino community, but the Broadway community. Feeling like everyone “needs a little Broadway right now”, she sings a medley of songs from her film alongside West Side Story super-fan Kate McKinnon (who, like general audiences, stayed away from the movie while it was in theaters). DeBose nails the classic tunes, but the whole thing is unfortunately hampered by McKinnon, who does nothing but sing slightly off key and wriggle her limbs. As far as West Side Story sketches go, the show has given us much better. An NBA halftime show on TNT covers a game between the Brooklyn Nets and Sacramento Kings, currently scored at 268 -1. Sacramento’s players and coaches all tested positive for Covid right as the game was about to start and had to be replaced by fans and custodial staff. The interviews with the brutalized Kings stand-ins hit the same beats and grow tiresome fast, but the back and forth between show hosts Charles Barkley (Kenan Thompson) and Yao Ming (Bowen Yang, playing Yang by way of Lurch from The Addams Family) is a constant source of amusement. Following up on the recently released trailer their forthcoming series Bel-Air – a dramatic reimagining of The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air — Peacock debuts a teaser for “the next 90s show about the black experience to be given a serious, high stakes remake”: Family Matters. This new version, titled simply Urkel, gives audiences “the goofy characters you loved in the 90s with absolutely none of the fun or charm”. Steve Urkel (Chris Redd) is now an angry nerd from a broken home, trying to stay alive on the mean streets of “Chi-raq”, while neighbor Carl (Thompson) is gritty cop with a hair trigger temper. It’s almost impossible for SNL to properly parody Bel-Air, given how preposterous it already is, but they do a solid job here. This is followed by a commercial for Ron and Donna Lacatza’s Formal Emporium, in which the husband and wife owners (Davidson and Sarah Sherman) of a girls’ dress rental shop spend all their time humiliating their teenage son Donovan (Andrew Dismukes), an awkward nerd with constantly smeared lips, a “soupy, wet ass”, and a violently unhinged love of the song Get Low. The sketch is admirably gross showcase for Dismukes – quickly eclipsing Kyle Mooney as the SNL’s go-to dweeb – but the other cast members don’t acquit themselves quite so well. Davidson’s Adam Sandler impersonation is so blatant its distracting, while Sherman’s one-note performance is utterly indistinguishable from every other character she’s portrayed thus far (including herself during her Weekend Update appearance). Next, Redd plays new NYC mayor and “friskiest uncle at the barbeque” Eric Adams, who’s obsessed with bringing “swagger” back to his city. Antagonistically fielding questions from the press, he defends the various controversies already plaguing his administration, such as his decision to keep schools open amidst the Omicron surge (“There are too many swagless parents out there giving their kids no swagger at home”), his insults towards “unskilled” workers (“By unskilled workers, I meant folks with trash jobs”) and appointing his brother as head of his security detail (“JFK appointed his brother … but unlike JFK, I’m not gonna get popped in the head, I’m gonna receive some!”). Redd brings a little too much legitimate swagger to his characterization of Adams, but the impersonation is dead-on. The night’s musical guest is Bleachers, who performs How Dare You Want More. On Weekend Update, Michael Che invites Sesame Street’s Elmo (Chloe Fineman) to comment about his rivalry with pet rock Rocko. Elmo apologizes and attempts to move on, until Che brings on Rocko, sending Elmo into a jealous rage. This segment represents that absolute worst quality of the show today: its shameless regurgitation of popular social media memes. For Saturday Night Live to swoop in and try to squeeze some more relevance out ready-made jokes is downright insulting. The only thing keeping a sketch like this from being outright plagiarism is the lack of authorship inherent to memes. In the fourth Sound of Music parody the show has done since 2016, DeBose plays the new nanny of the von Trapp children. She attempts to teach the kids how to sing using a random array of references to Homer Simpson, Queen Latifah, Peter Gabriel, IUDs and more. There’s a palpable theater kid energy to the proceedings that should entertain Broadway nerds even as it bores everyone else. Bleachers returns to the stage to perform Chinatown. Then, Debose and McKinnon play married academic giving a “sold out free lecture” at Cornell University on the ancient Greek poet Sappho. Their peers question whether their translations of newly discovered poems have been influenced by their personal lives, given that the verses contain arguments with a former lover named Nancy, references to “Helen of Generes” and Gillian Anderson, and Indigo Girl lyrics. The closing sketch is set at Texarkana chain restaurant Longhorns on New Year’s Eve. The frustrated kitchen staff question why their shift manager adds “lurrr” to the end of every sentence, leading to a fight and then a reconciliation. An utterly laugh-free sketch where the only aim seems to be finding out which cast member can do the worst accent (DeBose takes it by a mile). It’s not particularly offensive in and of itself, but coming as it does at the end of an episode that fairly reeked of East Coast superiority – what with the toothless sketches centered around Broadway shows, New York politics and liberal academia – it can’t help but leave a bad taste in the mouth. It feels like were watching a bunch of smug high school theater kids poking fun at the poor, dumb hayseeds at their school. The episode had a few redeeming moments – mostly courtesy of Redd, who continues to grow into one of the show’s most reliable performers – but it saw a noticeable drop-off in quality around the half-way mark from which it never recovered.A British arm of the camera company Canon will this year become one of the latest businesses to trial a four-day working week with no loss of pay, as part of a six-month trial run by academics at the universities of Cambridge and Oxford. The trial comes amid growing interest from businesses around the world in the potential benefits of giving workers an extra day off. The pilot programme will be run in conjunction with Cambridge and Oxford academics alongside Boston College, the UK 4 Day Week Campaign and the thinktank Autonomy. It is being overseen by 4 Day Week Global, a campaign group. Six companies have joined so far for a pilot, which is scheduled to begin in June, although the researchers hope to attract between 20 and 30 businesses in total. The Edinburgh-based Canon Medical Research Europe will trial the four-day week among its 140 employees. It develops medical and artificial intelligence software, and its parent company is a member of Japan’s Nikkei 225 index. Ken Sutherland, the president of Canon Medical Research Europe, said: “We recognise that working patterns and the focus we all give to our work-life balance has changed substantially during the pandemic. As a responsive employer we are always looking at how we can adapt our working practices to ensure that employees find their time with us is meaningful, fulfilling and productive. For this reason, we’re keen to pilot a four-day week to see if it can work for us.” The UK companies taking part are also understood to include software firms and a medical not-for-profit, and range in size from about 20 staff to several with more than 100. The four-day week, reducing standard hours by a fifth but with no loss of pay, has been gaining ground in recent years after some businesses have reported counter-intuitive benefits, such as increased productivity and improved staff retention – reducing a major cost especially for industries that usually have high employee turnover. The app-based Atom Bank announced in November it would move permanently to a four-day week, with most employees likely to have a three-day weekend as standard. Another Japanese technology company, Panasonic, this year said it would trial optional four-day weeks. Other large companies looking at the four-day week include Unilever, the maker of consumer goods ranging from Marmite to Dove soap. It has extended a trial for some workers in New Zealand until June because of the recent lockdowns. The UK supermarket chain Morrisons hassaid it would introduce the measure for employees at its Bradford headquarters. Pilot schemes are already taking place in Spain, Ireland and the US, and a trial in Scotland was announced last year by the Scottish first minister, Nicola Sturgeon. The former shadow chancellor John McDonnell was a prominent advocate, and one of his staffers set up the UK campaign. The Glasgow-based Pursuit Marketing has had a four-day week for all staff since 2016. Lorraine Gray, its chief operating officer, said the work pattern continued to be a success for the business, with productivity about 30% higher than before – more than making up for the lost day. “It focuses the mind,” she said. “For anybody in the workplace, there’s always points in your day when you could be more productive.” There’s no more “Mondaymorningitis” sick days, she added. Staff turnover has remained low, and there have been mental health benefits. Pursuit has expanded since 2018, when the Guardian first spoke to Gray, and it played a role in running call centres seven-days a week for Scotland’s test and protect contact-tracing system during the pandemic. One of the British academics studying the pilot will be Brendan Burchell, a professor in the social sciences at Cambridge University whose work has focused on issues such as the relationship between unemployment and wellbeing and the effects of “flexible” working on UK workers. He said: “With the social and environmental benefits of the shorter working week becoming clearer, grassroots support more widespread, and technology available to maintain productivity, the time has come for more organisations to take the leap and unravel the practicalities.”It is January 2020. Donald Trump and Greta Thunberg are the star turns at the annual festival of globalisation organised by the World Economic Forum in Davos. The fossil fuel-loving president and the teenage environmentalist have a pop at each other. There are reports of a new virus emerging from China but Covid barely gets a mention. Much has happened since. For a second year running, Davos is not going ahead in person. US billionaires will not be parking their private jets at Zurich airport. The skies above the ski resort made famous by Thomas Mann in the Magic Mountain will not be thick with helicopters. Hotels will not be able to charge five times their normal rates for a captive audience of policymakers, business leaders, academics, campaigners, journalists and assorted hangers-on. Let’s face it: few of us are going to miss being lectured about the need to tackle global heating from those with the biggest carbon footprints, or watching company bosses who do all they can to avoid paying tax shed crocodile tears about the lack of decent schools, skilled workers and public infrastructure. That said, the issues that were salient at the 2020 Davos have not gone away. In many respects, the trends have worsened in the past two years. Take inequality, where there has been a widening of the gap between rich and poor, both within countries and between them. The sort of people who attend Davos have been insulated from the worst of the pandemic and, in many cases, have actually prospered from it. Academics, journalists, PR consultants have all been able to work in relative safety at home while less well-remunerated frontline workers have put themselves at risk. Stimulus policies pursued by central banks – zero interest rates and quantitative easing – have put rocket boosters under asset prices. Poorer countries have had far less scope to stimulate their economies and have been squeezed out in the global race for vaccines. In the early stages of the pandemic, there was much talk about how the pandemic would bring people and countries together, but the opposite has been the case. In the UK, the mood has soured since the days when people stood on their doorsteps to clap for the NHS. In Europe and the US there have been vociferous, and sometimes violent, anti-vax protests. In the labour markets, there have been faint echoes of what happened after the Black Death in the mid-14th century. Back then, shortages of workers caused by a much more deadly virus put upward pressure on wage rates. Lockdowns in 2020 and 2021 have had similar effects: firms – especially those in low-wage sectors – are having trouble recruiting and retaining staff, and have had no option but to raise pay rates. The risk of a wage-price spiral has alarmed some of the world’s leading central banks, including the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England, who feel – rightly – their credibility is at stake. With interest rates on their way back up, belief in the Goldilocks scenario (just enough tightening to reduce inflationary pressure but not so much as to halt recovery) is going to be put to the test this year. Clearly, there is a risk of the porridge in 2022 either being too hot, in which case inflation is longer lasting, or too cold, in which case there will be a global recession. The sharp contraction in the global economy in 2020 did not remove the threat posed by climate change, and those who would have turned up in Davos know it. Each year, global movers and shakers are asked by the WEF what they perceive to be the biggest long-term risks. Even though the world is still struggling with Covid, this year the top five issues identified were all linked to the environment. Action on climate change is being made more difficult because the crisis has made countries more domestically focused. In part, that’s because disruptions to global supply chains have encouraged a drive for self-sufficiency, but there has also been a tendency for governments to look after their own, self-defeating though this will prove to be. Vaccine apartheid is a classic example of the lack of international solidarity, but there are other worrying trends too. The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have warned repeatedly that more and more countries are struggling with unpayable debts, to little effect. A new debt crisis is about to erupt, amplifying the impact of the pandemic. As the Bank’s president, David Malpass, noted last week, before the pandemic on average 53% of 10-year-olds in the world’s poorest countries were unable to read a simple story. The figure is now 70%. Any hopes that the departure of Trump from the White House would lead to a de-escalation of geopolitical tension have proved groundless. Joe Biden has turned out to be just as hawkish towards China as his predecessor, while relations between the west and Russia are as bad as they have been since the end of the cold war. The collapse of communism was supposed to usher in an era in which free markets and democracy would spread around the world, but the golden age of globalisation lasted barely 15 years. The World Trade Organization – the symbol of the new world order – is moribund, while authoritarian leaders are back in vogue. The end of history thesis proved to be wildly overblown. The plan is that Davos will still take place, in the late spring when the Omicron wave has abated, and if it happens there will be plenty to discuss. How many members of the usual crowd show up once the snow has melted remains to be seen. We have had peak globalisation; we’ve also had peak Davos.The Duke of Sussex believes the UK is too dangerous for him and his family to visit without state protection, as it emerged he is taking legal action against the government to allow him to pay privately for police security while in Britain. Prince Harry lost taxpayer-funded police security when he and Meghan stepped back from royal duties in 2020. The couple pay for private security in the US, where they now live. Harry is seeking a judicial review against a Home Office decision that prevents him personally paying for police protection for him and his family while in the UK. His legal representative said the duke’s private security team did not have adequate jurisdiction abroad or access to UK intelligence information required to protect him, his wife, and their children, Archie and Lilibet. They said the family had been subjected to “well-documented neo-Nazi and extremist threats”. Responding to reports, first published by the Mail on Sunday, the representative said the prince, who filed for judicial review in September, was “unable to return to his home” because it was too dangerous. They added Harry had first offered to pay privately for Scotland Yard protection at the Sandringham summit in 2020, where senior royals and their aides met to hammer out the exit strategy for the Sussexes, but that his offer was dismissed. If the case progresses, it will lead to a high court battle between ministers and Harry, thought to be the first occasion in modern times when a member of the royal family has brought a case against Her Majesty’s government. The couple’s concerns follow an incident in London in 2021, when Harry returned to the UK for the unveiling of the statute of his late mother, Diana, Princess of Wales, and his car was reportedly chased by photographers as he left a charity event. Harry’s legal threat comes ahead of his grandmother’s platinum jubilee, and raises questions over whether he and his family will attend celebrations in the UK over the jubilee bank holiday weekend in June. A spokesperson said the Sussexes believed the UK threat level is particularly high, greater than that faced in the US, where not only can private security be deployed but where, they believe, law enforcement organisations are allowed to bemore supportive. The couple believe that in the UK the controversy surrounding their departure from full-time royal service, and the hostility of a range of extremist groups and fixated people, make the environment particularly risky. Harry will challenge the decision-making on the grounds it is unreasonable, opaque and inconsistent. The spokesperson said the decision had taken insufficient account of Harry’s position, undiminished threat and any impact on the UK’s reputation of a senior member of the royal family being harmed on UK soil. Harry is said to want to pay for necessary security to ensure he and his family are safe, but he cannot unless the Home Office approves his offer. He believes his own private security cannot replicate the standard of security he would receive from the state. “The UK will always be Prince Harry’s home and a country he wants his wife and children to be safe in,” his legal spokesperson said. “With the lack of police protection comes too great a personal risk. “The Duke and Duchess of Sussex personally fund a private security team for their family, yet that security cannot replicate the necessary police protection needed whilst in the UK. In the absence of such protection, Prince Harry and his family are unable to return to his home. “The duke first offered to pay personally for UK police protection for himself and his family in January of 2020 at Sandringham. That offer was dismissed. He remains willing to cover the cost of security, so as not to impose on the British taxpayer. As is widely known, others who have left public office and have an inherent threat risk receive police protection at no cost to them. “The goal for Prince Harry has been simple – to ensure the safety of himself and his family while in the UK so his children can know his home country.” The representative said Harry was sixth in line to the throne, had served two tours of Afghanistan and in recent years his family “has been subjected to well-documented neo-Nazi and extremist threats”. A government spokesperson said: “The UK government’s protective security system is rigorous and proportionate. It is our longstanding policy not to provide detailed information on those arrangements. To do so could compromise their integrity and affect individuals’ security. “It would also not be appropriate to comment on the detail of any legal proceedings.”This wildly entertaining contest was a good advert for playing on. Although Leeds United were in danger of having to ask one of their supporters to come on and make up the numbers during this riotous 3-2 win over West Ham, they have set the standard for the rest of the Premier League. Cry off because of injuries? Not likely with Marcelo Bielsa in charge. As ever, it is difficult not to admire the purity of the Argentinian’s approach to football. After all it would have been understandable if Leeds, who had to fill their bench with teenagers, had requested a postponement. They have been weighed down by injuries all season but, whereas other clubs have insisted that they cannot play on, Bielsa’s response has been straightforward: stop complaining and give youth a chance. For Leeds, the reward was a win that moves them nine points above the bottom three. True, they often diced with danger, especially when Jarrod Bowen almost snatched a late point for West Ham, but there could be no disputing that the right team won. Bielsa’s ferocious pressing game set the tone and the hard running was accompanied by a cutting edge, Raphinha repeatedly carving West Ham apart and Jack Harrison grabbing the limelight with the first hat-trick of his career. West Ham, who were also stretched by injuries and Covid, were overwhelmed. David Moyes’s side defended poorly and argued that playing three times in a week caught up with them. Michail Antonio was playing as a left winger by the end and West Ham, who finished with the 17-year-old forward Sonny Perkins leading the line, could regret failing to pull clear of Arsenal and Tottenham following the postponement of the North London derby. For Moyes, the worry will be that West Ham keep blowing opportunities against lowly opposition. They remain fourth, but they will not qualify for the Champions League if they do not tighten up at the back. Issa Diop and Craig Dawson struggled in central defence – Kurt Zouma’s return cannot come soon enough – and although West Ham twice conjured equalisers, Harrison kept hurting them. Leeds, who were missing nine players, looked sharper from the start. West Ham were too open in midfield with Tomas Soucek still in quarantine and they could have no complaints when a silky run from Raphinha led to Harrison opening the scoring. West Ham, who beat Leeds in the FA Cup last weekend, were ragged as Raphinha teased Aaron Cresswell and found Mateusz Klich. The midfielder aimed for the far corner and although Lukasz Fabianski saved well, Adam Forshaw collected the rebound and teed up Harrison to score with a fine finish. Leeds were dominant at that stage, with Dan James a nuisance, but West Ham rallied. Luke Ayling and Pascal Struijk, who had not played since November, were grappling with Antonio and Bielsa’s problems increased when Forshaw and Junior Firpo limped off – not that Leeds had any time to feel sorry for themselves. They had a 15-year-old, Archie Gray, on the bench and Bielsa’s response to losing Forshaw and Firpo was to introduce two teenagers; something for the Premier League to consider the next time a club asks for a postponement. However there was more skittishness to Leeds after Lewis Bate and Leo Hjelde entered the fray. Cresswell sent in a corner for Dawson to nod wide and there was no reprieve for the visitors when the left-back whipped in another delivery, Bowen losing Stuart Dallas and heading in his ninth goal of the season. Panic over? Not quite. Three minutes later Raphinha lifted in a corner, Ayling attacked it and Harrison took advantage of dreadful marking by bundling the ball in at the far post. Leeds being Leeds, the game became comically stretched. West Ham threatened, Declan Rice shooting wide, and James shot straight at Fabianski. The pace was frenetic and West Ham equalised again at the start of the second half, Antonio combining with Pablo Fornals, who deceived Illan Meslier with a clever finish. Yet Leeds refused to be cowed. They overwhelmed Manuel Lanzini in midfield, where Soucek’s absence left Rice exposed, and the pressure told when Klich dispossessed the lethargic Nikola Vlasic. The ball broke to Raphinha and the winger sent Harrison in to beat Fabianski with a dinked shot. Trying to protect a lead, Bielsa withdrew a midfielder for an attacker, removing Bate and giving Rodrigo his first minutes since November. Moments later Raphinha danced past Diop and found Klich, who was denied when his shot went in off the offside Rodrigo. Typical Leeds. In the end they needed the linesman to spot that Bowen was offside when the West Ham substitute, Andriy Yarmolemenko, beat Meslier. West Ham pressed hard and there were anguished cries when Bowen somehow chested over from close range. It was great fun for the neutral, wonderful for Bielsa and torture for Moyes.Here’s Jacob Steinberg’s report from the London Stadium. Arsenal’s ears may well be burning. This wildly entertaining contest was a good advert for playing on. Although Leeds United resembled the walking wounded at times, they have set the standard for the rest of the Premier League to follow. Cry off because of a draining injury list? Not a chance with Marcelo Bielsa in charge. All smiles here. Hat-trick hero Jack Harrison has been speaking to Sky Sports. Just delighted to get a goal, when you score three it’s even better and in a tough match like today, it’s even better. The last week we have been working super hard, we really wanted to show a better side of ourselves after last week. We have been unfortunate with injuries and against adversity we work really hard, and the young lads came in and gave their all. We always work hard and push ourselves to the limit.” Going off-piste, we go to talk of Everton, from Eric Peterson. “I can tell from the online chatter that I was one of the last folks on the Benitez bandwagon - unlike the morons who complained incessantly about that “small club” remark and yet think their infantile years-old grudge about that is a legitimate basis for hiring a Premier League manager. They’re part of the problem, and they need to grow up. Everton need and deserve a more mature level of support than theirs. “What’s wrong with the Everton organization is not about this one hire, or all the managerial hires that have gone sideways in the last several years: it’s about the man making these hires. Farhad Moshiri has gutted this club. He either needs to set his ego aside and hire people trained to properly rebuild this emaciated club, or he needs to sell it. If all he has in mind is pulling a Mike Ashley and simply keeping Everton in the Premier League for when they move into their new stadium, he needs to be forced out by the board. Everton need and deserve a more mature level of ownership than his. My hopes for the next manager, in no particular order:Graham Potter. Proven Premier League track record who has shown he can add quality to not only the team on the pitch but throughout every level of the club.Wayne Rooney. Last summer, I would’ve dismissed this as a silly sentimental hire, but what he is accomplishing at Derby is miraculous, and unfortunately, uncomfortably appropriate for what he’d encounter back at Everton.N uno Espirito Santo. How quickly we forget how he built Wolves up from a Championship side to a perennial mid-table Premier League force. Even falling into the bottom half in his last year at Wolves doesn’t bother me: losing a striker like Raul Jimenez for six months can have that effect.” And Mary Waltz: “What fresh hell is this. All my friends who root for Liverpool are texting me and informing me that Big Sam will be hired for my beloved Everton. And I can’t tell them to f off because it could happen.” Bad news for West Ham, whose rivals have games in hand - Tottenham have four - while Leeds are well clear of that twilight zone at the bottom. Heroic from Leeds, who at the barest of bones. Fortune favours the brave - and those who choose to play football - and Jack Harrison’s hat-trick caps a famous win. They were forced to introduce two teenagers from the bench and they have damaged the hopes of West Ham of staying in the top four. What a game, and why Marcelo Bielsa is a *good* thing. 90+4 min: Bowen....oh no. What a miss! Antonio finds Leeds asleep down the wing, his cross is deflected and Bowen can only head home. And yet he decides to...chest it home - and miss. And that is that, Leeds have taken the points. 90+3 min: Declan Rice carries the ball into the heart of the Leeds defence, and the ball is cleared by a morass of Leeds defenders. 90+2 min: Yarmolenko scuffs a shot that Meslier gets behind. Raphinha takes a whack and also his time about getting back up. 90 min: Just four minutes to play. Can Leeds hang on and put distance between themselves and the bottom three? Dallas, heroic this afternoon, is back and clearing the danger. That’s followed up by more defending from Rodrigo and Harrison. 89 min: West Ham corner comes in, Dawson heads it, and it comes off Hjelde’s hand. No penalty as it was inadvertent. 88 min: Dan James is booked for hunting down and kicking Fabianski. That’s what they call a high press. 87 min: Hammers sub, off goes Diop and on comes Sonny Perkins, another teenage Premier League debutant, and one that sounds like a 1950s avant-garde jazzer. 86 min: Into the dying embers of what has been a minor Premier League classic. Both teams will surely have a chance. There’s no way this one is played out quietly. 84 min: West Ham now on the attack. And pushing on and on. Struijk almost does himself a mischief in launching himself at a loose ball. Oh wow. Antonio launches a throw-in, as everyone piles into the Leeds box. Chaos ensues. Bowen heads home after Meslier makes two great saves from Yarmolenko then initially from Bowen, but the header of the purported equaliser is offside. 80 min: And still Leeds attack, and still West Ham can’t get the ball clear. When it works for Bielsa, it is so good to watch, and so hard to play against. And it’s been a while since we’ve been able to say that. 78 min: Koch and Bowen collide as the Leeds player’s high boot hits the head of the West Ham forward. 76 min: Yarmolenko is booked for crop of James at full pelt. Cynical as hell. But here comes Raphina for another free-kick. Blocked this time. But still, it’s all Leeds Leeds Leeds. 74 min: Raphina again! Down the right wing he goes, blazing past Diop, and the pass across goal to Klich, who wallops home....oh, here’s VAR. As the ball came off Rodrigo on the line, it’s offside. It was inadvertent but it was offside. That could be a turning point. 72 min: It’s still Leeds on the attack, and Raphina is at the forefront again. What a player he is, and how much would he cost. Well over £50m appears the expected price tag. 70 min: It’s 2-0 to Liverpool, by the way, against Brentford. They will go second, though a long way behind Manchester City. In the meantime, West Ham are going some way to blowing their charge at fourth. 69 min: Hammers sub: Yarmolenko replaces Fornals the goalscorer. 68 min: Leeds continue to attack. Rodrigo was an attacking sub. And it’s working, as West Ham’s momentum of the opening moments of this half are a memory. 66 min: Michael Gibson emails in: “With the breaking news that Rafa’s gone through the door marked ‘do one’, do you think Everton will try to pilfer David Moyes from his Happy Hammers?” Answer: no, he’d be mad to go there. Just about anyone would be. 65 min: Leeds make their final change, and on comes their last remaining senior player, Rodrigo, and off goes Lewis Bate. The sub subbed, and that’s a tough one for the teenager. He looks a tad unhappy on the bench. Nobody is engaging him in conversation. 62 min: Close again! Lanzini booked, for a foul that gives Raphina chance to whip a free-kick beyond the wall and off the post. Leeds continue to be highly dangerous. They want more goals, god love Bielsa. 61 min: West Ham sub: Vlasic departs the scene and Masuaku comes on for West Ham. That’s a defender coming on for an attacker but it’s also Masuaku, a man who always brings chaos. Well! Leeds Leeds Leeds. The ball spills in midfield and Raphina sets up Harrison, whose finish for his third, is an absolute beauty. What a game! 58 min: Vlasic, who has become more prominent, cuts back to ping n a cross. It’s cleared but West Ham pile on and on. Harrison eventually relieves the danger but there’s nobody up front to hold it. 56 min: Still chances at the other end where Dallas just fails to get to a cross. 53 min: Antonio really is an expert at leading the line, and it doesn’t feel like long ago that he was playing as an attacking wing-back. Leeds really on the ropes now, and that’s down to the pressure West Ham are ratcheting up. Neat forward play from Antonio, who corrects his own poor control and plays in Fornals. Nice, neat and angled finish. The pressure has already paid off. 50 min: More groans as Fornals’ pass goes astray. The Leeds contingent in full voice, even as Ayling makes a mess as Antonio almost sets up Rice. 48 min: The half-time beers seem to have added a sense of disquiet among home fans. They aren’t happy at the way their team is playing. 46 min: We are back on, and West Ham begin like a train, Scottish invective frothing around their ears. Can Leeds’ brave band of nine senior players - eight are on the pitch now - and kids hang on? It finishes with James whipping one at goal that Fabianski’s fingertips direct away, but only just. A thrilling end to a breathless half in which patched-up Leeds have been excellent and West Ham caught cold, while still showing flashes of danger. Football, fun isn’t it? 45+3 min: Bielsa assumes his usual crouching position on the sideline. His team, battered and decimated, have come through for him, and almost have a third when Bate’s pass to Raphina is directed to James, and the shot is straight at Fabianski. He really should have done much better. 45+1 min: Bowen’s free-kick is a waste, and Struijk guides it out. There’s been four minutes added on of a breathless half of football. 45 min: Koch is booked for a clatter on Antonio, a touch of revenge there, perhaps. 43 min: There’s been very little time for thinking here. Rice, with a squawk, calls for a corner and gets one. Cresswell will attempt to whip in another. Bowen gets to it again but this time he is crowded out and can only head over. 41 min: Declan Rice makes another of his runs beyond the defence, surging on to a pass from Lanzini but can’t get a shot on goal. The angle was just a little too acute. 39 min: Dan James goes close now. We have quite a game on our hands here, and all credit to Leeds for continuing to show such spirit and adventure. Well well! Another Leeds corner, another from the left, and Ayling heads down, and Harrison taps in at the post. No offside or infringement, says VAR and Leeds lead. 36 min: Have to feel sympathy for Leeds. The injury to Forshaw derailed them completely. The defending was not good for the equaliser but this is a team running on empty. It’s that man again. Cresswell’s corner is whipped in. Koch and co can’t get to it and Cresswell, with some neat movement, nods home, leaving Stuart Dallas for dead. 32 min: Hjelde, the new man, and Dawson, square off, youngster versus veteran and the kid wins the day in forcing Dawson to concede a goal kick. 30 min: Close, so close for the Hammers! Dawson and Rice climb highest, and Dawson somehow heads a corner from the left down and wide. That’s a bad miss. On the sidelines, David Moyes calls for calm. 28 min: Mike Dean is the ref here, and the home fans are getting antsy with him. He waves away what looks like a Leeds handball. So, Leeds have two teenagers playing, and making debuts. For some reason, such a state of affairs is beyond Arsenal, who presumably have a number of teenagers who would like to make debuts, too. 26 min: Ayling fails to play to the whistle and West Ham almost force a chance after Fornals escapes the dallying defender and Antonio has a shot blocked. West Ham now have the momentum. 25 min: Booking for Antonio, after his control lets him down and he slides into Koch and clatters the defender. Leeds’ casualty list piles up. 24 min: Firpo eventually lopes off, and on comes Leo Hjelde, another Premier League debutant. 22 min: Disaster strikes for Leeds, as two players pull up with hamstring problems. Firpo is going off and so, sadly, is Forshaw, whose run of seven full matches after that absence, is going off too with a similar problem. He looks gutted. Lewis Bate makes his Premier League debut in place of Forshaw while Firpo just mooches around with Harrison playing on the left flank. Firpo is a passenger in the style you see from matches in the 1950s and 1960s. 20 min: Dan James, always a willing runner, is the source of problems for the Hammers. He looks a good buy for Leeds, and someone who would still be of use to that indolent Manchester United attack. 18 min: Junior Firpo looks to have a muscular problem, and that youthful Leeds bench may soon be called into commission. 16 min: Declan Rice goes on the lam, and he causes havoc in the Leeds defence. Only desperate tackles on Bowen and Antonio clear the danger. 14 min: Reports of Leeds’ demise seem exaggerated. They’ve been excellent while West Ham have been unusually circumspect. The Leeds Leeds Leeds fans are making themselves heard in the London Stadium. Whisper it, but the London seems to have a good atmosphere these days. Funny how a good team can change such things. The Hammers fans - up there with the Goodison Groan for moaning - may soon be getting on their team’s back if this continues. 12 min: The Hammers wake from their slumber and go on the attack. Antonio is in the thick of it. Leeds looking like the Leeds of last season as they pile back on the counter. The excellent Forshaw plays a beauty of a pass to Dan James, and the shot is just over. That’s been coming, Leeds have been on it. Cresswell is beaten by a long ball, Raphina passes across the initial shot is blocked and Forshaw sets up Harrison to whip home. Klich had the first shot and cool play meant the second was going in. 8 min: The corner came to nothing from that Leeds attack. West Ham’s defence is depleted but retains significant power. Another corner gives them more work to do, with Dallas taking, and Firpo directs the ball behind. 6 min: Leeds pass it around the back and it’s West Ham doing most of the pressing. But Harrison gets into a dangerous position, cutting into the box, and having a shot blocked. 4 min: Bowen, busy as ever, collides with Koch and Leeds have a free-kick. Raphina drifts the ball to Luke Ayling but it’s nowhere near the intended target. 3 min: Leeds, patched up and frankly knackered, set off at quite a rate. But the first half-chance comes when Vlasic whips in the ball and Antonio doesn’t quite get to it. 1 min: The players take the knee, to the tune of I’m Forever Blowing Bubbles, and away we go. Ezra, a pessimistic Leeds fan, gets in touch: “As a Leeds fan who adores Marcelo Bielsa and tries to learn from the great man, I hate to use excuses, but a glance at the bench today is more than a little worrying.Aside from maybe Rodrigo, there is no one there who is a seasoned professional, and with no Phillips, Bamford and Cooper, it will be a miracle to escape with a point.” So, here we go at the London Stadium, where both teams are ready and raring to play football. Which is no longer a given, it seems. Perhaps Romelu Lukaku could watch Michail Antonio today to see how it’s done in the Premier League. David Moyes, the West Ham manager, speaks to Sky Sports. We have been playing quite well, and we haven’t had one player who has stood out and got us 15 goals. [On Bowen] I think he can continue to improve, when we bought him from Hull we hoped we could build him to be a Premier League player and he did that from the start. I think he’s gone to another level. Let’s hope that keeps happening. Leeds are a real tough opponent. I don’t think it’s easy when you play them one week and then the next. Today we are going to have to play well. We’ve had injuries, we’ve had Covid as well, but seemingly not enough to get games called off. Two teams at either end of the table here. Marcelo Bielsa, ahead of his 150th league game at Leeds, has been speaking to Sky Sports. We have tried to correct some things that happened in the last game, try to get behind more in attack and make too more difficult to play at the back. Even if [West Ham last week]’s victory was fair, we were always able to be in the game and we avoided a mark difference between us. No, because we didn’t have any reason to ask for [a postponement]. The first round of fixtures we haven’t picked up as many points as we imagined. Leeds’ comeback kid, Adam Forshaw, signed a new contract, having been out for two years before returning earlier this season. He’s just been speaking to Sky Sport. To repay a lot of faith they showed in me, my family love it here. it was a no-brainer in me. A couple of the teams below us got some good results and are beginning to pick up points, we are aware of that. Some transfer news, from Jacob Steinberg. West Ham are unchanged from the team that beat Norwich in midweek, while Marcelo Bielsa makes two changes from the team that beating Burnley 3-1 on 2 January. Dan James replaces Tyler Roberts with Diego Llorente suspended so Pascal Struijk comes in. And what that means for Leeds is still no Patrick Bamford, with Rodrigo making the bench. West Ham: Fabianski, Cresswell, Coufal, Diop, Dawson, Rice, Lanzini, Fornals, Vlasic, Bowen, Antonio. Subs: Areola, Yarmolenko, Fredericks, Masuaku, Johnson, Kral, Alese, Perkins, Oko-Flex. Leeds: Meslier, Ayling, Firpo, Koch, Struijk, Klich, Forshaw, Harrison, Dallas, Raphinha, James. Subs: Klaesson, Rodrigo, Bate, Hjelde, McKinstry, Jenkins, Moore, Kenneh, Gray. With Arsenal not wanting to play Tottenham and Manchester United flopping to that draw with Aston Villa, this is a chance for West Ham to steal a march in the race for the top four. This is a reheat of last week’s FA Cup match, won rather easily by the Hammers, and Leeds continue to be short of players, with Patrick Bamford still unlikely to start. Here’s a mini-preview from this week’s 10 things to look out for. As Arsenal, Tottenham and Manchester United falter in their chase for a top-four place, West Ham have been taking care of business. The expectation is a thin squad will eventually run out of energy, as happened last season, but David Moyes’s team are currently in fourth place on merit. The improvement in the last 18 months of the likes of Jarrod Bowen, Manuel Lanzini and Declan Rice is a tribute to their manager, a rediscovery of the team-building expertise that first made his reputation at Preston and Everton. Rice is a reminder that stars can be made rather than bought in, while Bowen, who scored twice in Wednesday’s win over Norwich, is a reminder that stars can also be bought and made from the lower tiers. Such old-fashioned values are prevailing over the elite clubs chasing West Ham’s tail, and a repeat of last week’s 2-0 FA Cup defeat of Leeds would keep the Hammers ahead. As Jacob Steinberg wrote on Saturday, Jarrod Bowen, is the man to watch these days for West Ham. Bowen, who has helped West Ham reach the last 16 of the Europa League, has become invaluable. His versatility enables him to play through the middle when Michail Antonio is missing, but he is at his best on the right. Bowen’s left foot allows him to cause havoc with inswinging crosses, he can be relied on to track back to protect his full-back and he is always willing to get into goalscoring positions, even though his finishing could be more refined at times. Kick-off is at 2pm, UK time.There was an extra edge, as well as an extra punch, to Jürgen Klopp’s trademark celebration in front of the Kop that reinforced his belief this was not merely a routine win for Liverpool. A gulf exists between themselves and Manchester City at the top of the Premier League but the fight, as embodied by Liverpool’s manager, goes on. “We don’t have to convince anyone outside to believe. If they want to believe they can believe,” said Klopp. “If you are with us, you will enjoy the ride and we will go for everything. This is not the situation to talk about a title fight, it’s 11 points now with one game in hand. In a normal world nothing happens any more but what is normal nowadays? We try to do our part, there is nothing else to do.” Liverpool leapfrogged Chelsea into second with an ultimately comfortable victory over Brentford, who made life awkward for their hosts but without the set-piece threat that underpinned the 3-3 draw when they met in September. This time it was Fabinho who prospered at a set piece to open the scoring. Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and Takumi Minamino, two players with added responsibility to improve Liverpool’s goals output in the absence of world class teammates, obliged with one apiece in the second half. “The way Brentford play against us is really uncomfortable,” admitted Klopp. “If you want to or have to win the game you have to control the game but the ball was 20 minutes in the air. “You have to be able to bring the ball down and from there you have to play and it’s really tricky. I knew before it would be a tough one and it was a tough game, which is why I am so happy we did so well.” Fabinho’s goal a minute before the break lanced growing irritation with Liverpool’s performance around Anfield and punctured Brentford’s previously comfortable resistance. Liverpool were without Mohamed Salah or Sadio Mané in a Premier League game for the first time since the former’s arrival from Roma in 2017, and for 44 minutes it showed as the hosts increasingly resorted to hopeful crosses that suited the visitors’ three towering central defenders. A series of misplaced passes out of defence that gifted Brentford their brightest moments also added to Anfield’s anxiety. The mood and the contest changed on the stroke of half-time. Trent Alexander-Arnold operated as an auxiliary forward at times as Liverpool pressed the visitors into a deep retreat and his corner provided the breakthrough. Brentford had defended impressively up until that point but, as the right-back’s delivery arrived in the six-yard area, it was allowed to bounce through to the back post where Fabinho held off Kristoffer Ajer and headed in from close range. Brentford’s afternoon deteriorated from that point, although Bryan Mbeumo was close to levelling early in the second half when turning away from Joël Matip and shooting narrowly wide of Alisson’s right-hand post. Thomas Frank said: “I thought we played 60 very good minutes and maybe even better in the first 45: unbelievably well-structured, very good discipline, brave when we want to go high, defended low very well and gave nothing away in open play. Then we concede from a set piece. That should never happen. If you want to get a result against a world class team then you cannot concede from a set piece.” Liverpool’s intensity, threat and composure all improved after the restart. Diogo Jota, tireless on the left of Klopp’s forward line, struck a post with Brentford goalkeeper Álvaro Fernández beaten after a surging run from Alexander-Arnold. The Liverpool manager opted for Oxlade-Chamberlain on the right of Roberto Firmino, with Minamino dropping to the bench following Thursday’s stalemate with Arsenal in the Carabao Cup semi-final first leg. The switch was vindicated when the makeshift forward doubled Liverpool’s advantage from Andy Robertson’s perfectly flighted cross. Oxlade-Chamberlain stole in ahead of Brentford substitute Sergi Canós, as Robertson’s delivery sailed just over Ethan Pinnock, to send an unstoppable diving header inside Fernández’s near post. In keeping with the injury misfortune that has plagued his Anfield career, Oxlade-Chamberlain rolled his ankle moments later and had to be replaced by the Japan international. “The shadow on the game,” as Klopp put it. “Hopefully it’s not too serious but we won’t know until tomorrow at the earliest.” Minamino had been on the pitch three minutes when he benefited from Firmino’s unselfishness– and Brentford’s carelessness – to score Liverpool’s third. Fernández and Pinnock over-elaborated at a goalkick before the keeper played Christian Nørgaard into trouble on the edge of his area. Firmino pounced to dispossess the midfielder and found Minamino unmarked in front of goal. Minamino squared to Firmino, Firmino repaid the favour and helped the substitute repair his confidence after that 90th minute miss against Arsenal with a simple tap-in. Kaide Gordon became the fourth youngest player in Liverpool’s history when he was introduced late on. He had a glorious chance to became the club’s youngest ever goalscorer when sent clean through by Minamino but Fernández saved to deny him a place in the record books.An 86-year-old woman was killed in a “horrific” attack that left her 88-year-old husband with life-threatening injuries, police have said. Freda and Ken Walker were attacked in their home in a Derbyshire village on Saturday morning. Police confirmed on Sunday that emergency services had been called to the couple’s home when neighbours raised the alarm at about 9.30am. While detectives have not confirmed the nature of the incident, they are understood to be looking for suspects who managed to get inside the Walkers’ semi-detached home in the village of Langwith Junction. Ch Supt Hayley Barnett, of Derbyshire police, said on Sunday: “This couple were well-known here to this community and I know that many people who know them will be shocked by this horrific incident.” Neighbours paid tribute to the “lovely couple” who were said to be devoted to each other and popular in the local community. Ken Walker, who remained in critical condition in hospital on Sunday, is understood to have been a local councillor and a school governor until relatively recently. Jonathan Hilliar, who lives locally, told the BBC: “Every time I went past they would say hello. They were such a sweet old couple. I just don’t get it, I really don’t.” Barnett urged anyone with information about the incident to contact the police urgently. She added: “Whilst I can’t talk about the mechanics or how people came to be in the address, what I do urge people to do is keep good security to their homes. “Keep their doors and windows locked, don’t let any strangers in, don’t keep any valuables on display and have a means of making contact with emergency services.”The Parent Trap is a charming 1998 family film that will appeal to adults and kids alike, but please don’t use it as an instructional manual on how to raise children. An American winery owner and a British dressmaker enjoy a whirlwind romance and a quickfire wedding, only to get divorced shortly after the birth of their twin daughters. Rather than work out a shared custody deal, they instead decide it is in the best interests of their baby girls to split the twins up, take them to different sides of the world and then never inform either of the existence of the other. And if that wasn’t traumatising enough, neither daughter is given any information about their absent parent, being raised in a world of repression and whispers. Being a Disney film, any parental deceit is swept under the rug, as are the logistics that see both children coincidentally sent to the same remote summer camp a few months shy of their 12th birthdays. Much like the 1961 original on which this version is based, the two sisters are played by one young actor – Lindsay Lohan in her stunning film debut – and the girls take an instant dislike to each other. A series of escalating and unlikely pranks ensue – including one in which a tween is somehow able to hoist an entire cabin’s worth of furniture, bunk beds and all, on to the roof and glue it all in place – and the two are punished by being kept alone in an isolated cabin on the edge of camp for the remainder of their time away (some eight weeks) without adult supervision. (Then again, a previous scene allowed them to sword-fight, so this was never the most well-managed camp.) It is here in isolation that they start to like each other, discovering they are twins (Disney magic precluded them from realising this beforehand, despite being identical). A plan is hatched to swap identities, each going home in the other’s place to surreptitiously get to know the parent they were denied – with bouts of intense displacement, feelings of betrayal and anger seemingly not a concern for these two li’l cuties. Eventually the parents discover the ruse, and short of being even mildly apologetic for the lifetime of deception, both are simply put out by this cross-continental annoyance. The twins conspire again, this time to get their parents together in the same place at the same time, while also ridding their father of his gold-digging, child-hating, Cruella-style girlfriend – who is really blocking their happily ever after. The rest of the film is a series of mishaps, hijinks, mislaid plans and disasters. And, obviously, a happy ending. It’s such an enjoyable movie that the Disney of it all actually adds to the appeal. This is also, by far, the best performance Lindsay Lohan has ever committed to celluloid: remarkable considering it’s not only her debut but that she’s performing two roles – one with a believable British accent, the other as a knock-about tomboy – and doing so largely to a green screen. It’s quite amusing, too, that Lohan was cast in this double role, given that the biggest young stars at the time were literally a set of 12-year-old twins. But while the Olsens were lovably wooden, I cannot stress how lovably brilliant Lohan is here. Turn a blind eye to the series of parental flaws that would have both parents on speed-dial at Docs and you are left with an off-kilter comedy that is impossible not to be charmed by. A lovely side romance between the parents’ respective butlers is the real beating heart of this film, along with the stunning chemistry Lohan is able to manage with herself.Economic management is a perennial battleground in Australian elections. In reality, the debate is meaningless as no side has much control over key factors. On the economy, politicians enjoy what Yes Minister’s Sir Humphrey Appleby termed responsibility without power, the prerogative of the eunuch throughout the ages. Firstly, Australia’s economy is dependent on external events, particularly commodity prices and the performance of our trading partners, especially China. Over the last half a century, successive commodity booms and the emergence of Japan, China and India have underpinned Australian living standards and shielded the nation from major downturns. In 2021, Chinese demand combined with interruptions in Brazilian supply led to higher iron-ore prices temporarily increasing export revenues from this source alone to around 10% of the Australian economy, roughly double pre-pandemic levels. These additional revenues more than covered the pandemic-driven losses from international students, inbound tourists and immigration. Government revenue is highly sensitive to the iron ore price: a US$10 per tonne rise increases Western Australia’s royalties by around $800m per year. Other critical factors largely outside government control are Covid-19 and geopolitics. The virus affects expenditure on health and income and industry support. Activity is influenced by mobility disruptions, which impact demand (tourism, foreign students, hospitality and personal services) as well as supply (quarantined staff, worker and skills shortages and supply chain breakdowns). Sino-US tensions bedevil relations with Australia’s largest trade counterparty. Extreme weather events increasingly affect agricultural production. Global action to reduce emissions, such as the European Union’s planned levy on carbon-intensive imports, may affect Australian fossil fuel exports. Miners already face financing difficulties as investors seek to reduce exposure to the sector. Secondly, even in areas of policy supposedly within their control, governments have limited ability to shape outcomes. Budget-day grandstanding aside, many elements are difficult to control, as the persistent inaccuracy of forecasts highlight. When economic activity slows, taxes fall and spending rises, increasing deficits and debt (known as the “automatic stabilisers”). Improving performance has the opposite effect. Budget measures rely on uncertain multiplier effects – the increase in economic activity resulting from additional government spending. Targeting stimulus is challenging. Overzealous and/or misdirected government spending to boost the economy during the pandemic may have exacerbated inflationary pressures. Interest rate and monetary conditions are the preserve of a theoretically independent central bank. In any case, the Reserve Bank’s actions are frequently negated by those of larger counterparts, such as the US, the EU, Japan and China. Australian interest rates must track overseas equivalents to avoid destabilising capital inflows or outflows. Australia’s size limits the ability to intervene in financial markets to influence the value of the Australian dollar in a world where all countries want a weak currency to improve export competitiveness. Besides, lower rates and pumping money may not boost the economy as business and individual borrowing is based on needs and repayment ability. In the absence of demand for their products, lower cost of debt may not increase investment. Lower interest income may perversely encourage greater saving, including for retirement, reducing consumption, which normally constitutes around 60% of economic activity. Governments could undertake microeconomic or structural reform to increase competitiveness and flexibility by improving workforce practices, education, cost structures, infrastructure, productivity and social policy. This too presents complications. Couples refuse to cooperate with government diktats to increase the birth rate. Higher immigration faces opposition from many groups. While everybody agrees on the need for change, there is little agreement on the “what”, the “how” and the “who pays”. Besides, structural reform requires slow and painstaking effort not glib marketing slogans. It has uncertain outcomes and may take decades to yield results, during which time the underlying conditions may shift. Australia’s federated model makes it difficult to coordinate policies between different levels of government. Required legislative power is also restricted by internal party factional wars, as well as the frequent absence of a secure majority or control of both houses of parliament. Thirdly, governments are trapped by unintended consequences. Instead of boosting activity, lower rates create asset (housing) price bubbles, which exacerbate housing unaffordability and inequality, as well as creating high levels of mortgage debt and inflation. This leads to surreal policy cocktails: cutting interest rates, subsidising home purchases and jaw-boning banks to limit lending (known as macro-prudential policy). It resembles trying to drive a car with a foot simultaneously on the accelerator and the brake. It is understandable that modern superhero politicians prefer more nebulous issues: national security, culture, identity, character, probity and affinity with cute babies and cuddly animals. The mystery is why voters believe promises on the economy that even competent governments have limited ability to deliver on. Perhaps like Napoleon’s preference for “lucky” generals, Australians should vote for “lucky” leaders. • Satyajit Das is a financier and author whose latest books include A Banquet of Consequences – Reloaded (March 2021) and Fortune’s Fool: Australia’s Choices (coming in March 2022)Essential services in rural towns are under pressure due to Covid-19 and could leave locals unable to access pharmaceutical and banking services. Katie Stott, together with her husband, pharmacist Fred Hellqvist, manage the only pharmacy in Dover, Tasmania, the southernmost town in Australia, servicing approximately 2,000 to 3,000 people. “I’m terrified,” Stott says of the prospect of her or husband falling ill with Covid-19 and having to close their doors. “If we had to close for seven days or more I’m really scared,” she says as the pharmacy not only is responsible for servicing the local nursing home with its medication but also making deliveries to the elderly and disadvantaged members of the community who cannot drive. Stott says their pharmacy in Dover is one of about 350 small rural pharmacies in Australia that are a single pharmacist town, meaning there are at least 700,000 Australians living in communities that are at risk of losing their service if the pharmacist gets sick. “We just don’t have a lot of backup. A lot of these bigger pharmacies [are] operating A and B teams,” she says. “They can bring a fresh team in that haven’t had contact with the other team if someone gets sick. “We’ve just been praying it won’t happen but with Omicron it just seems like an inevitability that rural pharmacies are going to get hit.” The ability to secure a locum to keep doors open is a “nightmare”, Stott says, as even the locum they booked in advance in order to take a holiday had to cancel due to becoming a close contact. “I can just anticipate that it will be absolutely chaotic if we have to close for more than a day,” Stott says. “We’ll probably end up in a situation where people are calling triple-0 unnecessarily or going up to the doctor’s surgery.” Stott is also the coordinator of the Rural Pharmacy Network, which she says has been warning since the beginning of the pandemic that the government needs to have a contingency plan if pharmacies have to close. But Stott says there has yet to be any commitment from federal or state governments. “A, it’s getting a locum in the first place to keep the doors open, and B, it’s the cost of that locum … the hourly rate that they’ll be expecting to come into a pharmacy last minute, into potentially where there’s an outbreak of Covid, they can demand a pretty hefty rate and that’s not easy for a small pharmacy like ours to deal with.” Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter When Cathy Goodwin and her husband, Tim, the licensee owners of the Peak Hill post office, contracted Covid-19, the post office had to close for two days on the Thursday and Friday of the week before last. Aside from mail, the post office is also responsible for banking services as there are no banks in Peak Hill. Goodwin says that, with a large Indigenous population, a reasonably large welfare base, and pensioners, there are many people in the community who don’t want to pay their bills online. The post office also helps with administration of passports and tax file numbers, as well as carrying goods people need in emergencies such as printer cartridges, copy paper and mobile phones. “We’re a convenience store without food,” Goodwin says. The nearest post offices are more than 40km away in Parkes or more than 70km away in Dubbo. However, Goodwin says, “we don’t have public transport, particularly the older community don’t have accessibility to go into other towns if need be. There is a community bus once a week or once a fortnight. “You need the post office to be able to do those things and a lot of the oldies don’t feel comfortable going out of town at the moment because of the risks.” Goodwin says she phoned her area manager the night she got tested as “I was stressing because I feel very very guilty about the fact that we had to close because I felt I was letting everybody down”. She says Australia Post was “absolutely brilliant” with the area manager able to secure a worker from the corporate office from Dubbo to be able to open the post office Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday for reduced hours, until Goodwin was able to return to work Thursday. However, she says, according to the post office licensee Facebook page,there have been other offices which have had to close for the full seven days because they have been unable to secure extra staff. It is a “big concern” among rural post offices as “most of us are owner-operators and don’t have staff”. While Goodwin was able to get her PCR results within 24 hours, one of Goodwin’s casual staff is unable to return to work as she is yet to receive the result of a PCR test she took the morning of Thursday 6 January in Parkes. Lauren, who requested her last name not be used, lives on a farm in Camperdown in south-west Victoria. She says “rural areas will be underrepresented in the stats” because of the difficulties accessing testing. Lauren gives the example of her son, his girlfriend and her family, who all fell ill with a raging headache and a sore throat that felt like they had eaten razor blades. “They’re 99.9% sure they had Covid.” However, because it’s impossible to buy rapid antigen tests in the area and the family were too sick to drive to the closest testing centre an hour away, and Lauren couldn’t drive them without risking falling ill herself, “eight people ended up being really sick and not part of the statistics”. “After their experience, we have pretty much resigned to the fact that being tested now is going to be near impossible and when we get sick it will be Covid,” she says. Lauren runs a dairy farm and says “if we’re not well it stops. It’s not like we have sick leave or somebody else that can come help.” For this reason she and her neighbours have come to an agreement that “if we do both get sick separately that we will look after each other’s animals, making sure they have water and food, and that the humans in the house have also got food and water, and they’ll do the same for us.” A spokesperson for Victoria’s Department of Health says “since October, we have increased Victoria’s testing capacity by 55%, with more than 260 sites typically operating across the state”. “Rapid antigen tests have also been sent to regional services, including Barwon, to distribute to testing sites in the region,” the spokesperson says. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityMigraines are the most common form of headache that can cause severe throbbing pain – usually on one side of the head – and severely affect quality of life. A migraine attack can last hours or days and often comes with nausea, vomiting and extreme sensitivity to light and sound. According to a 2018 Deloitte Access Economics Report, almost 5 million people in Australia live with migraine, with 7.6% of them – around 400,000 people – experiencing chronic migraine, which means more than 15 migraine days per month. Migraines are much more common in women than men and more prevalent in working-age people. “During a flare, all people want to do is lie in a cold dark room and not do anything,” says Adnan Asger Ali, a physiotherapist and the deputy national chair at Musculoskeletal Physiotherapy Australia. But research shows regular exercise may have a preventive effect in reducing the number and intensity of migraines. One of the main reasons physical activity may help relieve migraines, says Ali, is that the body releases endorphins (natural painkillers) during exercise. “Physical therapy can complement the pharmacological management of migraines,” he says. “Working together with your physiotherapist to determine the appropriate frequency, intensity and dosage of exercise is a good, safe way to help you achieve pain relief through exercise.” A proper physical assessment is necessary to tailor a treatment plan to the individual, and individuals should consult with a health professional before embarking on a new exercise regime, but here are some suggestions on physical exercise that might help manage migraine. The class: yoga and tai chi Ali says slow movements, meditation and relaxation have significant beneficial effects on people who suffer from migraines. That includes activities such as yoga and tai chi. In a recent randomised clinical trial that involved 114 patients aged 18 to 50 years with a diagnosis of episodic migraine, researchers found that people who practised yoga as an add-on therapy had less frequent and less intense migraines than those who received medical treatment alone. Tai chi can also serve as a preventive measure for migraines. In a 2018 randomised controlled trial of 82 Chinese women with episodic migraines, researchers found that after 12 weeks of tai chi training, the women experienced significantly fewer migraine attacks. The move: chin tuck Neck stiffness and postural issues can be a driver for migraines, says Ali. He suggests the chin tuck, or cervical retraction, exercise to strengthen neck muscles and improve mobility. The chin tuck exercise can be performed standing or sitting. Begin by sitting upright and looking straight ahead, keeping your neck and shoulders relaxed. Place a finger on your chin and gently glide your chin down – tuck your chin to your neck. Don’t hold your breath, move your head up or down or bend your neck forward. You might feel a gentle pull at the base of the head and top of the neck. Hold the position for about five seconds and repeat the exercise 10 times – as long as it doesn’t cause any pain. The activity: walking, jogging, running and cycling Aerobic exercises such as walking, jogging, running and cycling might help mitigate migraine. A systematic review of studies on exercise and migraine published in The Journal of Headache and Pain in 2019 found that moderate-intensity exercise – physical activities that elevate your heart rate and cause you to breathe harder but still allow you to carry on a conversation – can decrease the number of migraine days. “Any activity that people will do consistently and that they enjoy will be good for them,” says Ali. The hard pass: high-intensity interval training Ali warns against HIIT workouts, which alternate short bursts of intense cardio exercise with rest or lower-intensity exercise. “Very high-intensity exercise is discouraged if it triggers your migraine,” he says. In some people, high-intensity exercise can trigger a migraine attack. But research has shown that regular HIIT workouts might be more beneficial than moderate exercise for others, highlighting the importance of a personalised exercise plan. • A quote in this article was amended on 11 February 2022 to remove a reference regarding the appropriate medication for migraines, which could have been wrongly interpreted; and to better convey the relevant benefits of physical therapy.Australia’s giant offshore gasfields are paying almost no royalties, create few jobs and are a large and rising source of greenhouse gases, according to a new report from the Australia Institute. The “Gas-fired robbery” report, released Monday, finds Western Australia receives only a tiny fraction of its revenue from an industry that generated $27bn in WA exports last year. The report comes just days after a WA heatwave matched Australia’s hottest ever reliably recorded temperature of 50.7C and reportedly caused an outage at a nearby gas plant. The $430m that ended up in the state’s coffers was a mere 1% of budget revenue, or half as much as it collected from motor vehicle registrations. By contrast, the iron-ore industry tipped $7.8bn into the 2019/20 budget, more than 18 times as much as gas. “Oil and gas companies like Woodside and Chevron are being given this valuable and finite resource virtually for free, making huge profits from its sale, creating few jobs and returning almost nothing to everyday West Australians,” said Mark Ogge, principal adviser at the Australia Institute’s Climate &amp; Energy Program, and author of the report. The North West Shelf gas operations provide the bulk of the liquefied natural gas royalties paid at $425m, with no tax or LNG royalties from Woodside’s Pluto, Chevron’s Wheatstone or Shell’s Prelude projects, the analysis found. Chevron’s Gorgon contributed $7m in 2019-20 to the WA budget but was potentially generating revenue of more than four times that tally per day. Although “paltry”, if the North West Shelf payments were extended at the same rate to the rest of the LNG industry in WA, more than $1bn would be generated for the state and $500m for the commonwealth, the report found. At its peak in 2013/14, the Woodside-run operation provided about triple the current level, or about $1.2bn, making up more than 4% of the budget revenue that year. The tax and royalty arrangements “see large amounts of gas effectively given away for free to multinational oil and gas companies”, the report said. “[T]he obvious question is how much money could be raised if WA’s gas was subject to an effective royalty regime.” With its reliance on expensive equipment rather than labour, the industry is also a relatively small employer in the state, accounting for less than 1% of the workforce, the report found. LNG also managed to extract $94m in subsidies from the state government in 2020/21. “This kind of legislative blank cheque from government to an industry that offers so few jobs and revenue in return is symptomatic of the disproportionate influence of the LNG industry,” it said. LNG’s contribution to greenhouse gas emissions is “immense” and growing as more projects line up for approval. Current and proposed LNG projects - including Browse, Scarborough and the Pluto expansion – will alone emit 41.6m tonnes of carbon dioxide-equivalent in production and processing. That tally – which excludes the contribution when the gas is burnt by customers – amounts to almost half WA’s total emissions each year. A spokesperson for the WA government did not dispute the revenue figures but said the contribution of the LNG industry – which reserves 15% of its output for WA customers – went beyond the extraction and processing of the fuel. “Given energy is an essential input into most economic activity, we should not consider the employment effects of energy projects by simply looking at their operational workforce,” the official said. “Domestic gas has underpinned the Western Australian economy – for domestic and industrial uses – for decades, and due to our strong domestic gas policy LNG projects continue to make a significant contribution to the state.” Gas provides as much as 60% of the state’s electricity, and the Western Australian Gas and Downstream Industry Opportunities Study in August 2021 estimated downstream gas processing projects may contribute between $3bn-$10bn to the state economy over 20 years. Chevron, too, defended its economic contribution. The US-based company has paid about $7bn in Australian state and federal taxes and royalties since 2009, a spokesperson said. “Forecasts show by the early to mid-2020s, we will pay $1bn to $2.5bn a year in federal and state taxes and royalties,” she said. “Our contribution in Australia goes far beyond tax,” with more than $60bn in local content generated by the Gorgon and Wheatstone projects with contracts reaching almost 1,000 in number for Australian businesses, and 19,000 construction jobs. Claire Wilkinson, director of the WA division of the Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association, said: “Western Australians know that natural gas creates local jobs and is essential to our community, no matter what this east coast outfit [the Australia Institute] suggests. “Critically, mining and minerals processing, a key generator of royalties for WA, is a big user of natural gas to power their activities,” Wilkinson said. “In the last 10 years alone, Western Australian natural gas has supported at least 57,000 full-time jobs and paid more than $53bn in taxes.” Guardian Australia also approached the Morrison government, Woodside and Shell for comment.How do you shop at the supermarket? Do you take equal parts of impulse and vibe, fashion a list of stuff you fancy and load up the trolley until you think you’ve got enough food for the week? An old and horribly inefficient version of my family of four did this for years. And for years, we’d get near the end of the week and have a pantry that was simultaneously full of food but without the constituent parts to make a decent meal. But then came a revelation. The most important piece of family admin is now the table we draw up that includes all the lunches and dinners we want that week. Our meal list comes in the form of a grid, with columns for each day of the week and rows for lunches and dinners. Once that’s done, we check that all the ingredients we need are either in the kitchen already or are on the shopping list. Then we add a few extras for snacks and breakfasts. Some days, we’ll eat leftovers in the freezer. But this goes on the meal planner too. This meal plan – stuck on the fridge – includes extra details like page numbers for recipe books or who will be that evening’s designated masterchef. We saved hundreds of dollars a month with this method, and we throw away much less food than we criminally used to. We also spend a lot less time in the supermarket because we don’t just wander down every aisle. This is good because supermarkets are not generally where you want to spend your time. But also the less minutes you have in there, the less opportunity the sneaky store designers have to tempt you with two-for-one offers, freshly-baked bread smells and those shiny product placements right in your eyeline (but yes, I will take those salt and balsamic vinegar chips, thanks very much). Do a meal plan every week. Don’t let them win.In a small town in South Australia, the exterior walls of a public restroom are wrapped in vivid landscapes hand-painted on to tile. In the centre, a windmill stands tall above a river that spills into rolling, rust-coloured paddocks. Beside it, a bird nests atop a sign reading “Carrieton”. “It is a mural depicting the history of the town,” travel blogger Marion Halliday says. “You look at it and go, oh my God, that’s amazing. “Then you realise it is the wall of a toilet.” Halliday, who is known online as Red Nomad, has spent almost 30 years travelling around Australia; her book Aussie Loos with Views documents the rest-stops. “Sometimes you just need the loo. You stumble across these quirky places in the outback where you think, there shouldn’t be a loo here, but there is. And it looks bizarre!” The federal health department’s National Public Toilet Map displays the location of more than 19,000 public bathroom facilities across the country – a true gift in this pandemic, as Australians make plans to spend more time outdoors. Approved in 2000, the map came about “at a time when getting information on where there are toilets was almost impossible,” says Michael Radford, who worked on the map. “The longevity of the project is an indicator of how valuable it is.” With each bathroom location, information is included on accessibility features including baby care, sharps disposal and showers. As “standards for accessibility change,” so does the map, Radford explains. “Some toilets become too antiquated. Toilets might have a ramp, but doorways to the toilet are too narrow for motorised access.” So what makes a great public loo? A toilet so pretty you took photos? A room with a view? One you stumbled upon just in time? “No one has ever identified the most scenic toilet ever,” Halliday says. “But there’s certainly a few contenders.” One might be at Kata Tjuta, a group of rock formations in the Northern Territory. “There was an area where you can park, picnic, walk around and visit the toilet,” Halliday recalls. “I came out of the loo, and suddenly there are these beautiful red rock domes, a blue sky and outback greenery. I thought, this has got to be one of the most scenic views from a toilet ever.” In Point Quobba, Western Australia, a narrow structure “you can only describe as a dunny” sits alone on a vast, sandy plane near the ocean. “It is a raised up toilet in this little wooden structure that faces out over some of the wildest seas I’ve ever seen,” Halliday says. “If you left the door open, which you’re probably not going to, you would be able to see a spectacularly wild part of the Australian coast from the toilet.” For Halliday, all a toilet needs to be memorable are the basics. “It has got to be clean,” she says. “And there has got to be toilet paper.” But she says “it doesn’t necessarily have to be a flushing toilet”, explaining that water conservation efforts in rural Australia sometimes rely on composting toilets that “do the job”. Others might be in it for the architecture and design. In 2019, a public bathroom in western Sydney took out the Total Facilities annual Australia’s best bathroom competition. The luxe bathroom at the Westpoint shopping centre in Blacktown boasts warm wood and clean marble finishes, suspended greenery, unintrusive hand dryers and mosaic art that pays homage to the area’s history. Beyond the aesthetics, it has been heralded for its inviting parents’ room and dedicated space for people with carers. Another beloved restroom in New South Wales sits on Rawson Pass near the peak of Mount Kosciuszko – the highest public toilet in Australia. Halliday describes the bathroom facility as “dug into the side of a mountain like a bunker”. On a Sydney beach, North Bondi Amenities is a popular modern outdoor toilet block bathed in natural light from skylights, with cascading greenery from succulents growing on the roof. Designed by Sam Crawford Architects in 2016, the concrete and terrazzo-tiled space elegantly suits the needs of a barefoot beachgoer needing to change into swimmers, take a toilet break or wait for the next bus in the shade. And in Wycliffe Well, a “quirky little roadhouse” between the NT’s Darwin and Alice Springs “claims to be the place with the most UFO sightings in Australia,” Halliday says. Each building at the roadhouse caravan park and campground is painted with murals of extraterrestrial activity. Halliday calls this “the alien pit stop”. With celestial splashes of purple and blue paint, humanoid silhouettes and “Maliens / Femalians” bathroom signage, Halliday says “the toilets are specifically built for them”. Guardian Australia is on the hunt for Australia’s best public loo. Do you have a favourite? Share it in the commentsThere are few food items across the world as divisive as Spam, the small can of processed pork that inspires either love or revulsion. I’m part of the Asian diaspora and for me, this very American product tastes like home. The story of Spam in Asian communities is a shared story of resourcefulness and resilience. It’s often difficult to articulate to people as they recoil in disgust, that Spam is not only delicious but is also viewed very differently in our parents’ home countries. I share my love for the small, rectangular slab of canned pork with millions of Asians and Pacific Islanders across the globe. The use of Spam is ingrained in the regional cuisines of the Philippines, South Korea, Japan and Hong Kong, which may seem inconsistent with local cooking styles, ingredients and techniques. So, how did this American tinned meat become embraced by so many cuisines? Spam and noodles, Spam and rice, Spam and eggs. Spam has a long history as a convenience product, a food ration, a luxury item and a leftover from US colonialism. It was created in 1937 by Hormel Foods as a way of turning surplus pork shoulder into profit, and to fill a gap in the market for small portions of high quality deli meat with a long shelf life. At the time, other companies were using waste products and offcuts like pork noses to make their deli meat, so Spam’s comparative high quality and affordability made it a hit with families struggling through the Great Depression. Its long shelf life and high protein content also made it an ideal military ration. That’s how Spam began its journey around the globe – as a wartime necessity. By the end of the second world war, the US government had bought about 68,000 metric tonnes of it, to feed its army and as aid for its allies. After the second world war, Spam’s popularity waned in Europe, but remained hugely popular in the Asia-Pacific. In the Philippines, Spam was an expensive commodity sold in retail stores at US army bases, with one tin often costing almost an average daily wage. Its price and its overt “American-ness” was a large part of its appeal – having Spam or other imported canned goods in your pantry became a symbol of affluence. In Hong Kong, where agricultural land (and therefore meat) was scarce and manufacturing was booming, cafes or cha chaan tengs cleverly combined Chinese cooking styles with luxurious, imported foods like Spam, butter and cheese, creating Cantonese interpretations of western fare for factory workers. In Hawaii, the US military introduced Spam as an alternative source of protein when local people lost access to a major part of their diet with restrictions on Japanese-American off-shore fishing during the war. It now forms an intrinsic element of Hawaii cuisine. The Korean war took Spam farther east. US soldiers bartered with Spam for information from local people left hungry by wartime shortages. It was also smuggled out from army bases along with sausages, baked beans and other canned goods. This period of scarcity gave rise to the now quintessential budae jjigae or “army base stew”, the perfect amalgamation of Korean cooking and American ingredients. I grew up in Singapore, eating Spam as part of an “economy/curry rice” offering, with noodles or in fried rice, and at home, where my mum cooked it for us as a treat. Spam is most delicious when simply fried in a pan – salty, soft in the middle, with crispy golden edges. It’s the perfect textural contrast. When diced and stir-fried into rice or eggs, it gives glorious bursts of porky flavour. Simmered, it becomes exceedingly tender and absorbs the flavour of the broth, making it an ideal ingredient in a decadent, spicy stew. Sure, Spam is a relic of American colonialism, but it’s also undeniably Asian. It’s a shining beacon of culinary innovation through hardship, and represents a complex history across many cultures. It’s also absolutely delicious. A plant-based alternative I know encouraging the consumption of a mass-produced meat product comes with huge ethical and environmental issues, but Asia’s love for Spam has also given rise to a brilliant plant-based luncheon meat product called OmniPork. It features as a plant-based “Spam” in McDonald’s in Hong Kong and Macau, and is even available in Australia. It looks and cooks just like Spam does – so feel free to substitute it in to my favourite Spam recipes below. Army base stew (budae jjigae) A rich, spicy relic from the Korean war, budae jjigae is the perfect fusion of traditional Korean flavours with western ingredients. Korean stews or jjigae are generally served sharing-style at the table over a portable stove, but can also be cooked on the stovetop and brought to the table. This is a wonderful dish to enjoy with a group. For this recipe, you’ll need gochujang and gochugaru, which are Korean red pepper paste and flakes. Both can be found in well stocked supermarkets and Asian grocers. Prep 10 min Cook 15 min Serves 4-6 For the stew 75g kimchi ½ can (170g) Spam, sliced 4 cocktail frankfurt sausages or similar, sliced 200g soft tofu, sliced 2 spring onions, cut into 3cm lengths 2 king oyster mushrooms, split lengthwise ½ bunch enoki mushrooms, trimmed 500ml hot stock, plus more to top up 1 slice American cheese 1 packet instant noodles ½ brown onion, sliced 100g sliced rice cakes 1 tbsp baked beans (optional) For the sauce 3 tbsp gochugaru 2 tbsp gochujang 6 garlic cloves, minced 2 tbsp soy sauce 1 tbsp soju or similar rice wine Mix the ingredients for the sauce together in a small bowl and set aside. Assemble the ingredients in a wide, shallow saucepan in layers, starting with the sliced brown onion, mushrooms, kimchi and sauce. Arrange the spam, sausages, baked beans and tofu over the top, pour the stock over the dish and bring to a boil, covered on medium heat. Allow to boil for four to five minutes. Turn the heat down to a simmer, and add the rice cakes and instant noodles without the flavour sachet. Remove the lid and continue cooking. Top with cheese and serve in individual bowls. Add more stock to thin the stew as it continues to cook down. Hong Kong-style Spam and egg macaroni soup Macaroni soup and Spam sit among thick french toast, scrambled egg in pineapple buns, and dim sum as part of Hong Kong’s unique breakfast offering. It’s quick and convenient to prepare, kid-friendly and comforting. Prep 10 min Cook 10 min Serves 2 100g elbow macaroni 1cm ginger, peeled and sliced 750ml chicken stock ½ can (170g) Spam, sliced 1 spring onion, sliced 1 tbsp soy sauce 1 tbsp oyster sauce 2 eggs 2 tbsp vegetable oil 1 bunch baby bok choy, split lengthwise and blanched Sesame oil, to serve Heat one tablespoon of vegetable oil in a medium saucepan, and stir-fry the sliced ginger until fragrant and golden (one to two minutes). Add the chicken stock, soy sauce and oyster sauce and bring to the boil. Add the macaroni and cook for seven to eight minutes, following the packet instructions. While the macaroni is cooking, heat the remaining one tablespoon of oil in a frying pan and pan-fry the Spam until golden brown on both sides. Remove the Spam and set aside, then fry the eggs in the same pan. To assemble, divide the macaroni and soup into two bowls, top with slices of Spam, the bok choy, an egg each and sliced spring onions. Ladle more soup over the top, sprinkle with a little sesame oil, and serve. Spam, potato and green chilli fritters These potato fritters are enormously addictive. I can eat five or six in one sitting before the guilt kicks in. Use a good all-rounder potato for this dish, like a desiree or dutch cream. Prep 20 min Cook 20 min Makes 14 fritters 1kg desiree potatoes, peeled 1 can Spam 1 egg, beaten ½ bunch parsley, finely chopped 3 spring onions, green part only, finely chopped 3 long green chillies, deseeded and finely chopped Salt and ground white pepper, to taste Vegetable oil, for frying Cut the potatoes into 3-4cm pieces and cook in boiling water until tender. Strain and steam dry, mash and allow to cool briefly. Add the Spam and mash thoroughly, then fold in the egg, spring onion, parsley and green chilli. Season with salt and white pepper to taste. In a heavy-bottom or nonstick frying pan heat enough oil to reach 3cm in depth. Shape the mix into patties, 5cm in diameter, and place directly and gently into the hot oil. Fry for four to five minutes until golden brown and crisp, turning only once. Serve immediately. Spam ‘sisig’ Sisig is a Philippine dish of crispy grilled and chopped pork (usually pig’s head and belly) with chicken livers, in a bright and acidic marinade. Classic sisig features papaya, green mango, fish and other meats, but the modern variety came about from Filipinos cleverly repurposing excess pork from US Clark airbase in Pampanga. Traditional sisig requires several stages of cooking, but this recipe only needs one. The flavourful dressing is the perfect match for the fatty, crispy meat. Serve on a sizzling hotplate if you have one, with plenty of steamed rice. Prep 10 min Cook 15 min Serves 4 2 cans (680g) Spam, cut into 2cm dice ½ red onion, diced 2 birds eye chillies, sliced 1 green chilli, sliced 1 tsp fish sauce 1 tsp calamansi lime juice, calamansi limes are sometimes available online and from specialty grocers; if you can’t find them – and don’t have a friendly Filipino neighbour to ask – this can be substituted for regular lime 1 tsp white vinegar 1 tbsp vegetable oil Black pepper 1 egg yolk, optional Heat oil in a frying pan over medium heat. Add the Spam and fry over medium-high heat until the it is crispy and golden. Transfer the crispy Spam into a bowl and combine with the diced onion, chilli, fish sauce, lime juice, vinegar and season with black pepper to taste. Heat a sizzling plate or pan until smoking, add a dab of butter and serve the sisig directly on the hotplate.Ashleigh Cooper has spent the new year indoors. Around her, in the suburbs of Melbourne, Covid cases are soaring. It’s a story repeated in every Australian state, except Western Australia. Australia recorded more cases in the first two weeks of 2022 than in the previous two years combined. For most, the threat posed by Covid has eased – 92.4% of Australians over the age of 16 are fully vaccinated, and 18% have also had a booster shot. And the Omicron variant, which has ripped through the country since December, appears to result in a less severe illness, in most cases, than previous variants of Covid-19. Public health orders enforced by strict and punitive laws have been replaced by a mantra of personal responsibility. It is up to individuals to determine and manage their own risk. For the most vulnerable people, the only way to manage this risk is to retreat. Cooper is disabled and immunocompromised. She went into self-isolation two weeks ago. “For me the risk is too high,” she says. “It is very strange to watch the rest of the world say ‘we will go out and it will be fine and we will get sick and it will be fine’. I would not be fine – I had my booster shot last week and was severely unwell for five days. I do not want to get Covid.” Guardian Australia spoke to more than 40 people about how they were feeling at the start of the third year of the pandemic. Many like Cooper have gone into self-isolation to protect themselves or a vulnerable loved one. Many others say they have chosen to go back into something resembling lockdown until their children can be vaccinated or until the outbreak peaks. Cooper says she felt significantly safer when Melbourne was in lockdown and finds the argument that people should “get over” their concern about a global pandemic “incredibly invalidating”. “We should absolutely acknowledge that [lockdown] was bad and a lot of people suffered, but a lot of people are also alive now because of it,” she says. “I know that I was safer.” Also invalidating is the implication, from some public health messaging and public responses to death announcements, that a disease is less devastating if most of its victims are people who have pre-existing conditions. “Almost everyone has a pre-existing condition,” Cooper says. “What’s the price that we are willing to pay in order for people to be able to go and have brunch? “Are you willing to justify risking the health of vulnerable people for that privilege?” ‘Utter confusion about what we should be doing’ Most people who spoke to Guardian Australia are still recovering from the impact of long lockdowns and do not want a return to restrictions. They just want an indication from governments both state and federal that they will be supported and able to easily access tests and healthcare as the outbreak, and any new variants to come, rolls on. Martin Radzaj says he has found the start of 2022 to be the most difficult time in the pandemic because of the “utter confusion about what we should be doing”. He also feels the loss of the sense of collective action which, for some, underscored the long lockdowns of 2020 and 2021. “The thought of lockdown again is what is giving me a lot of anxiety and a lot of dread … it scares me,” says Melbourne man James Burke. Two years of mostly home schooling has given his youngest child, who started kindergarten in 2020, social anxiety, and his older child had a panic attack at the prospect of returning to face-to-face learning. “We paid the price [of lockdown], we bought the government time to build capacity in our health services. And they lost control in just two weeks.” The anxiety of past outbreaks has been replaced with anger at state and federal governments, and a growing sense of despair that the pandemic will not end, at least not any time soon. Hannah*, a vision-impaired support worker in Melbourne, says the 2021 lockdowns left her feeling “emptied out”. “I felt like half a person,” she says. Like many who spoke to Guardian Australia, she focused on the vaccine rollout – when everyone who was eligible was double-vaccinated it would be OK. Then Omicron happened, the inevitable consequence of a lack of global vaccine equity, and the promise of a return to normal life has been pushed back once more. “It now feels as though it is going to define parts of my life trajectory where I was hoping it wouldn’t,” she says. “Two years [living in a pandemic] is very different to five years when you only get three good months every year.” Northcote woman Phoebe* is also feeling a sense of arrested development. The public servant, 25, contracted Covid along with 16 others at a house party late last month. She still can’t smell or taste anything and several of her friends remain unwell. “Some people are going to get chronic illness from that, and we are in our 20s,” she says. “Every single one of us was double-vaccinated as soon as we were eligible but we are not eligible yet for a booster. It just feels like there’s no plan and younger people are bearing the brunt of it.” Phoebe says her social circle has split in two: those who have had Covid and are now feeling invulnerable for 30 days – despite warnings that earlier reinfection is possible – and those who are curbing social activities to try to avoid it. ‘Have we given up?’ Thomas Barbera says his friend groups have done the same, and it has caused some uncomfortable conversations. “People do not want to feel that you are judging them or saying that what they are doing is unsafe – and it is not inherently unsafe, they just have different risk tolerance and different priorities than you,” he says. Barbera says he is still struggling to come to terms with a health policy that expects and accepts that hundreds of thousands of Australians will get Covid, after two years where a handful of cases would send the city into lockdown. “Two years of having ‘get a test’ drummed into you and then suddenly people are told not to get a test unless they fit certain criteria … I found that really hard,” he says. “It felt like, have we given up?” His store of rapid antigen tests, bought in early December, has been slowly dwindling as he hands them out to friends who have been identified as close contacts. Almost everyone who spoke to Guardian Australia said they would feel more comfortable moving around if they had access to free, readily available rapid antigen tests. Australian government frontbencher Simon Birmingham told the ABC on Friday that demand for testing, from both PCR and rapid tests, had been “far in excess of what has been modelled in Australia and all around the world”. The Australian government has since ordered $62m worth of rapid antigen tests. Kylie*, a midwife working in Melbourne hospitals, says despite difficulties with testing and high case numbers there is cause to be optimistic. “There are more women with the virus who are having babies, but unlike 2021 they are not gasping for breath,” she says. “In the past fortnight none of my patients have gone to ICU. So for me, right now, I am seeing the light.” Milly*, a young woman from Melbourne, says that two years of going in and out of lockdown has caused a downshift in her lifestyle that feels akin to being retired. “I have adjusted to living a more sheltered life and enjoy being in my house, running the same route, cycling the same loop, doing the Wordle, going to bed on time,” she says. “‘[The] big difference is I have no energy for or interest in working, just want to read books and chill. Took a while for the anxiety to die down to get to this point but now I don’t want to do anything else.” Richard Chigwin is experiencing his third summer without customers. He owns a series of ecotourism huts in the New South Wales Blue Mountains and lost the 2020 summer holidays to bushfires and 2021 to coronavirus. 2022 was supposed to be different, but “It feels exactly like there is a lockdown. You are not even fielding inquiries – it’s school holidays in January, that’s not right.” As a sole trader, Chigwin wasn’t eligible for government support in earlier rounds. Other business owners say they are finding this summer more difficult than previous seasons because there was no financial aid available. A Victorian-based consultant told Guardian Australia they were still receiving commercial rent relief until this week. Now that has ended too. “Like everyone else, we just have to muddle through on our own.” Lydia Napoli also works in hospitality in NSW. “It’s a nightmare,” she says. “My husband is working overtime, heaps of chefs and [front-of-house staff are] unwell or close contacts, and there is no support. I’m double vaxxed and feeling like, what was the point? There’s still high chances of new variants. It’s all just exhausting.” Karen McVean, a Melbourne-based remedial massage therapist, has chosen a different approach. “As the Covid years continue we are losing our magical thinking it will go away and not be a changing burden to our life,” she says. “Personally, I feel better with accepting that Covid is an ongoing issue. How can I best get on with living my best life?”Some may presume that catharsis can be found in memoir writing, but for Joe Simpson, putting Touching the Void down on paper was “horrible”. He retreated to a friend’s attic to write the book over seven weeks, purely because the facts of his stricken ascent up Siula Grande in the Peruvian Andes as a 25-year-old had been greatly misrepresented through rumours in the climbing world. Now, decades on, he’s flummoxed to see his story as a play, making its Australian premiere in Melbourne on 17 January after receiving five-star reviews in the UK. “There was obviously something in that story that fascinated everybody,” Simpson says from an attic in the UK, where he’s tearing himself away from the cricket. “It’s not simply rubbernecking. A degree of it is that returning-from-the-dead stuff that’s very much part of the northern hemisphere mythology, from Norse sagas to Jesus Christ. People think, I’m going to get into deep shit someday. I’m going to get cancer, I’m going to lose my job – whatever. What would I do in that situation?” In 1985, Simpson and fellow climber Simon Yates decided to tackle the previously unclimbed West Face. After a series of calamities, Simpson fell from an ice cliff, breaking his leg. Yates laboriously tried to lower him to safety, successfully clearing 3,000 feet, but as storm conditions worsened, the pair became stuck, with Yates in danger of being pulled from the cliff. He made the call to cut the rope, which meant Simpson, who Yates was unable to see or communicate with, would fall. “Left for dead” is the way the scenario is often described. “Eventually there was nothing in the story that you could recognise except the cutting of the rope,” Simpson says of those distortions. “My peers – people who should know better – were making judgment calls on what Simon had done without actually knowing any of the facts.” Back in 1988, Simpson expected to sell around 500 copies of Touching the Void within the climbing world, but he’s shifted more than 1m. In 2003, a Bafta-winning docudrama of the same name reconstructed the action and became the most successful documentary in British cinema history. Then in 2018, the book was adapted for the stage by Scottish playwright David Greig. Now the Melbourne Theatre Company has taken on that script, with Petra Kalive as associate director. “David was able to balance the story, so we get Joe’s epic hero’s journey, but also Simon’s journey. They were both in an impossible position and they’re both heroes in their own right, but their trajectories are very different,” says Kalive. Yates approves of play. “It’s a feelgood story,” he told PA Media after seeing the UK production. “It all works out in the end. I think we were very lucky. We got away with it.” The titular void becomes a character in its own right, as well as a metaphor for death. “That feels right for this production, especially doing it at this time,” Kalive says. “I thought a play about endurance and hope would be good when we programmed it, but had no idea that it would have so many resonances now.” Set designer Andrew Bailey created a mountain-like structure that’s “abstract” but requires the actors to work at height. There were five weeks of rehearsal, which included rock-wall climbing in the CBD. Kevin Hofbauer, who plays Simpson, used to be an athlete, which helps; Joe Klocek, equally athletic, plays Yates. And Karl Richmond plays Richard Hawking, a non-climbing backpacker who looked after base camp, for comic relief. And then there’s Sarah, played by Lucy Durack. She’s Simpson’s sister, used as a device to provoke her brother in his darkest hour and explore the many moral challenges of mountaineering. There’s a moment at Simpson’s fictional funeral when Sarah delivers a line that taps into the perception that mountaineering is a selfish pursuit, chief among the reasons being that some mountaineers put reaching the summit above human life: “I lost my moral compass. Do you happen to have one? Oh no, you’re a climber.” Simpson has now written five non-fiction books and two novels that all explore the ethics of climbing; none more so than 1997’s Dark Shadows Falling, triggered by an incident a year earlier in which two Japanese climbers allegedly failed to help an Indian climber whose body remains on Everest to this day. “One of the climbers said there is no morality above 1,000 metres and I got absolutely bloody livid at that,” Simpson says. “There’s no way a summit is more important. The very least you do is you sit with that man and you hold his hand and you give him water.” He’s also disturbed by the environmental impact of hundreds of people at a time at base camp, putting their bucket-list dreams of conquering Everest above exploring the area in a sustainable way. “I don’t regard what’s going on at Everest as mountaineering, frankly,” he says. “You know – 600 people climbing up a rope that somebody else put in, breathing oxygen that somebody else carried up … There are climbers today like we were in 1982, trying to do the hardest things you possibly can in the best style, trying to climb to the aestheticism of the line.” In his book This Game of Ghosts, Simpson touches on childhood and what might have set him on his course. Now, he says, “I think being sent away to school at eight has a fairly major effect on your personality. Suddenly torn away from your parents. Maybe it enables you to be more independent.” When he was 15 he rejected Roman Catholic indoctrination, but although he lost his faith, he found a sense of spirituality in mountaineering that gave the pursuit great meaning. “You can put your head down to sleep and see fossils in the stone that you’re lying on,” he says. “And you can look up – the starlight is just extraordinary, especially at high altitude. You’re looking at light coming from stars that stopped existing 100,000 years ago. That kind of spirituality is your part of being Gaia.” Simpson continued climbing until 2009, at which point he was in so much pain descending from a summit in Nepal that he realised all the “cheques I cashed in my 20s had come through”. As he says, there are old climbers and bold climbers, but no old, bold climbers. These days he is a keen fly-fisher (“not quite the same”) but the grief of losing climbing took five years to get over. “It’s how you define yourself,” he says. “Every year you’re going away on a trip and it was that sort of steamboat whistle – the aircraft is going down the runway and you’re going off on a great adventure, thinking, ‘What’s going to happen this time?’” Touching the Void is on 17 January to 19 February at Southbank Theatre, The Sumner.A woman with chronic illnesses and an immunocompromised partner and the single mother of a toddler are among those being told they’ll have their benefits cut if they don’t attend face-to-face job agency appointments, despite an unprecedented surge of Covid cases. Welfare mutual obligations, which have been suspended in Covid-affected areas for much of the pandemic, were reintroduced nationally in late October. Last week the government rebuffed calls to pause them, despite soaring infection numbers. Guardian Australia has confirmed that while some job agencies are allowing people subject to mutual obligations to meet their requirements from home – by conducting meetings by phone or online, for example – others are insisting participants attend in person. A participant in the disability employment services program, who did not wish to be named, said her provider warned her that she must attend a group job coaching meeting scheduled for next week. The 23-year-old, who lives in Adelaide, said she lived with chronic illnesses but was most worried about infecting her loved ones. “My partner has an autoimmune disorder and is on immunosuppressant medication,” she said. “I’m not really comfortable going out and potentially exposing myself and him. “He works at the airport but he has decided to take unpaid leave because of the risk.” Jobseekers face having their payments suspended if they fail or refuse to attend a scheduled appointment with their employment services provider. For much of the pandemic, the government paused mutual obligations – which meant jobseekers could either continue receiving services online, or stop taking part in meetings. During the period, welfare payment suspensions for “non-compliance” were not applied. This time, the government has rebuffed calls to return to those measures, instead setting lockdowns – which have been all but ruled out by state leaders – as the marker to dictate when mutual obligations might be stopped again. Lauren Colvin, 38, is another welfare recipient who is being required to attend face-to-face appointments. The single mother, who has a 17-month-old son, learned last week she was being forced on to the ParentsNext program, a controversial pre-employment program for those on parenting payments that has been decried as sexist. “I have to take my toddler [to the face-to-face meeting],” Colvin said. “We’ve been basically isolated. It’s really scary.” Colvin, who lives near Newcastle, said she was told by Centrelink she would need to attend a face-to-face appointment on Monday with a ParentsNext provider. The program is supposed to be aimed at getting those on parenting payments on to a path towards employment. But Colvin, who is a qualified primary school teacher, is already in the middle of a career shift, having completed a bachelor’s degree last year. She starts a master’s of psychology this year. Colvin believes she is not eligible for ParentsNext because she is already studying, a claim backed by guidelines published online, but Centrelink has insisted she must go to the meeting. “He just kept repeating the same line, ‘We are not currently under lockdown, therefore you must fulfil your obligations,’” Colvin said. “That was what he just kept reverting back to. “I tried to contact the complaints line, but just haven’t been able to get through.” Another participant in the jobactive employment program, who is based in Melbourne, asked for his next meeting to be over the phone rather than in person but was refused. He said he was told “it’s the government’s rules and I have to do it or my payment will be cut”. “Given this is an office with a bunch of random people going in and out all day, it’s scaring me a lot,” he said. Cassandra Goldie, the chief executive of the Australian Council of Social Service, said mutual obligations should be suspended. “We should not be forcing people to attend unnecessary, risky face-to-face activities, like group job-searching or appointments with jobservice providers, under threat of being cut off from their life-sustaining income support,” she said. Kristin O’Connell, of the Antipoverty Centre, said the government should suspend mutual obligations in a “return to the strategies that kept us safe in 2020”. “Moving activities online doesn’t go far enough – payment suspensions must be removed immediately,” O’Connell said. “We are desperately searching for Covid tests, trying to meet our basic needs in the face of shortages, and do all this on poverty payments. People need the time and space to focus on keeping themselves safe, and caring for loved ones, and recovering if they fall sick.” A Department of Employment spokesperson said providers were required to “ensure face-to-face service delivery is safe, permitted by the relevant jurisdiction’s health orders, appropriate to the participant and staff, is reasonable in the circumstances and beneficial to the participant”. “If a participant feels that they have a valid reason for not attending face-to-face services, such as a health or Covid-19 related issue, they should advise their provider before their appointment or activity,” the spokesperson said. “Providers are required to find the participant an alternative and suitable service if the participant has a valid reason. “Additionally, anyone who is sick, whether that be related to Covid or any other illness, is directed to isolate or is caring for someone who is isolating, can seek an exemption to their mutual obligation requirements.” A spokesperson for the Department of Social Services, which runs the Disability Employment Services program, said participants were “only required to attend face-to-face appointments where it is safe to do so”. “Participants concerned about face-to-face appointments affecting their health or that of an immediate family or household member, are offered alternative servicing arrangements,” the spokesperson said. However the spokesperson confirmed it was DES providers that “determine whether appointments and other mutual obligations activities can take place over the phone or digitally”.In its inaugural 2017 season, the AFLW burst onto the national sporting stage on a warm Friday night in early February. In its sixth chapter it is squarely a summer offering from the AFL, an eventuality which has gathered mixed responses and equally varied outcomes. From a player perspective, it is hard to know when the best time of year for the season would be. For such a physically taxing game, the hot weather alone is enough reason to question the December-March window. When the AFL explored India as a potential international venue for AFLM matches, one of the considerations was whether they could convince teams that the hot Indian weather was suitable for the game. Yet a similarly sweltering Australian summer is considered appropriate for AFLW players who, due to the part-time nature of their contracts, have far less time dedicated to conditioning, fitness and pre-season than their male counterparts. This year’s season start was delayed due to Covid-19. Its initial schedule, commencing at the beginning of December 2021, would have allowed the players a mid-season break over Christmas and the new year before returning in January. While not the fault of the AFL, the postponed start has meant athletes were expected to train throughout the holiday period in preparation for a 7 January start. While this may make sense for full-time athletes from summer codes such as tennis or cricket, AFLW players are pausing day jobs to train and play at elite levels and then trying to resume their careers post-season. It is possible we are seeing the effects of the huge physical demand on the playing group already. In two rounds season-ending injuries have sidelined star players. Some of this can be attributed to the lack of game time provided by the pre-season, with clubs playing only one practice match or none at all. A further delay to allow for extra practice matches, and a buffer time between the season proper and finals, could make for a safer competition. Again, however, this would rely on players being able to take even more time off work and study. Many players would not begrudge a summer season as it allows them to play in pathway competitions for the remainder of the year. The current shortened season played in winter would see many athletes play less football overall, similarly under-serving their bodies, their talent, and the competition. We often hear of the need for ‘clear air’ – a magical time in the sporting calendar where AFLW could be given its due attention by broadcasters and audiences alike. However, this has never actually happened. Initially squashed between the Australian Open and the beginning of the AFLM season, the W has never had a free go at audiences or broadcast. Even the clubs push out content daily on their AFLM teams’ pre-season happenings throughout the AFLW season. If the AFL wanted to prioritise ‘clear air’ for the AFLW, they would recognise it as a winter sport and make time to stage it alongside the already lengthy AFLM season. The AFLW’s placement at the start of summer, combined with extra draft ceremonies after the AFLM season, all point to the AFL’s desire to ‘own’ the entire year. The AFL’s participation marketing push this year squarely exploits this idea with the tagline ‘taste summer footy’ paired with the image of an ice-cream cone in the shape of a football. The downside of this approach for the AFL, is the possibility of fan fatigue. Right now, the AFLW is competing with the Ashes, the Big Bash League and the Australian Open, to name a few. As part of our discussion about the AFLW in summer, The Outer Sanctum polled listeners on the ideal time for the season to run. The response by fans was a clear preference for a winter season, with many assuming it would ultimately find its place there. No doubt, devoted fans will sweat it out in summer until then. What we cannot shake, however, is that the shorter season and part-time status of the players create the impression that the AFLW is still the summer sideshow to the main event in winter. That is, the men’s game. Were it to be played in winter, there is a risk the AFLM media coverage would drown out the AFLW. However given the way the AFL has built an ever-growing audience around the AFLW, perhaps a concerted marketing campaign by the AFL could circumvent this. The ultimate solution for all would be a full 18-round season played in the winter and, one day, equal pay and full-time status. Time (and some major sponsors) will determine how long before we reach that horizon.One hundred doctors, including specialists, consultants and locums for remote areas, are locked out of Western Australia, with Mark McGowan’s government refusing G2G passes despite the entry of Covid-19 being mere weeks away. Since the spread of the Omicron variant in late 2021, the WA government has progressively shuttered entry from anyone entering from the eastern states, making it now close to impossible for anyone to enter WA, diplomats and state officials aside. As the reopening deadline of 5 February approaches, shutout doctors – who already have jobs and work contracts in the state but can’t get a G2G pass to enter – are warning the health system needs adequate time to prepare for the influx of Covid-19, and the state government should now grant all doctors a G2G pass as a matter of urgency. Heather* is a senior doctor who is in training to be a specialist and has had her application to enter WA refused three times in recent weeks. Her hospital job is expecting her to begin work in late January. “I am a specialist-trainee – but there are also anaesthetists and consultants that are getting rejected and that’s extremely concerning,” said Heather, speaking to the Guardian on the condition of anonymity. “What I think is upsetting is these rejections are happening to the really essential doctors – people who are due at community clinics or in remote regions where their skills are absolutely critical.” With mortgage repayments to make and no clear outline for when entry will be granted, Heather is now looking at applying for locum roles in other states. “The state needs to decide should all doctors be allowed in as a group, or should we cherry-pick the specialists we need most – ICU, anaesthetists – and give them priority, with the rest having to wait,” Heather said. “The reality is every state is under a lot of health pressure, so it’s not a realistic excuse from WA to say the vulnerable communities need special protection. I am sorry but there are vulnerable communities in many other parts of Australia. The main difference with WA’s vulnerable communities is there is a much greater distance between Perth and the Kimberley, say.” According to a group chat viewed by the Guardian, around 100 doctors are in a similar position to Heather. All of them have jobs lined up, or are returning to senior roles they have held in critical and specialist areas for years. “In a [health] system that’s already understaffed makes perfect sense that we’re all having such trouble getting in …” wrote one doctor. “Especially with the border opening only a month away, the mind boggles.” “Yes, staffing at a crisis point without Covid,” wrote another. “I fear total collapse of the system when Covid arrives.” In a statement, McGowan’s office said the Office of the Chief Health Officer had received, processed and approved more than 130 applications for entry from health officials in January 2022. Mark Duncan-Smith, the WA president of the Australian Medical Association, said many doctors were gaining entry but the process was complex. “It’s a problem of process, not exclusions,” said Duncan-Smith, who said the AMA had assisted several doctors who had difficulties obtaining G2G passes, despite having employment contracts and letters of support. “They’re not being excluded, the problem is not in the approvals, these excluded people are having problems navigating the system. Should the system be simpler? Yes.” Western Australia’s opposition leader, Mia Davies, said it was “extremely concerning” that doctors who want to come home to WA “to work in our understaffed health system are not being granted exemptions”. “Immediate attention should be given to allowing these vital health workers to come into WA safely, as they will be key in bolstering WA’s hospital and medical workforce ahead of February 5,” she said. “I’m sure a majority of West Australians would like to see common sense applied to safely bring these essential medical workers into the state to support us through this next stage of Covid.” Libby Mettam, an MP and deputy leader of the WA Liberal party, said any doctors facing difficulties entering at a time of critical health need for WA was “completely unacceptable”. “It is completely unacceptable that health workers, including doctors, are being locked out of WA when they could be assisting our under-resourced health system ahead of the border opening in less than a month’s time,” Mettam said. “Given WA’s health worker shortage and the inevitable influx of Covid in the community in less than a month’s time, the McGowan government should be doing everything to ensure these health workers can work here, which includes health worker exemptions.” WA is scheduled to open to Australia – and the world – at midnight on 5 February. The McGowan government announced the reopening date in December when the state’s double-dose vaccination rate hit 80%. However, in parts of the Kimberley and Pilbara the vaccination rate remains much lower, with some remote Indigenous communities not yet hitting 50%.Australia’s commercial free-to-air TV channels have called on the federal government to introduce legislation guaranteeing them prominence on smart TV home screens, claiming they are becoming “increasingly hard to find” among global streaming rivals such as Netflix. Televisions increasingly include apps for the various streaming services available, including Netflix, Stan, Disney+ and ABC iview, as well as the commercial channels’ own apps. However, Free TV Australia, which represents free-to-air stations including Seven, Nine and Ten, has flagged growing concern that the commercial stations are becoming increasingly hard to find on smart TVs. “TV manufacturers and operating system developers increasingly exert control over which options are displayed to consumers, directing viewers to those services that can pay the highest price for preferred placement on the home screen,” Free TV Australia said in a submission to the parliamentary inquiry on social media and online harms this month. There was also concern that streaming-specific buttons on remote controls as well as favourable placement on smart TV home screens for other streaming services were diverting viewers away from free-to-air TV. “This means that decisions about whether free, licensed terrestrial services, together with broadcast video on demand (BVOD) apps will be readily available to Australian viewers, and if so on what terms, are increasingly being made in boardrooms in Japan, South Korea, and the US,” Free TV Australia said. “This risk becomes even greater as manufacturers seek to monetise prominent spots on user interfaces and to reach lucrative deals with global streaming services over and above local, Australian FTA broadcast services. Manufacturers see themselves as distributors and expect a ‘clip of the ticket’ or some form of payment for access to their screen real estate.” The organisation argued streaming companies could never replace the value of free-to-air TV. “Global entertainment platforms such as Netflix, Disney+ and Amazon Prime cannot cut to breaking news to cover health advice updates from government or provide critical bushfire updates,” Free TV Australia said. “Prominence and accessibility of free TV services are therefore essential to ensuring the government’s policy goals are achieved, including those relating to accurate, impartial, and trustworthy news; iconic sporting events; and provision of emergency information.” The organisation said legislation was needed to ensure TV manufacturers made it easy for Australians to find free-to-air channels and apps, proposing a “prominence framework” requiring “free, easy and universal access” to free-to-air services, and for Australians to be made aware of free-to-air services. “Action is needed now to secure the long-term availability and prominence of Australian commercial FTA content services for Australian viewers,” Free TV Australia said. Guardian Australia sought comment from the two biggest TV companies in Australia – Samsung and Sony. Samsung declined to comment. Free TV Australia also welcomed the government’s social media exposure draft legislation, released for comment late last year, as a means to reduce the defamation risk media companies currently face for comments on social media following the high court’s Dylan Voller defamation ruling late last year. The ruling found owners of pages and groups on social media are considered publishers for third-party comments on posts, and therefore may be liable for defamatory comments made. The legislation would make the social media platforms the publisher of the content, but would provide a defence for the companies if they facilitate identification of the user who made the comment. Free TV said since the judgment media companies had significantly limited comments on their stories on social media. “News media organisations have limited the number and range of articles that they share on social media, and are more often closing the comments section entirely, which prevents any discussion of the news and current affairs they are reporting. “While the Anti-Trolling Bill is still under consideration, media companies continue to be legally responsible for this material. It will be important, in final drafting of the Anti-Trolling Bill, to ensure that social media services cannot contract-out of legal liability.” The inquiry has closed submissions and will report back to parliament in February.Imagine if three witches in a forest glade had offered England this deal on a dark November night. Steve Smith, scorer of 11 Ashes hundreds in 20 outings, with an average of over 100 in his previous two Ashes series, would not add to those centuries and would average 30. David Warner, with an Ashes average in Australia of 60, would not make a hundred and would average 34. Marnus Labuschagne, on a streak of 13 Tests averaging 73, would make one small and lucky hundred and average 42. Fast-bowling leader Josh Hazlewood would miss four Tests, Pat Cummins would miss one, and Australia would call on three replacement quicks with two Tests between them. The thing about witches in a forest glade, as Macbeth could attest, is that beneath the promises lies a catch. Not that England took many of those, but still. Despite all of the above going the touring team’s way, they experienced a series thrashing with few statistical peers. Those top-line players were the focus of supposed years of planning, yet it was Australia’s second rank that dominated whenever called upon. Travis Head, player of the series for bookending it with two fast centuries at crucial times. Usman Khawaja, his Covid replacement in Sydney, making twin hundreds in the match to join a storied club. Marcus Harris with the decisive hand in Melbourne. Just like previous tours, when the likes of Shaun Marsh, Mitchell Marsh and Brad Haddin reached an ascendancy with the bat that their broader careers would not have suggested possible. With the ball, there was Scott Boland with the frankly 1800s numbers of 18 wickets at 9.55. Jhye Richardson played once for a match-winning five for 42 – and as a bonus, has the highest batting strike rate ever in an Ashes series for his 17 from seven balls. Mitchell Starc’s history suggested that he would flag but he finished with 19 wickets at 24.35. Michael Neser, with one Test, was the only one of Australia’s nine bowlers to finish with an average higher than Starc. James Anderson was the only one of England nine bowlers to finish with an average lower than Starc. This pattern of the supporting cast taking the spotlight was demonstrated no more dramatically than by Cameron Green on the final night of the series. He had already made scores of 74 and 23, striking the ball crisply to form partnerships of 121 with Head in the first innings and 49 with Alex Carey in the third. The only dual contributor with the bat, he was the main reason Australia had a lead of 270 going into the fourth. Then he showed up with the ball. With England batting under darkening skies, descending into evening with floodlights glaring and the pink Kookaburra showing life, you can guess who would be perceived as the main threats. Starc, the day-night king, with 55 wickets in the format. And Cummins, with his diabolical seam movement, third on that list with 30. Zak Crawley and Rory Burns scored quickly against both of them, first with edges, then with increasing fluency. On-drives, square flicks, proper stuff. Nathan Lyon, with 34 pink-ball wickets? He wasn’t called upon. Boland, with his knack for carnage? Leg-glanced repeatedly. England tallied the best opening stand in the series for either side with 68. Then came Green. Where other bowlers had been survived, the big names seen off, the new arrival brought pace, extreme bounce, and an around-the-wicket line to the left-handers. Burns needed a long DRS review to survive a possible outside edge in Green’s first over. He didn’t survive the inside edge on to his stumps, the ball leaping at his attempted leave. Dawid Malan was bounced and hit on the helmet before being bowled in the same way, left with nowhere to go. It was a different piece of work to Crawley, a right-hander who likes driving. Green came over the wicket, accepted one lovely boundary as the cost of doing business, then pitched up again with enough outswing to take the outside edge. That meant a burst of three for 17 within five overs, the first three wickets to fall, the two set players gone, and England’s innings soon to fall into disarray. That same old story, from useful contributor to match-defining threat. Green finished the series with 13 wickets at 15.76, of which only two were tailenders, and of which nine were well-set players on scores of 25 or more. Nothing was more impressive than his final burst, knocking the top off an innings when others could not. Green, Head, Boland: these were not the players who England had planned for, but they had plans of their own.Maggie Brown’s obituary of Anthony Smith refers to his brilliance as a fundraiser. As deputy curator of the British Film Institute’s National Film Archive under Tony’s directorship in the 1980s, I witnessed at first-hand his determined, but respectful, wooing of the cinephile J Paul Getty Jr on behalf of the BFI. The results of this included the construction of the archive’s JPGJ Conservation Centre in Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, the refurbishment of the National Film theatre and the purchase of a new BFI HQ. He also recognised the value of cultural celebrity, and oversaw the creation of the BFI fellowships, the first of which were awarded to Orson Welles, David Lean, Marcel Carné, Satyajit Ray, and Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger as part of its golden jubilee celebrations in 1983. Tony was shrewd, pragmatic and fun to work with. He never pretended to be busy when he wasn’t and would readily ring down to one of us and suggest lunch because he didn’t “have anything else to do that day” – a disarming way of indicating that he had had a successful morning.Security costs are a controversial issue for the royal family, with neither Buckingham Palace nor the government willing to discuss arrangements publicly. As security is paid for from the public purse, the issue is often weaponised by critics who argue police protection should not automatically be conferred on non-working royals and extended family members. There are calls for the Duke of York to pay for his own security after being stripped of his royal patronages and the use of the HRH style in any official capacity in the fallout from the US civil sex assault lawsuit he faces. In this case, Prince Harry has offered to personally pay for Scotland Yard protection for him and his family while they are in the UK. A Home Office decision prevents him from doing this. His concerns are that his private security team does not have adequate jurisdiction abroad or access to UK intelligence information required to keep him and his family safe. He also warns of damage to the UK’s reputation should a member of the royal family be harmed on its soil. Security provision for the Sussexes was one of the key issues when they announced they were stepping down as working royals. Their website at the time suggested they believed the Home Office, through the Metropolitan police, should continue to provide protection for the family. Speaking to the chatshow host Oprah Winfrey in 2021, Harry said he was told that “due to our change of status – we would no longer be ‘official’ members of the royal family”. He said he had been shocked by this and “pushed back” on the issue, arguing that there had been no change of threat or risk to the couple. Meghan, during the same interview, told how she had written to her husband’s family urging them not to pull his security, but had been told “it’s just not possible”. They disclosed they had put in place “privately funded security” for their move to the US after then president Donald Trump said America would not meet the bills for the couple’s protection. Harry later told Winfrey they were paying for private security through deals they secured with Netflix and Spotify. Harry has said he “inherited” a risk on being born into the royal family. His legal team said that risk was “for life”. In a statement, the prince’s legal representative said: “He remains sixth in line to the throne, served two tours of combat duty in Afghanistan, and in recent years his family has been subjected to well-documented neo-Nazi and extremist threats. While his role within the institution has changed, his profile as a member of the royal family has not. Nor has the threat to him and his family.” A judicial review is a court proceedings that challenges the lawfulness of a decision by a public body. Judicial review claims must pass a “threshold test” before they can proceed. Harry has filed his claims, and the Home Office must file an “acknowledgment of service” and their grounds for resisting the application. The high court will now consider whether there is an arguable case for judicial review. Where permission is granted, the claim proceeds to a substantive hearing.The inconclusive ending of David Baddiel’s article (‘Why don’t Jews play Jews?’ – David Baddiel on the row over Helen Mirren as Golda Meir, 12 January) is unavoidable, because the only way to achieve consistency is to revert to the assumption that actors can act. Take the case of the late Richard Griffiths’s posh gay Uncle Monty in Withnail and I. He came from an underprivileged background and was married to a woman. To have disqualified him on the basis of the latter but not the former seems risibly arbitrary. Peter Davis Welwyn, Hertfordshire • Re “Face masks make people look more attractive, study finds” (13 January), I can confirm they do. As an 83-year-old, they cover 80% of my wrinkles, leaving only laughter lines showing. Joyce Turcotte Winster, Derbyshire • How interesting. Three rich, privileged men – Prince Andrew, Boris Johnson and Novak Djokovic – all finally realise that the rules actually do apply to them. Who’d have thought it? Judith French Lichfield, Staffordshire • When can we expect an interference alert over the Conservative party and Russian oligarchs (MI5 accuses lawyer of trying to influence politicians on behalf of China, 13 January)? Jeremy Cushing Exeter • Am I missing something, or is it acceptable for anyone to go around offering MPs money unless they are Chinese? Andrew Ruff Bedford • My friend Abdul used to say that everyone in Liverpool knew him (Letters, 13 January). So I sent a Christmas card to “Abdul, Liverpool”, which he received. Elizabeth Bailey Edinburgh • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I read David Green’s letter on anti-vaxxers (12 January) and empathised with the letter written in response (13 January). The week before Christmas my dad died of Covid. The intensive care consultant couldn’t have been clearer that, in her opinion, if he had been vaccinated he would not have developed Covid pneumonia to the severity that he did. He died very frightened and asking his family to come and be with him, and we couldn’t. The experience traumatised my sister so badly that she was hospitalised with psychosis three days after his passing. The reason he wasn’t vaccinated is because his mind was poisoned with conspiracy theories and misinformation exacerbated by two years of lockdown and reduced social contact. While I am angry that he would not get vaccinated, I don’t think any good would ever come from criminalising his choice. Is it not anti-vaxxers who should be demonised and prosecuted. It is the people, organisations and companies who perpetuate lies and make money from the fear felt by vulnerable people. Name and address supplied • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Thank you for your editorial (12 January) which highlighted the nonsensical state of the Church of England’s position on church weddings for LGBTQI+ individuals. As a gay, civilly partnered cleric, I would also like to thank you for drawing attention to the fact that I am prohibited by law from marrying my partner of 22 years – even in a civil ceremony – if I wish to continue ministering in the church I love, and had to give assurances that our relationship was wholly celibate before I was first ordained, three short years ago. Most people I have spoken to about this had no idea that anyone could be subject to such arcane rules in this day and age which, as you point out, provides ample grist to those with a prurient or malevolent interest in the lives of others to intimidate or threaten those placed in this unacceptable and extremely vulnerable position. The current practice of the church could not be further removed from the glorious liberty of the Christian gospel, which is that God is love, and those who love live in God. May I commend Equal: The Campaign for Equal Marriage in the Church of England to your readers, and any who share such values and yearn for the church to remove this great injustice against the LGBTQI+ community, uniquely now within this island in England. No matter the outcome of the Living in Love and Faith process this year, we will not rest until there is full and total equality for all in the provision of the church’s sacramental ministry, which is God’s gift to all and should be extended to any couples wishing to solemnise their relationship in the sight of God and God’s church. Rev Dr Stephen J O’Connor Deal, Kent • Current confusions and conflicts over the “real” meanings of, and differences between, words such as sex, gender, male and female, make debates about so-called same-sex marriage ever more problematic. Perhaps the simplest solution would be for the Church of England to adopt a definition of marriage as a union between two persons, regardless of any other supposedly innate – or unchanging – characteristics. Fr Alec Mitchell Holyhead, Anglesey • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I read Jonathan Freedland’s article (It’s a scandal that Boris Johnson ever got to No 10 – and shaming that he’s still there, 14 January) with interest and I entirely agree; what indeed will it say about Britain if Boris Johnson is allowed to get away with this? I am hoping that Sue Gray’s inquiry will be sufficiently damning to finally topple this prime minister, because even if he was not in attendance at these parties, they were carried out on his watch. Surely now Conservative ministers and MPs will not allow this to just move on, even after hearing grovelling apologies. It is an indisputable fact that salutary lessons will not be learned, and after a short moment for the necessary sackcloth-and-ashes routine, business will carry on as usual – and this will be outrageous. Judith A Daniels Great Yarmouth, Norfolk • Regardless of the hue, regardless of the political affiliations and ideologies, Britain has never been so badly served by a prime minister as it has been by Boris Johnson. What is gut-wrenching is that it has taken so long for the Tories to realise the dead weight they have been promoting to the highest office. As a socialist, of course I had concerns about the Camerons and Mays of this world, but everything was up for discussion/debate, at the very least, when they were in power. Thatcher might have been a poisonous bulldozer in a china shop bent on destroying what so many hold dear, but at least you knew what you were dealing with. It gave us a fighting edge. For Johnson, at last, it seems his former supporters are seeing the writing on the wall. And perhaps they are realising how many of us have been traumatised beyond belief by the No 10 culture that saw all of us following Covid rules to keep each other safe while they flouted them with total disdain. The message that No 10 believed in protection and isolation rather than the devastation of herd immunity can no longer be upheld. Cathy Elder Cardiff • With daily calls for Johnson to resign, I am looking forward to the day when we can refer to him as “the disgraced former prime minister”, a title which could not be better deserved. But surely culpability for getting us into this internationally embarrassing position also lies squarely with the parliamentary Tory party, whose members knew – probably better than most – the flaws in this man, yet for short-term electoral advantage were prepared to foist him on the British people. I only hope that the electorate’s anger and memory is sufficiently long to ensure that they pay the price at the next general election. Quentin Isaac Bristol • Apologies (and especially what ultimately amount to non-apologies) come cheap, but explanations attract a higher premium. When politicians and civil servants apologise (sort of) for breaking Covid regulations, the import of which seem to have been screamingly clear to everyone else, they should be forced to explain precisely what patently obvious point they managed to miss and why. Prof Trevor Curnow Lancaster • Selflessness, integrity, objectivity, accountability, openness, honesty, leadership. These are the Nolan principles – a formal and widely upheld code of behaviour applicable to most corners of public life. “I’m in the mood for dancing.” This is the Nolans’ principle – an informal and wildly upheld code of behaviour seemingly applicable to the corner of public life known as No 10. David O’Brien York • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A five-year-old British girl has died after being hit by a skier in the French Alps, according to French media. A man in his 40s was being held on suspicion of manslaughter on Sunday after the accident in the resort of Flaine, Haute-Savoie, at about 11am on Saturday, Le Dauphine reported. The girl was said to have been taking part in a group ski lesson run by ESF (Ecole du Ski Français) with four other children on a blue (intermediate) piste. The public prosecutor for Bonneville told France Bleu: “The child was in single file behind the group and was about to make a right turn when she was very violently hit by the skier arriving at high speed who tried in vain to avoid her.” The accident was said to have taken place at the edge of the piste during clear weather. The girl’s family live in Geneva but have a second home in Les Carroz, which is one of five linked resorts in the Grand Massif area in the French Alps. She died as she was being airlifted to hospital by helicopter. The skier who collided with her, reportedly a volunteer firefighter, was said to be “devastated” and in shock. A postmortem will be carried out on the girl. The manslaughter investigation, which will be conducted by Bonneville police, will look at whether the man in custody was skiing too quickly and paying due attention to safety. Jean-Paul Constant, the mayor of local municipality Arâches, said: “Everyone was very shocked.” He said staff at the resort would be provided with counselling and he was also looking for a psychologist who speaks English to assist the girl’s family, who have returned to Geneva. France’s ski industry has experienced significant disruption as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic and has been gradually reopening to people from outside the country.Serbia’s president has said Novak Djokovic had been “harassed … but not humiliated” and the prime minister called his treatment “scandalous” as the world tennis No 1’s home country reacted furiously to his deportation from Australia. After an 11-day saga, three judges unanimously upheld a decision by the immigration minister to cancel Djokovic’s visa because his presence might risk ‘civil unrest’ by stoking anti-vaccination sentiment, removing any chance of him winning a 21st grand slam at the Australian Open. “I think the court decision is scandalous … I find it unbelievable that we have two completely contradictory court decisions within the span of just a few days,” the Serbian prime minister, Ana Brnabić, told reporters in Belgrade. “I am disappointed … I think it demonstrated how the rule of law is functioning – or better to say not functioning – in some other countries. In any case, I can hardly wait to see Novak Djokovic in our own country, in Serbia.” Djokovic, who was photographed wearing a mask in a Melbourne airport lounge with two government officials in black uniforms, left on an Emirates flight to Dubai after releasing a statement saying he was disappointed but accepted the decision. The Serbian president, Aleksandar Vučić, called the court ruling “a farce”. He said he had spoken to the player and had told him he should “return to his country, come home to Serbia, to where he will always be welcome”. Vučić said Australian authorities may “think they humiliated Djokovic, the best player in the world, with this 10-day harassment, [but] they humiliated themselves. He can return to his country with his head held high and look everyone in the eye.” If it was “up to principle, they should have said unvaccinated players cannot enter – but they did not say that,” Vučić said. “They gave him an exemption. Why did it take them so long, why did they treat him like that, why create this kind of theatre?” He said he was sure Djokovic “would have been treated differently if he hadn’t come from Serbia … If he was from another country, the approach would be completely different. Of course people here are frustrated, 90% are on Novak’s side.” The player’s father, Srđan, said the episode amounted to “an attempted assassination with 50 bullets to the chest”, while the sports minister, Vanja Udovičić, described it as “nonsense and shame, absurdity and hypocrisy”. The Serbian tennis association said the “farce was over” and expressed its “huge disappointment”, describing the decision to deport Djokovic, who has won nine Australian Open titles, as political. “Political pressure has led to the revocation of his visa to satisfy public interest,” it said. “It begs the question whether athletes will from now on be incarcerated like criminals and deported when it suits the political interests of powerful individuals.” Boško Obradović, the leader of the far-right opposition party Dveri (the Doors), said Belgrade should introduce countermeasures and “chase the Australian ambassador” out of the country. On the streets of the player’s home town, Belgrade, many people agreed. Milan Nikolić said the dispute “could have been sorted out differently. It is not like the Australian government did not know who Djokovic is, what the procedures are.” Marko Djurickovic, who said people should be able to decide for themselves whether to get vaccinated, thought the decision was “clearly political”. The world No 1’s choice not to get vaccinated would not influence vaccine take-up in Serbia, he added. “He is a public figure but he is not the government,” he said. “I blame them. They did not explain properly the necessity of a jab and frankly, no one trusts them; when they tell you to do something, it is part of civil disobedience to do the opposite.” Divna Vukadin said the Australian move was clearly politically motivated. “Why did they call him, then revoke the visa? He produced all the right papers. So why now? This is really unfair. I would expect more from a country claiming to respect the rule of law.” Both Vučić and Brnabić said Serbia had administered two doses to 58% of its population, not less than 50% as Australian authorities said. Data shows Serbia has double-jabbed 47% of its whole population, well below the EU27 average of 70.25%, although the percentage of the adult population is higher. Milivoje Pantovic is a producer with N1 Television in BelgradePaul Myners, Lord Myners, who has died aged 73, was fond of declaring: “I have worked in the city but never been of the City.” It was that apparent detachment that caused Myners, a successful financier who built a multibillion-pound pensions business and chaired a slew of companies, including Marks and Spencer and the Guardian Media Group, to become the go-to man for sorting out financial crises. He helped to address the scandal at the Co-op bank, Premiership Rugby’s salary cap controversy, and problems at Nissan after Carlos Ghosn, but he was most famously brought in as financial services secretary to the Treasury by Gordon Brown to help address the 2008 banking crisis. The tough conditions he imposed for rescuing the banks were generally regarded as successful although one insider described them as “less a negotiation, more a drive-by shooting”. However his perceived failure to demand a cut in the pension entitlement of the Royal Bank of Scotland’s Fred Goodwin was attacked as evidence of double standards and targeted at an appearance before a Commons select committee. Myners’ profile as a liberal outsider in the City was enhanced by his advocacy of social change. This included chairing the Low Pay Commission from 2006 until 2008 and his presidency of the Howard League for Penal Reform. He was scathing about prison conditions and would take guests to lunch in prisons to make his point. Myners was adopted as a young child from an orphanage in Bath, by a Cornish couple, Thomas and Caroline Myners. While he bonded with his mother, a hairdresser, from whom he absorbed his liberal outlook, he felt he was never accepted by his father, who worked as a butcher and fisherman. He did not want to find his biological parents but said that the sense of rejection he felt and his father’s lack of interest “led to me being more driven and perhaps not good at handling rejection”. He was known as a tough businessman, with a short fuse, which could lead to trouble in board meetings. He went to Truro school with a scholarship but at 15 there was a family confrontation when his father wanted him apprenticed at Falmouth dockyard. Instead Paul followed a friend into teacher training at the Institute of Education in London. After two years on staff at a girls’ school in Wandsworth, in 1972 he decided teaching was not for him. Instead he wrote 20 letters to City institutions asking for a job, delivering them on his bicycle because of a postal strike. A whiff of the prevailing attitude, which he would spend a lifetime opposing, came from Hill Samuel’s reply stating that they only employed people already known to the directors. Myners accepted the only offer, from the stockjobber Wedd Durlacher. There he came to the notice of the editor of the Daily Telegraph’s stock-tipping Questor column, who proposed him as his successor two years later. In 1974 he joined Rothschild’s as a junior portfolio manager. He was posted to Kuala Lumpur and Hong Kong, where at 27 he was managing an office of 40 people and was appointed to the main board. But returning to Rothschild’s London headquarters, he missed management and in 1985 chose to become chief executive of a small pension fund manager, the Gartmore Group, where he swiftly became chair and made his name. In his 16 years the company was bought and sold five times and funds managed rose from £1.2bn to £75bn. He was estimated to have earned £30m. He left in 2001 to focus on a series of positions in major companies, including the chairmanship of Land Securities (2006-08) and the Guardian Media Group (2000-08). He was a surprise but effective choice at the Guardian where he set in train the sale of its highly profitable motor trade publications and declining regional newspapers to build up a specific endowment fund to support the Guardian and Observer. The decision was vindicated by the progressive collapse of remunerative classified advertising in the face of the internet. Looking back Myners said: “I thought the key thing was to build up an endowment. It meant we could lose about £30m a year and still maintain the papers.” Alan Rusbridger, editor from 1995 until 2015, said that “the Guardian was very fortunate to have Paul as its chair as it negotiated the digital revolution, which was a traumatic period of transition for virtually all news organisations. He steered the company with astute judgement and an understanding of what the Guardian should be. He was a reliable friend to both commercial and editorial sides of the operation. We were lucky to have him.” In 2004 he became interim chair of an embattled Marks and Spencer, just two days after Philip Green had made a bid for the company. The board resisted and Myners chaired the famous meeting at which shareholders voted to reject Green’s offer. Myners was known as one of the busiest men in the City, and it was joked that he worked out of his car. He conceded: “I do like a challenge. It energises.” High level appointments included the Court of the Bank of England, the Financial Reporting Council, and the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers. He chaired the Tate Gallery and was chancellor of the University of Exeter. But his chairmanship of the London School of Economics council was cut short after a boardroom row. His trenchant views on the financial industry were sought-after and he advised a string of finance companies. His report on institutional investment for Brown in 2001 set out the Myners’ principles of best practice for pension companies although critics complained that they had not always been observed by Gartmore. He attacked “ownerless corporations”, arguing that companies had such diversified shareholders that no one behaved like an owner. In later life he criticised active investing by funds, arguing that passive investing produced comparable results, and revealing that he had transferred much of his wealth to them. Active in the Lords from 2008, he was a passionate remainer and scathing about the Conservative leadership. Later, in 2014, he transferred from the Labour benches to the crossbenches. Myners was married twice: first, from 1972 to 1993 , to Tessa Stanford-Smith, a teacher, with whom he had three daughters; and second, from 1995 to 2020, to Alison Macleod, former chair of the Contemporary Art Society, with whom he had a daughter and a son. Both marriages ended in divorce. He is survived by his children and five grandchildren. • Paul Myners, Lord Myners, businessman and politician, born 1 April 1948; died 16 January 2022 • This article was amended on 31 January 2022, to correct a reference to “activist” investing to “active” investing.Boris Johnson broke the law and lied about it, Keir Starmer said on Sunday. In an interview for the BBC’s Sunday Morning show, the Labour leader said it was not necessary to wait for the “partygate” report to learn whether Johnson broke the rules because it was already obvious that he did. Starmer also restated his call for Johnson to resign, saying he had “degraded the office of prime minister”. Starmer told the BBC: “I think [Johnson] broke the law. I think he’s as good as admitted that he broke the law. And, after all, Downing Street has now apologised to the Queen for some of the parties that have gone on.” Starmer seemed to be referring to Johnson’s statement to MPs last week in which he all but admitted that the 20 May party he attended was against the rules. He said he thought at the time it was a work event, but now realised he should have stopped it. Arguing that “the facts speak for themselves”, Starmer said that as well as breaking the law Johnson “then lied about what happened and this compounds the situation”. To justify this claim, Starmer said Johnson originally told MPs he had been assured no parties took place at No 10. Then, after the private video of staff discussing a Christmas party in 2020 was broadcast, the PM told MPs he was angry to learn about this. Then he admitted he had been at the 20 May event, and he told MPs last week that in retrospect he realised he should have stopped the gathering that evening. Starmer said that showed his initial claim to have no knowledge of partying was false. Many Tory MPs have said they want to reserve judgment about whether Johnson should be allowed to stay in office until the publication of the report by Sue Gray, the senior civil servant investigating the scandal, is published. It is due within a fortnight. But Starmer said there was no need to wait because it was “blindingly obvious” what had happened. There had been “industrial-scale partying” at No 10, he said. In his column in the Sunday Times, Dominic Lawson claimed that Johnson was clearly warned in advance, twice, that the 20 May event was party taking place against the rules. “Last week I spoke to a former Downing Street official who said at least two people had told the PM, after seeing the emailed invitation from his principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds, that this was ‘a party’ and should be immediately cancelled,” wrote Lawson, a former editor of the Spectator and the Sunday Telegraph. “I was told that Johnson’s dismissive response was to say they were ‘overreacting’ and to praise Reynolds as ‘my loyal Labrador’.” Angela Rayner, the Labour deputy leader, said this showed that Johnson was lying when he told MPs last week that when he attended the 20 May gathering, he thought it was a work event. But Downing Street said: “It is untrue that the prime minister was warned about the event in advance. As he said earlier this week he believed implicitly that this was a work event.” Starmer has said a photograph of him drinking with a number of party staff in a constituency office last year was “no breach of the rules” and there was “no comparison” with the prime minister. Appearing on the BBC’s Sunday Morning programme, Starmer was asked about the picture published in the Daily Mail, which first emerged in spring last year. The image, which was taken several days before the Hartlepool byelection, was captured through the window of a building in Durham and shows Starmer drinking a bottle of beer and standing close to two people while another pair can be seen in the background. England was at that time in step two of the roadmap out of the third lockdown, and indoor mixing between different households was not allowed except for work. Starmer said: “I was in a constituency office just days before the election. We were very busy. We were working in the office. “We stopped for something to eat and then we carried on working. No party, no breach of the rules and absolutely no comparison with the prime minister.” He added: “It was perfectly lawful to meet for work, which is what we were doing. The party that was put to the prime minister on Wednesday happened because an invitation was sent to 100 people saying: ‘Let’s have some socially distant drinks in the garden and bring your own booze.’ There is simply no comparison.”Gul Bano* and Karima* are activists who ran provincial branches of the ministry of women’s affairs in two different parts of Afghanistan. Their former offices have been taken over by the Taliban’s feared enforcers, the ministry for the promotion of virtue and prevention of vice. They are now in hiding, afraid of the men they helped put in prison for domestic violence and other abuses, many of them in the Taliban or with family links to the militants. Karima I know at least four women activists or government workers who have been killed in the last four months, and one who was kidnapped and it is not clear what happened to her. I moved from my province to a bigger city in July, but the security situation there was also bad so I set off for Kabul, planning to get my passport and leave the country. Unfortunately my family and the Taliban arrived in Kabul on the same day, and we are still waiting for the passports. I advocated for women for the past 15 years, that’s why Taliban are looking for me. I supported women who were victims of violence, and I was threatened for that even under the last government. Six women from our office were killed in recent years. In the first few days of Taliban rule I got so many calls, asking where is this woman and that woman you supported, what is their address? Women we were supporting and helping to escape from violent situations were mostly from very remote regions and villages under Taliban control, so their relatives were Taliban. And these were some of the people calling me and threatening me. Many of the abusers had been imprisoned because of our work for women’s rights, then the Taliban took over and released all the prisoners, and now most of the threats are coming from these abusers. According to their point of view I am not even a Muslim because I was advocating for women’s rights. I don’t feel safe here. We change where we are staying every week and I have told even my very close relatives that we left Afghanistan already. We are in a crisis as we have no salary to pay rent, – in addition to fears about the Taliban, we also have to worry about cold and hunger. We applied for asylum everywhere we could think of, including the UK, and received no news, so I am here with my husband and children, waiting and sitting. I am sure I won’t be able to remain in Afghanistan. Even if I don’t get support, I will smuggle myself to Iran, Tajikistan or Pakistan. Gul Bano I’ve been living in fear and shock since the fall of Kabul. We held a women’s protest and they tried to attack and stop us. So now I’m in hiding and always under direct threat due to my job as a women’s rights activist and a [former] government employee. I’ve been receiving threatening calls on a daily basis, not only from the Taliban but also from relatives and family members of those women I tried to defend. They tell me: “We are following you, we see you but you don’t see us.” Even under the previous government there were several attempts against my life by these men, which fortunately I escaped unharmed I fled my home when the Taliban took over and they seized it, looted all my possessions and took all of my documents. It is in a very good neighbourhood, and now one of the most senior Taliban officials in the province lives there, which breaks my heart. I was defending women’s rights in that house and the Taliban are living there now. It hurts me, and I’m facing real mental health challenges now. It’s not only me. We, the heads of the ministry of women’s affairs offices in 34 provinces, are struggling. The Taliban are trying to track us down and we only try to keep ourselves safe by changing where we stay. I ask anyone out there in the world who can do something: help Afghan women and get us out of this humiliation. I have so far requested several countries for help but received no positive response, even though they announced that they’ll help Afghan women who are in danger. All I got is an email from the US state department saying they can only help those who were their employees and that they are sorry. *Names have been changed for this article.Nadine Dorries’ announcement of major changes to the BBC’s funding model is just the latest attack on the broadcaster by Conservative ministers over the past 12 years. There have been repeated attempts to decriminalise non-payment of the licence fee, enormous real-terms funding cuts and the decision to make the BBC take the blame for abolishing free licences for over-75s. In the short term, the more damaging news for the BBC is the government’s intention to freeze the cost of the licence fee for two years. This dooms the broadcaster to another round of deep cuts to its output that will weaken its offering to the UK and the world. In the long term, the bigger issue is the government wants to abolish the BBC’s existing funding model when the broadcaster’s royal charter expires in 2027. Households with a television used to receive live broadcasts (or watch iPlayer) are charged £159 for a licence, raising £3.2bn a year for the BBC and and the Welsh channel S4C. Yet there are hundreds of thousands of prosecutions a year for non-payment of the licence fee – disproportionately affecting women who are at home when inspectors call. Also the number of households that pay the fee is declining. Yet with countries around the world phasing out their television licence fees, the writing has been on the wall for the British version for some time – even if the exact timing and format of its replacement is unclear. Here are some of the alternative funding models: Charge a levy on every broadband connection The existing television licence is levied on the device traditionally used to receive most BBC content. A more modern equivalent would be a levy on every broadband connection in the UK used to fund public service media. This could be relatively easy to enforce, with the money collecting through existing broadband providers and has the benefit of being a near-universal. But adding £13 a month to the cost of a broadband connection could make internet access prohibitively expensive for some households. Introduce an annual grant from the government Rather than have an entire bureaucracy dedicated to collecting the licence fee, why not simply have the government fund the BBC directly? This model has been used to fund Australia’s ABC for most of its existence, although it also leaves the broadcast at the mercy of the government of the day. There would also be questions about how to enshrine the BBC’s editorial independence if the broadcaster’s funding was decided alongside other spending commitments in the chancellor’s budget. Allow the BBC to carry advertising The BBC already takes advertising on its services outside the UK, so why not in Britain? Other national broadcasters around the world carry adverts, as do British public service broadcasters such as ITV and Channel 4. Yet it is unlikely advertising revenue would be enough to sustain the BBC’s current range of services and it would inevitably lead to a focus on programmes that bring in viewers as well as the curtailment of some bits of output that are highly valued by niche audiences. Charge a special tax on income to fund public service media This model has gained popularity in Scandinavian countries that have abolished their licence fees. Sweden chose this approach in 2019, abolishing the 2,400 krona (£194) licence fee and replacing it with a tax on all working adults, charged at 1% of income up to a maximum of 1,300 krona a person. This money is then paid into a dedicated funding pot for public service media, which helps reduce the risk of government interference. A British equivalent would mean a new tax appearing on payslips next to income tax and national insurance contributions – something that could be politically challenging. Turn the BBC into a subscription service This is the rallying cry of many Conservative MPs who see the enormous popularity of Netflix and wonder why the BBC could not adopt the same model. The biggest challenge is technical. While Netflix offers a single product – an app and website that are easily password-protected – the vast majority of BBC content is still consumed through free-to-air television and radio broadcasts that are impossible to put behind a paywall. A subscription model would inevitably kill the universal free-to-access BBC as we know it. Privatise the commercially viable parts and keep a much smaller public service news organisation Privatise BBC iPlayer, stick it behind a paywall and charge a subscription fee for high-end dramas and David Attenborough programmes. Sell off the corporation’s radio stations and allow them to chase audiences to please advertisers. And then provide a much-reduced package of central government funding to cover the BBC’s unprofitable news output on a free-to-air basis. Abolish the BBC altogether With news increasingly distributed through Facebook-owned social media platforms, Piers Morgan about to launch television channel talkTV on behalf of Rupert Murdoch and the growing popularity of private sector radio stations such as LBC, do we really need the BBC? The government could simply follow the US model, let the free market take control and allow private companies to shape the nation’s media consumption.With typical bravado, GlaxoSmithKline has, we learned on Saturday, dismissed three takeover bids from Unilever for its consumer healthcare venture with Pfizer, including one worth £50bn received just before Christmas. The drugmaker, run by Dame Emma Walmsley, has decided to push on with plan A, namely the demerger and stock market flotation this summer of the consumer health business, known for brands such as Aquafresh and Sensodyne toothpaste, along with Panadol and Voltaren for pain relief. GSK’s confidence that the bids from consumer goods company Unilever, which makes Dove soap and Sunsilk shampoo, “fundamentally undervalued” the venture and its future prospects is based on three pillars. First, the drugmaker has released new forecasts showing it is now projecting annual sales growth of 4%-6% for the consumer venture, which made sales of £9.6bn last year – higher than the 3%-3.5% analysts have factored in, it says. It believes Unilever’s offer, which is made up of £41.7bn in cash and £8.3bn in Unilever shares, fails to capture this sales potential. It will explain the potential for the consumer brands more fully at an investor day on 28 February, with fourth-quarter results on 9 February also providing an opportunity to justify the strategy. Second, GSK reckons the Unilever offer does not fully take into account the synergies the deal would create. And third, it argues that any takeover bid needs to come with a higher premium. Many analysts have estimated the value of consumer healthcare at £45bn, with some estimates as high as £48bn. The New York hedge fund Elliott Management, the activist shareholder that has been pushing for a sale of the consumer health business and a change of leadership, declined to comment, but the much smaller London-based investor Bluebell Capital Partners, which has echoed Elliott’s demands, said Unilever’s bid was “proof that such a high-quality business has the potential to attract interest by strategic and financial buyers”. GSK has argued that there is no need to hold a formal auction as it has been clear since 2018, when plans for a split were announced, that consumer healthcare was up for grabs. It would be one of the largest ever deals in London. There are a small number of potential acquirers – only the likes of Reckitt Benckiser, Procter &amp; Gamble and Nestlé would be big enough to stomach such a purchase. Private equity groups are thought to have looked at it too, but it would require a large consortium to pull off a bid. The consumer business’s chair-designate is the former Tesco boss Sir Dave Lewis, who is also a Unilever veteran and has worked with Unilever’s chief executive, Alan Jope, in the past. Unilever, for its part, is coming under pressure from previously loyal shareholders as it has missed sales and profit margin targets, and its shares have lagged behind those of its global peers. Terry Smith, founder of the investment manager Fundsmith and a top-10 Unilever shareholder, last week used his annual letter to investors to hit out at Unilever management, saying they had “lost the plot”. Russ Mould, investment research director at the stockbroker AJ Bell, said: “Jope seems to think he needs to do something and while he may have felt he was pushing on an open door, given GlaxoSmithKline and Pfizer’s spin-off plan, they perhaps believe his need to act is greater than theirs. It’s an interesting dynamic.” In a brief statement on Saturday, Unilever said the consumer business would be “a strong strategic fit as Unilever continues to reshape its portfolio”. Its statement did not suggest that it was abandoning its pursuit. “The statements suggest price is the issue, not the lack of desire to sell or lack of desire to buy. A further attempt at a higher price is therefore possible,” said Mould.At least it was quick. The final ignominy over in less than two hours, from Rory Burns to Ollie Robinson with barely time for a scratch and a sniff: 10 wickets for 56 runs in 22 overs. Out of a paper bag into the ashes. It was Mark Wood’s face that said it all. He’d just produced the best bowling of his Test career, six for 37, a high-class bouncefest to haul England back into the match by their gammy toenails, short-pitched menace with a smile, hurling that woodchip body into the unwilling Tasmanian ground. Reward at last for seven weeks of wholehearted toil. Yet there he was, less than four hours later, plodding off the Bellerive Oval, the ninth wicket to fall in an innings of sorrows, dragging on after slapping Pat Cummins for a couple of fours over extra-cover – just for the lols. Helmet off, mouth set, eyes empty, head down, homeward he trod. This tour has sapped even Wood’s joie de vivre – an achievement, of sorts. England have for some time been collapse specialists – pack detonator, will travel – but even by their standards this was a spectacular explosion of fortune. With just an over to go before tea, Zak Crawley and Burns had put together 68, England’s first opening stand of more than 50 in the entire series. There had been a few lucky breaks, a review survived here and there, but Crawley was creaming the ball with a golden spoon and Burns wore an air of busy purpose alongside his indie-band hair. WinViz was absurdly confident, like the cocky young pup it is. Next-in Dawid Malan was spotted on the balcony wearing a cap with an almost jaunty air. Deep in the dressing room, perhaps Chris Silverwood was searching the internet for the ingredients needed for a sundowner. Wouldn’t it, you found yourself thinking to yourself, against all odds and the evidence of the last four Tests, be something for Joe Root to win the game and salvage something from the series with that longed-for Australian Ashes hundred? Fool! From his two-metre vantage point, Cameron Green – Australia’s brightest of bright young things – produced a telling ball from around the wicket and Burns, conflicted, contrived to play on. His bemused shrug was a catalyst for the carnage to come. After the break Malan was cracked on the helmet, before he too knocked Green on to his own stumps, also leaving with a shuffledown of despair. His tour has slipped from promise to purgatory, and was thrown into perspective overnight by the news that his wife had given birth to their baby six weeks early. Root ran out to bat, legs somehow kicking onwards, one last push, one last weary hurrah. He soon lost Crawley, tempted into another drive by the magnificent Green and snaffled behind the stumps. Ben Stokes holed out before Root himself was done by a dirty grubber from Scott Boland that spat through under the bat. He permitted himself a deep breath, and a wry smile. It was over. A drawn man now, with watery blue eyes, carrying every one of England’s mistakes strapped to his own back, he could at least retreat in the knowledge that he’d got a screamer. And then Cummins and Boland finished things off, the final five wickets disappearing for 23 runs. The Australians didn’t even have to claim the final half hour. Sam Billings pushed with hard hands to mid-on; Ollie Pope pottered into the wasteland on the off side, with thoughts of who-knows-what, but was left staring down at his dismantled stumps as if they were the remains of yesterday’s dinner. The padded-up bowlers looked as if they’d had enough. They went out swinging, with anger, frustration, disappointment – probably all three. After Cummins bowled the retreating Robinson with a full toss, the debonair new baggy-green captain with the perfect teeth and the Midas touch, smiled. He exchanged a big bowlers’ handshake with Mitchell Starc: the two leading wicket-takers of the series content with their work. And England? Many threads make up a story, but, yikes, the stats: England put together only eight partnerships of over 50. And their batting average in this series is 20.21, the lowest in an Ashes series since 1890. And then the faces. At the presentation, there was not a smile to be seen from the batsmen, who’d had time to change into their leisurewear, or the bowlers, who had not. Root seemed on the edge of tears as Adam Gilchrist threw down the gentlest of questions – you know you’re in trouble when even the Australians feel sorry for you. It’s hard to summon up triumphalism when the opposition fold so quickly. And like a breath of wind on a house of cards, England were gone.Ministers are seeing “encouraging” signs that plan B coronavirus restrictions in England could be lifted in 10 days’ time, the co-chair of the Conservative party Oliver Dowden has said. Current measures in England, including guidance to work from home and the widespread use of face coverings, were imposed in early December to help tackle the spread of Omicron. They are set to be reviewed on 26 January. In the clearest hint yet that some or all of the measures will be removed on that date, Dowden, who also serves as minister without portfolio, said that while the government would review further data this week before making a decision, the “signs are encouraging”. Covid cases continued to fall on Sunday, with a further 70,924 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases recorded in the UK as of 9am. The figure represents a 50% fall from the 141,471 cases reported the previous Sunday, although the new figures do not include data from Scotland, because of an IT problem. Dowden’s comments came after health and scientific experts expressed cautious optimism this weekend that the Covid situation was improving. Dr Susan Hopkins, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) chief medical adviser, said cases appeared to be “plateauing” in parts of the UK, and added that while cases were still relatively high, there had also been a slowdown in hospital admissions. Prof Linda Bauld, a professor of public health at the University of Edinburgh and chief social policy adviser to the Scottish government, said Omicron cases in the UK appeared to be “stabilising”. Dr Chris Smith, a consultant virologist and lecturer at Cambridge University, said the latest data gave him “great cause for optimism”. Meanwhile, the amount of time people with Covid-19 in England have to spend in self-isolation is to be cut to five full days from Monday. The NHS will also roll out booster vaccines to children aged 12 to 15 who are most at risk from coronavirus from today. Clinically at-risk 12- to 15-year-olds or those who live with someone who is immunosuppressed are entitled to their booster three months after their two primary doses, with those who are severely immunosuppressed able to get their booster after a third primary dose. Dowden told Sky News’ Trevor Phillips on Sunday programme: “It has always been my hope that we would have the plan B restrictions for the shortest period possible. I’m under no doubt the kind of burdens this puts hospitality, wider business, schools and so on under, and I want us to get rid of those if we possibly can. The signs are encouraging but, clearly, we will wait to see the data ahead of that final decision.” Sir Keir Starmer said he hoped plan B restrictions could be lifted “as soon as possible”. Speaking on the BBC’s Sunday Morning programme, the Labour leader said: “I think the sooner we can lift the final restrictions, the better. I think that’s what the whole country want. It’s important that we’re led by the science on this. We had access to the government scientific and medical advisers, and that’s helped us form our views. “I hope those restrictions can be lifted as soon as possible, but I want them to be lifted because the medical science says they should be lifted, not simply because the prime minister is in a real mess and he’s desperately trying to get out of it. “So, if it’s the right thing to lift those restrictions, we will vote to lift those restrictions. But we’ll be led by the science as we always have been, not by the politics of propping up a broken prime minister.” The shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, said he could not be confident the government was not looking to lift plan B measures in an attempt to shore up Boris Johnson’s leadership. He told Trevor Phillips on Sunday: “If the prime minister or the health secretary from the Conservative party is coming forward saying, ‘We’re going to remove plan B measures’, I want to be absolutely confident they are making that decision in the national interest and not in the party interest, for party management reasons. I don’t have total confidence about that.”The US president, Joe Biden, suffered his worst day in office – so far – last Thursday. Mr Biden had begun that morning hoping to convince his party to support his push to change Senate rules to pass two voting rights bills. Even before he got a chance to make his case, Senator Kyrsten Sinema, a rightwing Democrat, rejected the president’s plan. At a stroke, two key parts of Mr Biden’s agenda – racial justice and democracy – appear stalled. On the same day, the US supreme court struck down the Biden administration’s requirement for businesses to make employees either be vaccinated against Covid-19 or test weekly and wear a mask at work. The president’s pledge to lift the threat of the pandemic won’t be redeemed any time soon. Mr Biden’s opponents paint him as a leader of drift and dwindling energy. If this view settles, then it’ll be an image hard to shift. There’s little room for reassessment in politics. That is why the president must change course and have a clear-eyed view of his opponents within and without. The “moderate” wing of the Democratic party has already gutted the president’s climate plans. These Democrats, like most Republicans, depend on a donor class which wants to render legislation inert that would hit corporate profits. On the campaign trail Mr Biden said he would deal with the threat. In office he has not done so. The president faces a concerted campaign of leveraging money to protect money. Employers claimed that his “vaccine-or-test” mandate would cost billions of dollars to implement. A number of Republican-dominated states have fought its imposition. Covid-19 has killed almost a million Americans and hospitals are overwhelmed with unvaccinated patients. Conservative judges share an ideological aim with the Republican party to dismantle the system – at the cost of American lives during a pandemic – which permits the federal government to repeal unfair state laws. Mr Biden’s problem is that, on paper, the Democrats seem unassailable: controlling both houses of Congress and the presidency. But this is far from the case. Democrats were once something of a “party of state”. They controlled both the House and the Senate between 1933 and 1981, interrupted only by two brief Republican interludes. The Democrats won the presidency two-thirds of the time during this period. Today neither party perceives itself as a permanent majority or permanent minority. This helps to polarise politics as party differences cut against collaboration. Slim majorities now make radical change. Democrats demonstrated this with Obamacare. Republicans did the same with taxes in 2017. Bernie Sanders advises the Democrats to boil down their offer to its most popular elements and hold votes to extend child tax credits, cut drug prices and raise the federal hourly minimum wage to $15. This feels right and ought to appeal to Mr Biden: putting Democrats on the right side, and Republicans on the wrong side, of public opinion before November’s midterm elections. The stakes could not be higher. Maureen Dowd in the New York Times warned: “Joe Biden better Build Better or he won’t be Back”. That might open the door to Donald Trump – or someone worse.Boris Johnson’s plan for salvaging his premiership has become increasingly clear: acknowledge a “culture” of drinking in Downing Street – but not that it stemmed from the top – and then change the subject, by announcing a slew of populist policies. Nadine Dorries’ announcement that the BBC licence fee will be frozen, then abolished, had been in the works for a while; but the timing was highly convenient, giving Tory right-wingers something to cheer as Johnson’s future hangs in the balance. Other plans expected in the coming days, according to the Sunday Times, include sending in the military to help tackle cross-Channel migration; training schemes for universal credit claimants – whose benefit was recently cut by £20 a week – and the much-delayed “levelling up” white paper. The lifting of Covid restrictions on 26 January, if the Omicron wave continues to abate, would also give Johnson a platform to deploy his customary boosterism. The hope appears to be to convince the public – and Johnson’s own mutinous backbenchers – that he is ready to draw a line under all the scandal, and get on with government. What is unclear is whether Tory MPs are willing to give him the chance. Having spent the weekend hearing from constituents and grassroots members, they are unlikely to return to Westminster on Monday in a more forgiving mood. Former minister Tim Loughton became the latest MP to call for Johnson to resign this weekend, saying the prime minister had resorted to “obfuscation, prevarication and evasion” over partygate. He is one of six MPs who have publicly said they are unwilling to wait for Sue Gray’s investigation to be published and want Johnson to go, but many more are hanging their decision about his future on her findings. Gray is expected to censure senior officials for their role – including, presumably, Martin “bring your own booze” Reynolds. But where Johnson’s actions are concerned, she is expected to stick to setting out the facts as she understands them. It may be impossible for her to judge whether he really “believed implicitly” the 20 May garden party was a “work event”, for example – leaving the ultimate judgment about his culpability up to politicians to make. And the emergence of more gatherings for her to investigate is likely to delay the report beyond this week, extending a period ministers were already calling “purgatory”. The outlines of the prime minister’s likely response to Gray’s findings, however, were already evident from Conservative party chair Oliver Dowden’s broadcast round on Sunday morning. He said Johnson felt a “sincere sense of regret” over what had happened – and suggested the prime minister was now the man to clean up “the underlying culture” in No 10. Johnson’s colleagues will have to decide whether the public will think that a remotely plausible idea – or whether he is irrevocably tainted in voters’ minds by the drip, drip of stories about lockdown-busting social events. They won’t have been reassured by the latest Opinium poll for the Observer, which showed his popularity ratings lower than Theresa May’s. Tory MPs also fear that more revelations are to come as they steel themselves to hit the campaign trail for May’s local elections. In particular, new facts could yet emerge that destroy Johnson’s claim to have attended just a single party – and that accidentally. Meanwhile, the problem with his plans for a flurry of rightwing announcements to tempt true-blue backbenchers is that his main rivals, Liz Truss and Rishi Sunak, are if anything more rightwing – but unburdened by the taint of scandal. And the backdrop for a new year relaunch is hardly auspicious, with a national insurance rise coming in April to coincide with rocketing energy bills for consumers. Johnson is a great political survivor, and some Conservative veterans were insisting this weekend he could still be in Downing Street by the autumn; but his escape route from the deep predicament he finds himself in now looks very narrow indeed.The good news is that energy prices will be coming down. The bad news is nobody knows when for sure. The UK’s biggest energy supplier, Centrica, says high gas and electricity prices could last for another two years. The International Energy Agency (IEA) reckons that’s too optimistic. Expensive bills are a problem for firms, consumers and the government. Households could face a doubling of annual energy bills to £2,400 a year from October - a cost-of-living catastrophe for millions. While Labour proposes a support package, Conservative ministers have said little – fuelling suspicions that they intend to reduce demand for energy by making people poorer. Carbon-based energy will fade, but it won’t disappear completely. To keep temperatures to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, the IEA says the world in 2050 would have to use about half as much natural gas as today and about one-quarter as much oil. British policymakers must wake up to the security implications of greening the economy. Britain replaced coal-fired plants with wind power to reduce carbon emissions, becoming dependent on natural gas imports – especially in calm weather. Traditional suppliers like Russia might see opportunities in volatile fossil fuel prices that result from the transition to net zero. This is not reassuring. Fuel price protests sparked unrest in Kazakhstan this month, but they also brought Britain to a halt 22 years ago. Britain should look to John Maynard Keynes for answers. The basic fault of commodity markets, he saw, was the private sector’s failure to make effective use of stockpiling. Keynes proposed government storage of raw materials and foodstuffs to stabilise prices – by buying up essentials from world markets when they were cheap and selling them to consumers when they were dear. In 1942, he went further to propose an international system of buffer stocks to limit the fluctuation of the prices of key commodities. Keynes showed that buffer stocks could secure macroeconomic stability. His proposals were adopted partially by the United States, and others, after the second world war – becoming a defining feature of the golden age of capitalism. Producing and consuming countries have conflicting interests when it comes to key commodities but they share an interest in stable prices as a pre-condition for sustained investment. Keynes saw a pricing policy as a solution to high, unstable prices. This makes sense but is anathema to current economic thought. Britain closed its last big gas storage facility in 2017, a shortsighted decision by Centrica that left the country able to store only 2% of its annual demand. Other big gas importers, by contrast, can store at least 20%. As the economist Isabella Weber notes, the orthodox view today is that the state should put “free prices” above welfare considerations. History suggests that this is about politics, not economics. Ms Weber, in her book How China Escaped Shock Therapy, speculates that Keynes may have been inspired by ancient Chinese economic thinking on smoothing grain prices. A mixture of extreme weather, rising demand, post-pandemic economic nationalism and spiking energy prices will have profound effects. In Britain, post-Brexit economic barriers will also push up the cost of trade. Commodity prices can potentially have a very powerful inflationary effect on the cost of goods. The United Nations says average food prices jumped about 28% last year to a 10-year high. In Italy, pasta risks becoming unaffordable. Britain has an energy price cap that does not live up to its name. The answer to soaring bills is not to raise interest rates and make families poorer. Instead, Britain should have a serious conversation about key commodities as a source of power and their absence as a strategic vulnerability; and heed the wisdom of the past to deal with crises of the present.This Sunday, culture secretary Nadine Dorries tweeted out a death sentence for one of the most respected and popular broadcasters in the world. “This licence fee announcement will be the last,” she wrote, along with a link to the Mail on Sunday’s splash. “The days of the elderly being threatened with prison sentences and bailiffs knocking on doors, are over. Time now to discuss and debate new ways of funding, supporting and selling great British content.” She was doing her master’s bidding, as Boris Johnson thrashes around for anything to shift the narrative away from his own tumbling fortunes. Johnson demands “red meat” to mollify his MPs, who are in savage mood after a harrowing weekend in their constituencies listening to local people demanding his head on a plate. Axing the BBC is easy pickings, he thinks. But he may turn out to be as wrong about that as he is on just about everything else. Thus spoke a Tory MP I talked to on Sunday, rolling their eyes in despair: “Here’s yet another national institution Boris wants to bring down with him, slashing and burning as he goes.” But will they speak out? No, not a single Tory MP dares back the BBC publicly yet, even if what some say in private is another matter. Will this assault on the corporation be as popular as Johnson imagines? That depends partly now on the BBC’s boldness in reminding people of its national worth, including what good value everyone gets for 43p a day. With such a weak government so blatantly looking for scapegoats, the broadcaster has no need to be craven. The Brexit promise was of “Global Britain”, yet Johnson is wrecking all the soft powers to make that possible. The BBC is trusted and admired for the honesty of its news across the world, especially in countries where reliable journalism may be hard to come by. Its best programmes are our best ambassadors. Britain’s influence has been deliberately vandalised by Conservatives who talk mindlessly of “patriotism” while demolishing all the vehicles of national pride abroad: foreign aid has been cut right back, while the British Council – almost as old as the BBC – is to close 20 offices around the world. British academic influence has been battered by the needless withdrawal from the Erasmus programme, and scientists are locked out of Horizon research funding. Now the BBC is mortally threatened – just as, in the words of the University of Westminster’s Steven Barnett, its global reach is poised to “hit a weekly figure of half a billion people in its centenary year”. The BBC is often considered the most respected media outlet in the world, with the World Service reaching 279 million people a week and the BBC News website the world’s most visited. What wouldn’t other countries give for such soft power? Instead, this global asset is tossed aside in the ideological mayhem created by this strange generation of nation-destroying Tories. Mesmerised by the noise made by its detractors in the rightwing press, Johnson thinks the BBC is some preserve of the metropolitan liberal elite. But he may find that he is actually being deceived by his own echo chamber, increasingly detached from the world outside. The likes of Defund the BBC, the TaxPayers’ Alliance and the Institute of Economic Affairs attack this emblem of British culture, yet never identify their funders, so who knows who or what they represent – business or governments at home or abroad? On Christmas Day, eight out of the 10 most watched programmes were on BBC One, with a record 141m programmes streamed on BBC iPlayer between 27 December and 3 January. The broadcaster is used by 90% of adults and 80% of 18- to 34-year-olds a week, according to the National Audit Office, making it by far the most used media brand in the UK. Leave it to the US streaming giants and there would be little British content, just a monoculture of globalised programming. Who would pay for its news, or children’s programmes or the BBC Bitesize Education service that was used by 5.8 million children during lockdown? How would we pay for the immeasurable riches of BBC radio or the regional stations that are one of the last bastions of local reporting? When I speak to the shadow culture secretary, Lucy Powell, she jumps to defend the BBC Charter. The organisation has suffered cuts of 30% since 2010, and worse is to come following Dorries’s announcement of a funding freeze. The entire edifice is demolished just “because they don’t like its journalism”, Powell says. The Mail on Sunday article noted that government figures were “incensed” by the corporation’s reporting of Johnson’s partygate scandals – but the most outspoken coverage has come from the Tory press itself. Powell, as a Manchester MP, points to the “levelling up” effect that the BBC has on the country, with its operations in Salford, Cardiff and around the country. No other broadcaster would put more than half its jobs and producers outside London The licence fee is not the only viable way to pay for it: possible alternatives might be a household tax, as in France and Germany; but it certainly shouldn’t be looking for funds in the Treasury’s pot, as it would then be left to compete in every budget with the NHS and defence. The principle that matters is that everyone pays in, so it costs far less for a panoply of programming right across the taste spectrum than could ever be funded by subscriptions from a few. If the BBC, and its users, make a trenchant and confident case for what everyone would lose without it, it will survive and thrive. So the country has to ask itself what it values most: a great national broadcaster with such a wealth of programmes at the cheapest rate, or the political posturing of a lame-duck prime minister? Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistVirginia’s newly elected Republican governor has immediately passed a swath of conservative orders – ranging from attempts to alter local school curriculums to loosening public health mandates during the pandemic – after being sworn into office on Saturday. Glenn Youngkin, a former private equity CEO who has never served in public office before, became the state’s first Republican governor since 2010 after a closely watched gubernatorial election last year. The 55 year-old placed the issue of critical race theory (CRT) at the centre of his campaign, capitalizing on a conservative backlash against the discipline and pledging to ban teaching of it in Virginia’s schools. Critical race theory is an academic practice that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society. On Saturday, after taking the oath of office, Youngkin unveiled a list of nine executive orders and two executive directives, with the first on the list described as a directive to “restore excellence in education by ending the use of divisive concepts, including Critical Race Theory, in public education”. The order lists 13 instructions, many directed to the state’s school superintendent, who has been tasked with reviewing the state’s curriculum and policies within the department of education, to identify “inherently divisive concepts”. The order also bans an executive employee from “directing or otherwise compelling students to personally affirm, adopt, or adhere to inherently divisive concepts”. The order does not define “divisive concepts” but cites critical race theory as an example. At least 22 other states have moved towards imposing limits on the teaching of critical race theory in recent months, as rightwing media in the US continues to fuel disinformation about the teaching of the previously little-known discipline. Despite the sweeping and ambiguous language, the governor’s power to intervene in local school districts is limited. And although Virginia’s general assembly has the power to compel school boards to adopt specific policy via legislation, state Democrats hold a slim majority in the Senate, meaning new laws are unlikely. On Saturday, senior state Democrats told local media they planned to block much of the new governor’s agenda. The sweeping executive orders also included loosening of public health mandates, aimed at slowing the spread of Covid-19 during the coronavirus pandemic. Youngkin’s second order eliminated mask ordinances for pupils in the state’s schools, while his last executive directive abolished vaccine mandates for state employees. Like many other areas of the US, Virginia continues to see a surge in Covid cases as the omicron variant rips through the country. Cases are up 288% in comparison to last winter’s surge, according to the New York Times. The current seven day positivity rate sits at over 35%, according to the state health department. 15,803 have died in the state from the virus since the pandemic began.Scotland’s largest-ever auction of permits to construct offshore windfarms is expected to raise up to £860m when the results are announced on Monday. Crown Estate Scotland, which is running the auction, hopes that windfarms with as much as 10 gigawatts of new generating capacity will be built over the next decade, effectively doubling the amount of electricity generated in Scottish waters in a transition which has the potential to create tens of thousands of jobs. The programme, known as ScotWind, has attracted frenzied interest from domestic and international bidders, and could set new records for values placed on the plots of seabed being leased for turbines. In the first ScotWind leasing round, 8,600 sq km of Scottish seabed is on offer across 15 areas, enough to develop windfarms which could power every Scottish household and save more than 6m tonnes of carbon dioxide a year. The windfarms could more than double the capacity built or planned in the seabed around Scotland over the coming decade. At the moment, offshore windfarms in Scotland generate about 1GW. Projects that have received consent and those being built amount to less than 10GW. The Moray East windfarm has become Scotland’s biggest source of renewable energy, generating up to 950 megawatts from 100 turbines. It will be overtaken by Seagreen next year with 1GW of capacity. Located around 27km off the Angus coast, the £3bn windfarm is a joint venture between Perth-based SSE Renewables (49%) and France’s TotalEnergies (51%). The winning bids – and the prices paid – are expected to be announced at 10am on Monday. Crown Estate said in July that 74 offers had been submitted for ScotWind. Many come from consortiums. Among them is Denmark’s largest energy company Ørsted, which pioneered the first ever offshore windfarm in 1991 and has teamed up with Italy’s Falck Renewables and the floating wind expert BlueFloat Energy. Other bidders include renewable energy investment funds such as Australia’s Macquarie Bank Green Investment Group, which has partnered with the Scottish offshore wind developer Renewable Infrastructure Development Group; big utility companies involved in existing projects, such as SSE and Scottish Power; and large oil companies, including Shell, France’s Total, Italy’s ENI and Norway’s Equinor. Crown Estate Scotland lifted the cap for the auction bids from £10,000 to £100,000 per sq km last year. If every bid is submitted up to that maximum cap, the sale could raise £860m. Melanie Grimmitt, global head of energy at the law firm Pinsent Masons, said this leasing round had shown that there was significant appetite for investment from within the UK and abroad, which bodes well for a second ScotWind seabed leasing round later this year. “This is crown state Scotland’s first seabed leasing round and marks an important chapter for Scotland’s offshore market, but with proposed windfarms from the leasing round expected to save in excess of 6m tonnes of carbon emissions, it is also an important milestone for the UK’s overall net zero commitments,” she said. “Developers will be keeping an eye out to see if and how the application process and criteria for the next round might differ from this one given how popular and competitive it has been.” Crown Estate Scotland is a separate organisation to the crown estate, which manages the Queen’s assets in England and Wales, and its profit is passed to the Scottish government. Some of the proceeds are expected to be ploughed into preparing the workforce for the switch from North Sea oil and gas to wind power. The transition to renewable energy means that as fossil fuel jobs disappear, thousands of workers will need retraining. • This article was amended on 18 January 2022. The Norwegian oil firm mentioned is called Equinor, not Equinox.A man who died after taking four people hostage at a Texas synagogue has been named by the FBI as 44-year-old British national Malik Faisal Akram. Akram began a standoff with police after disrupting a religious service at the Congregation Beth Israel in Colleyville, in the Dallas-Fort Worth metropolitan area, and taking hostages including the rabbi. He released one hostage unharmed after six hours. More than 10 hours after the siege began, members of the FBI’s hostage rescue team stormed the synagogue to free the three remaining hostages. They were said to be “alive and well” after the siege had been brought to an end. On Sunday, Joe Biden said the gunman had used weapons he got off the street to commit “an act of terror”. The US president, who was visiting a food bank in Philadelphia, said: “I don’t have all the facts, nor does the attorney general – but allegedly the assertion was he got the weapons on the street. “He purchased them when he landed and it turns out there apparently were no bombs that we know of … Apparently he spent the first night in a homeless shelter. I don’t have all the details yet so I’m reluctant to go into much more detail.” Akram’s family said they were “devastated” by his death, Sky News reported. His brother Gulbard said in a statement that family members had spent hours “liaising with Faisal” during the hostage-taking, and that although he was “suffering from mental health issues we were confident that he would not harm the hostages,”. The family said they “do not condone any of his actions and would like to sincerely apologise wholeheartedly to all the victims involved in the unfortunate incident,” according to Sky. Reports suggested that a live stream of the Shabbat service, available on Facebook during the standoff until it was cut off at 2pm local time, captured audio of a man talking in an English accent. A spokesman for the Metropolitan police in London said counter terrorism policing officials were liaising with their US counterparts over the incident. The police department said it first sent in Swat teams at the synagogue in response to emergency calls beginning at about 10.40am. The FBI made contact with the man who said he wanted to speak to a woman held in a federal prison. Video from Dallas TV station WFAA shows people running out a door of the synagogue, and then a man holding a gun opening the same door just seconds later, before he turns around and closes the door. Moments later, several rounds of gunfire can be heard, followed by the sound of an explosion. FBI special agent in charge, Matt DeSarno, said the hostage taker was specifically focused on an issue not directly connected to the Jewish community, and there was no immediate indication that the man was part of any broader plan. But DeSarno said the agency’s investigation “will have global reach”. In the live stream, the hostage-taker was heard demanding the release of Aafia Siddiqui, a Pakistani neuroscientist suspected of having ties to al-Qaida, who was convicted of trying to kill US military officers while in custody in Afghanistan, a law enforcement official said. Siddiqui is in federal prison in Texas serving an 86-year sentence. Multiple people heard the hostage-taker refer to Siddiqui as his “sister” on the livestream, but John Floyd, board chair for the Houston chapter of the Council on American-Islamic Relations –– the nation’s largest Muslim advocacy group –– said Siddiqui’s brother, Mohammad Siddiqui, was not involved. “This assailant has nothing to do with Dr Aafia, her family, or the global campaign to get justice for Dr Aafia. We want the assailant to know that his actions are wicked and directly undermine those of us who are seeking justice for Dr Aafia,” said Floyd, who is also legal counsel for Mohammad Siddiqui. “We have confirmed that the family member being wrongly accused of this heinous act is not near the DFW Metro area.” The man could be heard saying repeatedly he did not want to see anyone hurt and that he believed he was going to die, the Fort Worth Star-Telegram reported. On Sunday the British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, condemned the incident in a statement posted on Twitter. “My thoughts are with the Jewish community and all those affected by the appalling act in Texas. We condemn this act of terrorism and antisemitism,” Truss said. She added: “We stand with US in defending the rights and freedoms of our citizens against those who spread hate.” Colleyville, a community of about 26,000 people, is about 15 miles (23 km) north-east of Fort Worth. The synagogue is nestled among large houses in a leafy residential neighborhood. Congregation Beth Israel is led by Rabbi Charlie Cytron-Walker, who has been there since 2006 as the synagogue’s first full-time rabbi. Anna Salton Eisen, a founder and former president of the synagogue, said the congregation has about 140 members and Cytron-Walker has worked hard to build interfaith relationships in the community, including doing pulpit swaps and participating in a community peace walk. “This is unlike anything we’ve ever experienced. You know, it’s a small town and it’s a small congregation,” Eisen said as the hostage situation was ongoing. “No matter how it turns out it’s hard to fathom how we will all be changed by this, because surely we will be.” Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this reportDavid Moyes hit out at the Premier League for making West Ham play three times in a week after Leeds United dented his weary side’s hopes of qualifying for the Champions League. West Ham were unhappy after their rearranged fixture against Norwich City, which was postponed last month, was played last Wednesday. Moyes had hoped he would get a free week following the busy festive period and he felt that his side, who were without five players, suffered because of the schedule. “We did not agree with why we had to play Norwich when we did,” West Ham’s manager said. “We missed one game and not by our doing and we were made to go again at this point in the season. We had a busy Christmas period like everybody else, like Leeds, but Leeds have two games to play, and were not asked to play midweek. “I cannot understand it and it only tells me that the people making those decisions do not understand what recovery means, what it means to play games on a regular basis and the people putting the games are getting that wrong for sure.” Moyes was reluctant to say whether the rules are being abused after Arsenal’s game against Tottenham was postponed yesterday. “I don’t really care about that,” the Scot said. “Maybe we are not being tough enough, maybe I am not being tough enough in saying we could have done with the game against Norwich being off and we could have fought harder for it. “Maybe I will have to do that in the future because it put us under pressure to play today. Leeds had a full week to prepare. But it is done and I can’t put the result solely down to that. It is down to us not playing well, making mistakes, missing chances.” West Ham, who remain fourth, were cut apart by a Jack Harrison hat-trick. Leeds, who moved nine points above the bottom three, were missing nine players due to injury and suspension, but their manager Marcelo Bielsa said that he did not consider asking for a postponement. Bielsa, who filled his bench with academy products, also saw Junior Firpo and Adam Forshaw limp off in the first half. “There are rules to ask for that type of thing and we did not meet the criteria sufficiently to ask for a decision of that kind,” he said.Unilever’s rebuffed £50bn takeover offer for GSK’s consumer healthcare venture, which owns the Panadol and Nicorette brands, represents only a modest premium to its current value, according to some leading analysts, suggesting the drugmaker is right to hold out for a higher offer. GSK said on Saturday that it had rejected three bids from Unilever, the consumer goods giant behind brands including Marmite and Lipton tea. The latest offer, made on 20 December, comprised £41.7bn in cash and £8.3bn in Unilever shares. Britain’s second-biggest drugmaker said the proposals “fundamentally undervalued” the consumer business and its future prospects, and that it remains committed to separate the business from its medical arm and float it on the London Stock Exchange. Analysts have valued it at £45bn, with some estimates as high as £48bn, but takeover offers typically come with an acquisition premium. GSK on Saturday released new organic sales growth forecasts for consumer health of 4% to 6% in the medium term, higher than the 3% to 3.5% analysts have pencilled in. It said it was pushing on with plans for a stock market flotation this summer. Jefferies analyst Peter Welford said: “A £50bn bid reflects a modest 10% acquisition premium, with Unilever gaining control of a leading global consumer healthcare business and likely able to realise significant synergies. We acknowledge post-spin there will be standalone costs that depress returns, but also greater freedom to allocate capital which could boost future growth prospects.” On the other hand, he noted that a £50bn-plus sale would leave GSK £34bn-plus cash for its 68% stake. “In theory this war chest provides ample strategic optionality to rebuild a pipeline and invest in focus therapeutic areas, but at least initially we expect many shareholders would fear a large acquisition and the risk of inferior returns.” GSK has been under pressure from the activist investor Elliott Management, a New York hedge fund, to pursue a sale of the consumer business. Elliott took a sizeable stake in GSK last spring to clamour for change at the pharmaceutical company ahead of its planned split, including demanding that the chief executive, Emma Walmsley, reapply for her job. GSK has firmly resisted the hedge fund’s demands. Unilever issued a statement on Saturday that left the door open for a further approach. “GSK Consumer Healthcare is a leader in the attractive consumer health space and would be a strong strategic fit as Unilever continues to re-shape its portfolio.” Russ Mould, investment research director at the stockbroker AJ Bell, said: “GlaxoSmithKline has a plan of action that it has clearly outlined for some time, so I doubt it feels under pressure to consummate a deal. The fact that management feel capable of waiting for a better price suggests as such, although they do have an obligation to shareholders to get the best possible price that they can, either via the spin-off or sale.”Perhaps the strangest aspect of Rafa Benítez’s time at Everton is how well it began. He may have been sacked after a dismal run of one win in 13 league games, but after seven league games Everton had 14 points, a better start than they’d had last season, when everybody was cooing about Carlo Ancelotti and James Rodríguez. But the problem was that Benítez is Benítez and a significant part of that identity is bound up with Liverpool. Whatever Benítez’s qualities as a coach, he was never likely to be afforded much patience by fans if things went badly. Benítez will probably argue he was undone by a series of key injuries, most notably Dominic Calvert-Lewin and Yerry Mina, while Abdoulaye Doucouré has not been the same since his foot problem. Any side would be affected by the loss of its spine, but in Everton’s case, those absences exposed deeper-lying, almost existential issues. This is a club locked in a spiral of negativity and, whatever Benítez’s faults, nobody should think that many of the problems did not precede him. What is Everton? Since Roberto Martínez departed in 2016, Everton have decided that none of Ronald Koeman, Sam Allardyce, Marco Silva or Benítez are quite for them. Given Carlo Ancelotti won only six of 19 home games last season, he might have found Goodison Park turning against him had fans been in the ground and there is some suggestion he was coming under internal pressure before jumping ship for Real Madrid. Which poses a major question: given four of the last five managers have been deemed failures almost from the off, are Everton terrible at making appointments, or is there something in the character of the club that makes it essentially unmanageable? For a long time Everton were a club who battled on admirably despite a comparative dearth of resources. Since Farhad Moshiri became the club’s owner in 2016, though, there has been a net spend of a little over £200m. That’s not enough to challenge for Champions League qualification, but even after the tap was turned off this summer, the first year of Moshiri’s reign when a cash profit was made on sales, it is not a level of expenditure that should see the club anxiously glancing over their shoulders at a possible relegation fight. Spotrac suggests Everton have the seventh highest wage bill in the Premier League; it’s a long time since they have played like it. Two timeframes need to be taken into account. In the immediate term, Everton were sinking. Defeat on Saturday to a Norwich side that hadn’t so much as scored in six league games meant Everton have now lost to all three promoted clubs this season and that, understandably, came as the final straw. Was a first relegation in 71 years a serious prospect? Perhaps not, but given how poor their form had become, how shambolic their defending, nobody could claim to be entirely comfortable with just a six-point gap to the drop zone, even with games in hand. Once middle-aged fans are running on to the pitch to berate a manager, the jig is almost certainly up. The sale of Lucas Digne a few days earlier after a falling out with Benítez suggests that there was no plan then to dispense with him but there comes a point in any poor run when the tide of negativity is so powerful that sacrifice is the only possible course of action. So Benítez had to go. But whoever takes over will inherit an odd mishmash of a squad patched together over the reigns of six managers. It’s not that there are not good players there – there are – but too many were bought at or beyond their peak. Of course bargains can be found among those cast off elsewhere, but it feels as though there has been a fundamental failure to accept Everton’s place in the modern world. Cosplaying being a big club has simply wasted money. Clubs like Everton can thrive only by buying young prospects and then selling at a profit. It’s unpalatable, but that’s the reality of the financing of modern football for those who are not superclubs. To do that, though, requires a proper structure and a proper philosophy. Under Moshiri there has been none of that, just a club ricocheting between approaches, from modern Dutch to old-school English to emergent Portuguese to Champions League aristocracy to the dour football of 15 years ago. The people who could have instituted a proper transfer policy, Steve Walsh and Marcel Brands, never seemed entirely happy fits. Walsh left in 2018, Brands in December citing “a clear difference in the vision and direction” with the board. Perhaps Brands wasn’t the right man. Perhaps Walsh wasn’t. Ultimately Benítez clearly wasn’t. But who can be? What direction is there at the club at the moment? A former manager has privately observed that Moshiri is unclear in his own mind, too reactive to the shifting tides of fan and media opinion. But until there is a clear vision it is hard to see how Everton move forward, and that begins with an acceptance of their place in the world.England kept alive their hopes of a first Quad Series title after overcoming an eight-goal deficit to defeat New Zealand 49-46 and book their spot in Wednesday’s final. After losing a first international series to the Roses back in September, and then being hammered on Saturday by Australia, just how New Zealand were going to approach England was a point of intrigue. That question was quickly answered. Physical, breathless, the first 15 minutes packed a punch. Bodies bounced off bodies as New Zealand quickly took ownership of space, a familiar tactic from the Ferns. Twisted frames and tightly delivered bounce passes forced England into an unwanted thinking game. Though Layla Guscoth showed flashes of class it did little in the face of the New Zealand defence. In a matter of moments, the Roses trailed by six. When it looked like everything was going New Zealand’s way, and no doubt how Dame Noeline Taurua intended, something not even the Ferns’ head coach could control took over. Seeing their side down by eight the Copper Box crowd intervened. Voices cried, inflatable sticks slapped together and on cue the Roses shifted gear. Drawing on the energy of their surroundings, England began delivering the kind of netball that has seen them be so successful: sharp angles and tight defence. With the late introduction of England’s most-capped player Jade Clarke, New Zealand were muted. Their goal margin disappeared and the score at half-time was poised at 25-25. It is no secret that the biggest challenge ahead for the England head coach, Jess Thirlby, is Commonwealth Games selection. With a squad depth not seen in England’s history what each player can offer will factor heavily in her decision-making. The 38-year-old Clarke made her strongest bid yet for a spot in the 12-player squad. Taking on the mantle of centre, Clarke released the England captain, Serena Guthrie, to wing defence and the new combination proved decisive. “That was a big turning point for us,” said the captain. In the third quarter the two players, with their combined 10 years of international experience, allowed England to take the lead. The goalkeeper Eboni Usoro-Brown and Guscoth, thriving off the output of the Clarke-Guthrie pendulum in front of them, continued to pick off ball keeping the Roses ahead as the teams went toe-to-toe. The never-say-die Ferns continued their pursuit deep into the fourth quarter but the Roses did not relinquish control. Helen Housby, shooting at 96% throughout the game, gritted her teeth as the New Zealand defence desperately pressured her but not even their best efforts could stem her impact. As the buzzer sounded, the crowd cheered in approval as the Roses were final bound. “It’s not ideal to go down obviously,” said Guthrie. “We had to really fight to get back. Ideally, we want to get in the game earlier and stay up in the game but sometimes you’ve got to play what’s in front of your face. I was just really proud of the team effort today.” Next up for England is Australia in the last group match. The world No 1 team, like the Roses, have won their two games and Thirlby was thankful for Sunday’s encounter ahead of Tuesday’s challenge. Thirlby said: “The way that we’ve had to play that game and the way in which New Zealand forced us to play a little bit is a great preparation for a match against the Diamonds.”The BBC will have to make deep cuts to its programme budgets after the government said the broadcaster’s funding would be frozen for the next two years, with the licence fee abolished completely in 2027. The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, is expected to confirm that the cost of an annual licence, required to watch live television and access iPlayer services, will remain at £159 until 2024 before rising slightly for the following three years. She said this would be the end of the current licence fee funding model for the BBC, raising doubts about the long-term financial future and editorial independence of the public service broadcaster under a Conservative government. Dorries said: “This licence fee announcement will be the last. The days of the elderly being threatened with prison sentences and bailiffs knocking on doors are over. Time now to discuss and debate new ways of funding, supporting and selling great British content.” The decision, confirmed by government sources, was briefed to the media as part of a range of measures designed to shore up public support for Boris Johnson after he has faced calls to resign as prime minister. The BBC will have to negotiate with the government over an entirely new funding model when the final licence fee funding deal expires in 2027 – with potential options including a subscription service, part-privatisation, or direct government funding. The Mail on Sunday quoted an ally of Dorries as saying: “There will be a lot of anguished noises about how it will hit popular programmes, but they can learn to cut waste like any other business. This will be the last BBC licence fee negotiation ever. Work will start next week on a mid-term review to replace the charter with a new funding formula. “It’s over for the BBC as they know it.” The source added that “the days of state-run TV are over” and praised the growth of US-run private sector companies such as Netflix and YouTube. Although the BBC will continue to receive £3.2bn a year in licence fee income, the costs of making its programmes are increasing rapidly due to rising inflation and competition from the likes of Netflix. As a result, the corporation will have to make hundreds of millions of pounds in spending cuts in order to balance its books. If the BBC had been allowed to increase the licence fee in line with inflation – currently at 5.1% – the annual cost would have risen to £167 in April. The BBC has already made substantial cost savings behind the scenes, meaning the next round of cuts are likely to hit on-air services. As a result, the public should prepare for the BBC to provide less high-end drama and sports coverage, pad schedules with cheaper programmes, and potentially close some channels or services altogether. This could in turn erode support for the BBC if the public no longer feel they are receiving value for money from the licence fee. The new licence fee deal will cover a five-year period to 2027, with the cost to the public likely to rise in the final three years – although this increase could also be at a below-inflation rate, meaning further cuts to BBC output could be required. Dorries’ allies said there would be no further licence fee deal under a Johnson government and they would start negotiations on an entirely new funding model for the corporation. The BBC’s existence and ability to raise money is underpinned by a royal charter that expires at the end of 2027. The BBC has already been preparing for the end of the licence fee, with proposals including a universal levy on broadband subscriptions or funding the broadcaster with a grant from general taxation – although this could undermine its editorial independence and leave it even more at the whim of government anger. Making the BBC a paid-for subscription service similar to Netflix is difficult due to the widespread popularity of broadcast radio and Freeview television services, which cannot be put behind a paywall. Negotiations over the amount the BBC can charge for the licence fee have been ongoing for some time, with a final deal delayed by Dorries’ appointment in the autumn. The government has repeatedly criticised the corporation’s news output, claiming it is biased against the government and linking negative coverage of the prime minister to the licence fee negotiations. The BBC has faced repeated deep real-terms spending cuts since the start of the Tory-Liberal Democrat coalition government in 2010, with the Conservatives forcing the broadcaster to pay for free licences for the over-75s – then blaming it when they took the benefit away. A BBC source said of the licence fee proposals: “There has been similar speculation before. There are very good reasons for investing in what the BBC can do for the British public, and the creative industries and the UK around the world. Anything less than inflation would put unacceptable pressure on the BBC finances after years of cuts.”Roberto Martínez, the first Everton manager sacked by Farhad Moshiri, is being considered for a remarkable return to Goodison Park following the dismissal of Rafael Benítez. The former Liverpool manager’s short and troubled spell was ended on Sunday after Saturday’s defeat by fellow strugglers Norwich City. Moshiri, Everton’s erratic majority shareholder, is seeking his sixth permanent manager in six years having accepted that his controversial appointment of Benítez had backfired. It is understood other board members had been pushing for Benítez’s removal for several weeks during a dreadful run of form. The Norwich defeat means Everton have taken just six points from their last 13 games, leaving them in 16th, six points above the relegation zone. Benítez leaves with a win percentage of 26% – the worst record of any permanent Everton manager since Howard Kendall’s ill-fated third spell at the club in 1997-98. “Everton Football Club can confirm the departure of Rafael Benítez as First Team manager,” read a brief statement. “Benítez, who joined Everton in June 2021, has left the club with immediate effect. An update on a permanent replacement will be made in due course.” He was in charge for just 22 matches. Martínez has emerged as a leading candidate for the vacancy. The claims of the former Granada coach Diego Martínez, José Mourinho, Niko Kovac and Wayne Rooney are also expected to be discussed by the Everton hierarchy. Duncan Ferguson, who took temporary charge following Marco Silva’s dismissal in 2019, could be appointed on an interim basis. One of Moshiri’s first acts after arriving at Everton in 2016 was to sack Martínez, who enjoyed an impressive first season in charge at Goodison before his reign unravelled. The current Belgium coach has the World Cup in Qatar at the end of the year but only one game – a friendly against Slovenia on 29 March – before the end of the Premier League season. Martínez said at the time of his departure from Everton that he had unfinished business with the club. Everton fans unfurled a banner at Carrow Road calling for Benítez to “get out of our club” and got their wish on Sunday, with the former Liverpool manager lasting just over six months of his three-year contract. Benítez issued a statement saying the job had been harder than he anticipated. “We knew it wouldn’t be easy, and that it was a big challenge, both emotionally and in terms of sport,” he said. “My love for this city, for Merseyside and its people, made me accept this challenge, but it is only when you are inside that you realise the magnitude of the task.” He said injuries and the club’s finances had made things even harder but that he was convinced results would have turned with signings and players returning. “Sadly, nowadays in football there is a search for immediate results and there is always less and less patience; unfortunately circumstances have determined the results and it won’t be possible to continue this project,” he said. Benítez was the most controversial managerial appointment in Everton’s history and only the second man to have managed both Everton and Liverpool, alongside William Edward Barclay in the 19th century. He received personal abuse and threats before signing his contract in June 2021, and Merseyside police investigated a banner that warned “We know where you live” but was left outside the wrong house near the Spaniard’s family home in Wirral. The 61-year-old, however, received a warm ovation before his first home game at the helm but a dreadful run of form, his tactics and a falling-out with Lucas Digne combined to turn many more fans against him. He was also beset by substantial injury problems that left him without Dominic Calvert-Lewin and Richarlison, Everton’s leading goalscorers last season under Carlo Ancelotti, for the majority of his turbulent tenure. The timing of Benítez’s departure is another demonstration of Everton’s dysfunction under Moshiri. The club sold Digne to Aston Villa as a result of his falling-out with Benítez just three days ago. Marcel Brands left as director of football last month amid mounting criticism of the Everton board, who faced fresh calls for their own departures at Norwich, and that allowed Benítez to strengthen his hold over the club’s transfer strategy. Everton have spent around £29m this month on two full-backs, Ukraine international Vitalii Mykolenko and Scotland international Nathan Patterson, and signed Anwar El Ghazi on loan from Villa. On Friday Benítez refused to comment on whether El Ghazi had been imposed on him by Moshiri. Danny Donachie also left as head of medical services following a review instigated by Benítez, who brought in Cristian Fernández as first-team rehabilitation fitness coach.When Courtney Lawes left the field with a grimace in the 64th minute, Franklin’s Gardens held its breath. It was the England forward’s 250th appearance for Northampton and Eddie Jones, among the crowd as he prepares to name his 2022 Six Nations squad on Tuesday, looked concerned. Lawes, who impressed as a stand-in skipper in England’s autumn victory over South Africa, had been hoping to mark his special day in style. He was accompanied by his four children as he led the Saints team out to rapturous applause and pyrotechnics before kick-off. The 32-year-old appeared in discomfort when he was replaced, yet afterwards Phil Dowson delivered a prognosis that came as a blessed relief to Lawes’s club and country. “We thought we’d bring some fresh legs on so it was more precautionary than anything else,” Dowson, Northampton’s forwards coach, said. “He was exhausted, and we had lots of forwards on the bench to bring on. Courtney is experienced enough, old enough and 250 games ugly enough to tell us when he’s done. He’s OK.” Lawes appeared to have taken a heavy knock around 10 minutes before he was forced off, but again Dowson played down the seriousness of the complaint. He added: “He was winded and that’s one of the worst injuries you can get for a short period. I’ve spoken to the medic and there’s nothing glaring. When he says he’s done, he’s very honest.” Exhaustion aside, this was no way for a man who has given so much to the Northampton cause during the past 15 years to mark his milestone appearance. Credit to Ulster, of course. This deserved bonus-point victory marked a third straight win in this season’s Champions Cup and secured their progress to the last 16 of the competition. Mike Lowry, the full-back, took centre stage with a brilliant two-try display and the wingers Robert Baloucoune and Ethan McIlroy were not far behind him in a youthful backline. The Ulster coach, Dan McFarland, said of his dashing back three: “It’s a time in their career where they feel they are invincible. They are able to produce some magic moments.” Indeed, the visitors took their chances with deadly aplomb and capitalised on Northampton’s error-strewn performance which the director of rugby, Chris Boyd, watched from the behind the posts as he served the first game of his two-match ban. After he watched his side beaten 30-6 by Saracens in their Gallagher Premiership clash at Franklin’s Gardens on 2 January, Boyd hit out at the game’s referee Adam Leal. The New Zealander – who will leave his role at Saints at the end of the season – criticised Leal’s handling of the scrum. Boyd said Leal “didn’t have enough nuts” to penalise Saracens at the set piece and, while the 63-year-old is suspended from all matchday coaching duties, he can attend the games as a spectator. Ulster won 27-22 when the sides met last month and they led here when Baloucoune evaded the Northampton defence to dive over in the right corner. That sixth-minute opener was soon added to when Lowry collected a kick from Rory Hutchinson one-handed and found Baloucoune who sent the scrum-half Nathan Doak scurrying clear. Saints replied when Dan Biggar finished off a delightful move down the left flank after fine work from Tom Collins. The wing took a fine pass from Hutchinson and showed intelligence to usher the supporting Biggar over the line for a try which revived Northampton hopes. But on the stroke of half-time, Ulster struck again when a kick from the fly-half Billy Burns fell kindly for Lowry to score and the try was awarded by the TMO despite suspicions of an earlier knock-on. In the 55th minute, the Saints scrum-half Alex Mitchell was sent to the sin-bin for a deliberate offside after Lowry had threatened the home line with another explosive burst. Five minutes later, Lowry took centre stage again, finishing off in style after Baloucoune’s pass had sent Mcllroy through the leaden-footed home defence. Northampton claimed a late try through Hutchinson but their qualification hopes are all but over. Dowson added: “Courtney is a big part of this club and is one of England’s captains. We wanted to make it a special day for him and we failed on that front.”Good morning. Novak Djokovic has left Australia after his last-ditch court challenge failed. And the England Test side has once again failed to turn up with much fight, handing Australia a 4-0 Ashes series win. Novak Djokovic has been deported from Australia after the full federal court dismissed his bid to restore his visa. The Serbian tennis player was seen boarding a flight from Melbourne to Dubai hours after the court rejected his challenge to the decision of Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, to cancel the visa. In a statement Djokovic said he was “extremely disappointed” with the ruling. “I respect the court’s ruling and I will cooperate with the relevant authorities in relation to my departure from the country,” he said. Serbia’s leaders have hit out at Djokovic’s treatment. The prime minister, Ana Brnabić, criticised the decision to cancel the visa as “scandalous”. “I find it unbelievable that we have two completely contradictory court decisions within the span of just a few days,” she said. The tennis world reacted with a mixture of silence and disappointment to Djokovic’s deportation and frustration that it had overshadowed the Australian Open. About 100 doctors have been locked out of Western Australia after being refused G2G passes despite state borders opening, and the likely influx of Covid, just weeks away. Shut-out doctors are warning the health system needs adequate time to prepare for the influx of Covid, and the state government should urgently grant all doctors a G2G pass. Mark Duncan-Smith, the WA president of the Australian Medical Association, said the process was complex. “They’re not being excluded, the problem is not in the approvals, these excluded people are having problems navigating the system. Should the system be simpler? Yes.” Australia has secured a 4-0 Ashes series victory over England. The English team collapsed on the third day of the fifth test, going from 68-0 to 124 all out to hand Australia a 124-run victory. Despite the latest flogging and ongoing questions about the team’s leadership, England captain Joe Root has declared himself ready to lead England’s Test team into a new era. “At the minute we’re going through a real tough period. Performances haven’t been good. But I believe I’m the right man to take this team forward,” said Root, who has now won 27 of 61 matches as captain over four and a half years. Australia Vulnerable welfare recipients have been told they’ll have their benefits cut if they don’t attend face-to-face job agency appointments, despite an unprecedented surge of Covid cases. Australia’s free-to-air TV channels have called on the government to introduce legislation guaranteeing them prominence on smart TV home screens. The networks say they are becoming “increasingly hard to find” among global streaming rivals. Western Australia’s offshore gasfields are paying almost no royalties, create few jobs and are a large and rising source of greenhouse gases, according to a new report from the Australia Institute. A Covid outbreak in regional Australia could leave residents cut off from essential services if businesses close due to staff infection or close contacts. The world The full extend of damage from Saturday night’s volcanic eruption near Tonga is still unclear, as the island nation is covered by a thick blanket of ash, contaminating water supplies, cutting off communications and preventing surveillance flights. A man who died after taking four people hostage at a Texas synagogue has been named by the FBI as a 44-year-old British national. The FBI stormed the building after a man took four people including a rabbi captive during the Shabbat service. The violent unrest in Kazakhstan that began with peaceful protests in early January has left 225 people dead, authorities have said in a dramatic increase on previous tolls. The former Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu is reportedly close to reaching a plea bargain in his corruption trial. In the reported agreement, Netanyahu will admit to two counts of breach of trust, resulting in a suspended prison sentence and a few months of prison time that will be converted to community service. Recommended reads Some may presume that catharsis can be found in memoir writing, but for Joe Simpson, putting Touching the Void down on paper was “horrible”. He retreated to a friend’s attic to write the book over seven weeks, purely because the facts of his stricken ascent up Siula Grande in the Peruvian Andes as a 25-year-old had been greatly misrepresented through rumours in the climbing world. Now, decades on, he’s flummoxed to see his story as a play, making its Australian premiere in Melbourne this week. There are few food items across the world as divisive as Spam, the small can of processed pork that inspires either love or revulsion. Spam is a shining beacon of culinary innovation through hardship, and represents a complex history across many cultures – and there are even plant-based versions. Rosheen Kaul explains how this very American product became a staple for millions of Asians and Pacific Islanders – with four easy recipes to help you ease it into your diet. How do you shop at the supermarket? Do you take equal parts of impulse and vibe, fashion a list of stuff you fancy and load up the trolley until you think you’ve got enough food for the week? This week in our easy wins series, Graham Readfearn shares how a simple family meal plan stuck to the fridge can save cash and reduce waste. Listen Omicron is now the dominant variant of Covid-19 in Australia and since its emergence late last year scientists and governments have been racing to learn more about it. So what do we know about how Omicron impacts the human body? In todays’ Full Story, science writer Donna Lu speaks to Laura Murphy-Oates about the latest data, studies and health advice on the variant. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport The AFLW should be recognised as a winter sport staged alongside the men, writes Rana Hussain. “The women’s competition is reaping no benefits from being the summer sideshow to the AFL’s main event.” Media roundup Much of the country’s news is dominated by Novak Djokovic’s deportation, with some News Corp columnists calling for the resignation of Tennis Australia’s boss Craig Tiley over the saga. In Queensland, the Courier Mail reports that children as young as 10 are being caught with e-cigarettes in a new series looking at the dangers of vaping. The West Australia reports Geraldton Hospital ED is facing a “critical medical staff shortage” and at times in January were able to fill only 12% of its medical roster. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Prada called on Hollywood heavyweights Jeff Goldblum and Kyle MacLachlan to bookend its catwalk on Sunday afternoon, bringing a close to a quiet menswear fashion week that saw multiple brands cancel their shows in light of increasing Covid cases across Europe. The appearance of the actors at the Fondazione Prada punctuated the second physical catwalk show from founder Miuccia Prada and her co-creative director Raf Simons since the latter came onboard in early 2020, marking an unprecedented union of two of the fashion industry’s most influential and famed designers. The fruits of their collective output have so far proved to be critically acclaimed and this autumn/winter 2022 collection had the hallmarks of the same. Taking the concept of uniform as their stimuli, Prada and Simons elevated boiler suits in silk tech, leather and cotton, and blurred rose-print – replacing “the traditional historical shirt/tie/bow tie and giv[ing] a new energy and reality, a younger attitude also,” said Simons. Outerwear loomed large in trench coats and utilitarian parkas with shearling panels. Elsewhere, the accessories that will get the social media universe buzzing arrived in compartmentalised backpacks, fluorescent gloves and miniature pocket belts in the signature Prada triangle. “The collection celebrates the idea of working – in all different spheres and meanings,” said Prada, emphasising the idea of the importance of formal work and the wardrobe she imagines represents it. “Through these clothes, we emphasise that everything a human being does is important. Every aspect of reality can be elegant and dignified … elevated, and celebrated.” Joining Goldblum and MacLachlan to present the collection to a socially distanced audience of 200-plus guests was a new generation of actors: the Queen’s Gambit star Thomas Brodie-Sangster, Sex Education lead Asa Butterfield and the award-winning Moonlight actor Ashton Sanders. “Actors are interpreters of reality, employed to echo truth through their portrayals,” said Prada. “Real men, recognised figures, they bring a new facet of reality.” The reality of the Italian fashion week was something different from what had been scheduled. Giorgio Armani, one of the showcase’s biggest draws, was the most high-profile designer to cancel his eponymous and Emporio Armani shows – “with great regret and following careful reflection in light of the worsening epidemiological situation” – in early January. Carlo Capasa, president of the governing body of Italian fashion, the Camera della Moda (CNMI), said that while he respected Armani’s personal decision, it was important to find ways to push on with live events that facilitate face-to-face interaction and drive revenue into the Italian fashion industry. “Given the situation we’re doing the best we can do in this moment and we have proven we can manage the situation,” said Capasa, referring to the strict distancing, FFP2 masks, and proof of full vaccination that were required at all 16 physical shows on the schedule. “Generally speaking, fashion week needs to go on [to give] the sign that the industry needs. It’s very important [as] it’s the second biggest industry [in this country] and we have 1.2 million people working in fashion in Italy. We don’t know how long it’s going to take to be out of the current situation [with the pandemic] and so it’s about trying to find a balance between real life and security.”Boris Johnson has been accused of targeting the BBC in a desperate attempt to save his own premiership, as the Labour leader insisted he had broken the law by attending lockdown parties and then lying about it. A number of Tory MPs are said to be poised to demand Johnson’s resignation amid anger from constituents over allegations of a party culture in Westminster while coronavirus restrictions were in place. There have been reports that up to 35 of the 54 letters needed to trigger a vote of no confidence are already in, though the actual number is a closely guarded secret. As Downing Street hoped to find ways to contain the crisis, the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, one of Johnson’s most loyal allies, confirmed on Sunday the BBC licence fee will be abolished in 2027 – and the broadcaster’s funding will be frozen for the next two years. Though the move will force the corporation to close services and potentially make thousands of redundancies, it is likely to prove popular with Conservative party members and supporters, as well as the rightwing media who have yet to call for Johnson to quit. “The prime minister thinks those reporting on his rule-breaking should pay consequences, whilst he gets off free,” said Lucy Powell, the shadow culture secretary. Ian Murray, the shadow Scottish secretary, described the announcement as “a last-ditch attempt [by Johnson] to save his failing premiership”. The BBC funding cut, which could fundamentally change the corporation as it enters its centenary year, appears to be a central theme of Johnson’s fightback strategy, which is reportedly called Operation Red Meat. Other measures said to be in the pipeline include a renewed drive to stop people crossing the Channel in small boats, measures to tackle the NHS operations backlog, extra investment in skills and lifting Covid restrictions on 26 January. Although the BBC had been braced for bad news for some time – Johnson declared that he would consider abolishing the licence fee in the 2019 election campaign (on a day when a hospital scandal was dominating the headlines) – one government insider said the announcement had not been expected this weekend. Some Tory MPs have been particularly critical of the way the BBC has covered Johnson’s latest leadership crisis, with the backbencher Michael Fabricant even claiming at the weekend that relentless coverage of anti-Johnson comments in news reports amounted to “a coup attempt against the prime minister”. No 10 insiders insisted on Sunday that these reports were not a factor in the licence fee decision, which they said was the culmination of a process going on for more than a year, but the Liberal Democrat leader, Ed Davey, claimed there was a link. “Slashing the funding of a beloved national treasure just because you don’t like the headlines on the 6 o’clock news is no way for a responsible government in a democracy to behave,” he said. With Downing Street still reeling from revelations that its staff had partied the evening before the Duke of Edinburgh’s funeral, it was forced to deny a claim that the prime minister failed to intervene to cancel a 20 May party last year when he had the chance. No 10 said the claim made by Dominic Lawson in his Sunday Times column was “untrue”. But one former Downing Street staffer told the Guardian they knew at least one colleague who had warned Johnson personally that the “bring your own booze” gathering, organised by Johnson’s aide, Martin Reynolds, should not go ahead. Asked whether the PM knew about the party before it took place, the former insider replied: “Yes.” Reynolds is one of several No 10 figures expected to leave after Sue Gray publishes her report on the scandal. On Sunday evening, the Telegraph reported that the senior civil servant had already questioned Johnson. With many Tory MPs waiting until the Gray report comes out, the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said there was no need to wait because it was already “obvious” that Johnson “broke the law … [and] then lied about what happened”. Starmer was referring to Johnson’s statement to MPs last week in which he all but admitted that the party he attended at No 10 on 20 May 2020 was against the rules. Starmer said the PM’s admission that he was at the event showed he was not telling the truth when he told MPs before Christmas there had been no parties at No 10. Six Conservative MPs had publicly called for Johnson’s resignation by late Sunday and one backbencher said that he knew there were “a lot of letters written but not necessarily sent yet” to the chair of the Conservative 1922 Committee demanding a confidence vote. The MP said the mood in his “red wall” constituency had gone from “anger to ridicule” and that Johnson had become the butt of jokes among some who voted for him in December 2019. The backbencher said “the term ‘shitshow’ was used a lot last week [by Tory MPs]” and that they were waiting for the forthcoming report into the partygate scandal before deciding what to do next. James Johnson, a Tory pollster, delivered a similar insight into popular revulsion with the PM on Sunday when he tweeted the findings from focus groups carried out with long-term Conservative voters, and people who backed the party for the first time in 2019, and he reported that calls for the PM to quit were “almost universal”.TV and radio stars have rallied behind the BBC after it was revealed the government plans to freeze the broadcaster’s funding and eventually scrap the licence fee. Match of the Day host Gary Lineker criticised the move by the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, which emerged in briefings over the weekend and could force the corporation to close services and make redundancies. Lineker told his 8 million Twitter followers the BBC was revered, respected and envied around the world. “It should be the most treasured of National treasures. Something true patriots of our country should be proud of. It should never be a voice for those in government whoever is in power,” he wrote. Dorries is expected to confirm the cost of an annual licence will remain at £159 until 2024. The licence, which is needed to watch BBC channels and access iPlayer, will then rise slightly for three years before ending completely in 2027. Dorries remarked: “This licence fee announcement will be the last. The days of the elderly being threatened with prison sentences and bailiffs knocking on doors are over. Time now to discuss and debate new ways of funding, supporting and selling great British content.” However, Armando Iannucci, the creator of The Thick of It, challenged Dorries’ assertions. “If you really think your government can win back the public by tossing out a panicky weekend threat to the BBC, then you under-estimate the level of support, admiration and respect the public has for it,” he replied. Former children’s laureate Michael Rosen, who regularly appears on Radio 4, mimicked the prime minister in addressing Dorries. He wrote: “Good to see your plans to give the BBC a kicking. I thought of Herodotus pinning Hannibal to the Golden Fleece. Nation shall speak unto nation but not via Broadcasting House, eh babe? Repressio pressio Boris.” Others recognised the BBC had its critics on the left as well as the right. Comedian Nish Kumar, who hosts the Mash Report, described the government as “a pack of pissed up cultural vandals”. He added: “I know that it feels like absolutely everyone hates the BBC right now, and there are good reasons for that, but ending the licence fee is bad news.” Some were more succinct. Businesswoman Deborah Meaden, one of the investors in the BBC’s Dragons’ Den programme, said: “You will miss it when it’s gone.”• An obituary mistakenly said that the DJ Janice Long hosted a weekday breakfast programme on BBC Radio 2, and reduced by several years her time presenting the station’s midnight show (28 December, Journal, p6). • A birthday notice for Dame Sandra Horley, the former chief executive of Refuge, omitted her title (11 January, Journal, p11). • Other recently amended articles include: Warning over fuel and food stocks as ‘hellish’ Tigray reels from airstrikes Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.The tournament is hotting up now, with some big names on the line. Join us this week for more more more. Thanks for reading. Peter Oh is in: “In terms of tournament title defences, could Algeria’s now be heading toward the level of France’s shambolic display at the 2002 World Cup?” More exultant social media. Functional social media corner. Here’s a roundup of today’s other action in the tournament. What a shock, the story of the tournament so far! Algeria were woeful but Equatorial Guinea, scorer and heroic defender, has been the match-winner. 90+4 min: Esteban is booked for some theatrics, and there’s a chance for Algeria to get it launched into the box. That, like everything else from Algeria, is wasted. 90+3 min: Dorian has a shot that’s saved as Equatorial Guinea are pinning back Algeria, who have four men upfield but can’t get the ball. 90+2 min: Edu, the star of the show, leaves the field. Eneme Bocari comes on, he plays for Nantes reserves. He almost gets a goal almost immediately but takes a wild swing. 90 min: Five minutes are added on. By the way, we are told the team in the lead here are the 49th-ranked team in Africa. Can that be right? 89 min: Equatorial Guinea have the ball in the Algerian half and are doing their best to kill time. 87 min: Belmadi is going bonkers on the sidelines. His team are on the brink of a serious embarrassment here. 85 min: Algeria pressure now, with Mahrez getting space and time down the flanks. Coco heads away with Slimani the target for the balls pumped into the box. Brahimi gets to the byline, and Esteban gets it clear. Then there’s a faller in the box, and a penalty claim. Belaïli was falling before the challenge came in. 83 min: Algeria have the ball in the net! Belaïli buries the ball but he’s offside, and he knows it. A neat finish but ultimately a waste of the time that is ticking down. 82 min: A glimpse of Mahrez, but he has to dig out the ball from the sideline, and Belaïli swings a volley at it, and then Slimani swung and missed. Oh dear. 81 min: Equatorial Guinea fans pictured in the stands, to say they are going wild is wildly understating stuff. The Algerians look desolate. 79 min: Slimani gets the header from a corner and there is a weak penalty claim made as Owono wins the ball ahead of onrushing Algerian attackers. Owono then takes his time after taking a knock. 77 min: Edu is down, and he’s taking his time over this. The referee will not be allowing any time-wasting. 75 min: The Algerian plan now seems to: launch it at Slimani, who is a fine finisher, but he’s also up against a defence who seem equipped to deal with the rough stuff. 74 min: The Algeria body language is not good. They have been poor all night and allowed themselves to get frustrated, and then caught out. 72 min: The goal celebrations took some time there, and Algeria almost get caught again at the other end by another speedy break. After Dorian Junior forces a corner, Algeria make a terrible mess of the corner and it’s poked home by Esteban at the back post. We have a shock on our hands, a big shock. 67 min: Free-kick chance for Mahrez, after a melee on the edge of the Guinean box. Edu is the draught excluder, and Mahrez sets up Belaïli for the hit. It comes off the wall and bounces behind. 65 min: As another Algeria free-kick is wasted, another change is made. Two in fact, Miranda on, Bikoro off. Dorian Jnr on, and Yannick goes off. The stadium announcer does the business once more. 64 min: Two Algeria subs, off go Feghouli and on comes Boulaya. Then on comes Slimani for the quiet Bounedjah. 62 min: Algeria seek holes in the opposition defence but can’t find much of a way through. This time, they try to be patient but lose the ball, only for Bendebka to be fouled. 60 min: Atal’s foul wins Equatorial Guinea a free-kick, but this one is blammed into the wall. 58 min: Mahrez being followed everywhere by N’Dong, and Coco brings the ball out of defence in the style of Ruud Krol or Marius Tresor. 57 min: Close! Belaïli heads the ball down and it’s only just hacked off the line by a retreating defender. 56 min: At this point, Mahrez, who has done so little in this game, must be wishing he could have been sunning himself in Cheshire rather than this. 54 min: Tahrat comes on for Benlamri, whose game, and possibly tournament is at an end. The lady announcing subs in the stadium doesn’t make any mistake in letting the stadium know about changes, delivering the message loud and often. 52 min: Equatorial Guinea have had the better chances. Nlavo is causing problems, and Benlamri is on the end of a challenge that ends with the defender pulling up. 51 min: Edu - excellent again- drives past Bensebaini, and then the sub, Nlavo, gets two chances at it, hitting the first at the keeper and the second off the keeper. 49 min: Djamel Belmadi, the Manchester City legend who is the Algeria manager, is wearing a pained expression. This is not flowing football. And his team are struggling for a flow. 47 min: We begin with a foul, with Atal collapsing to the floor with a head injury. But play is waved on quickly enough. 46 min: The tempers are still flaring, with Algerians having a go at referee Escobar before we even kick off. A sub is made, with Siafa going off, and Nlavo Asué coming on. This been attritional, with Algeria finding very little room amid the Guinean aggression. The closest anyone’s come is that Edu shot that looked like it was flying in, but dipped over the bar. 45 min: More bookings, more bad tempers, as Mandi wants a penalty and is booked for dissent. Was Coco booked too? The wait for the free-kick is an age. Mahrez wafts the free-kick over. And that’s half-time. 43 min: Algeria have to be patient. Mahrez turns back on himself as a means to win space, and then his team win a free-kick in a very dangerous position from a Coco foul. 41 min: The Guinean defence is sat deep, and Mahrez has been a passenger in this match for some time now. Atal shows off some skill when overlapping from the right flank, but his left-foot shot is blocked. This has opened up. 39 min: Edu, from an Equatorial Guinea corner, smashes a shot that flies just wide of angle and post. The closest we have come so far, and it would have been one to rattle the stanchion had it been a few inches lower. 38 min: Algeria, for pre-tournament favourites, are not playing too well. Too put it mildly though this does not seem like a fun game to play in. 36 min: Edu buys a foul and calls for a yellow card, not for the first time. From the free-kick, Ganet smashes in a shot that has M’Bohli scrambling all over the place. Then the keeper clattered by Oubina, and there is another break in play. 35 min: Another cruncher, Bennacer on Ganet. In another game that might be a yellow but the tariff appears higher in this game. 33 min: Guinean goalkeeper M’Bohli gets it launched from a backpass. Safety first. 31 min: Mahrez spins but can’t find a final pass. Then across come Salvador Edu, and whacks Atal. It was another of those crunchers. This is more amped-up than an Old Firm game at the moment, and tempers are fraying. 29 min: Every tackle is a cruncher in this game. Some real brutality out there. Algeria look to be struggling with their opponents’ muscle. Though that may be finite. Ndong, at the other end, clatters Atal. 26 min: That Equatorial Guinea defensive line holding firm for now. And the pink-haired Edu, is then fouled by Bensebaini. The reaction is a triple forward roll. Bensebaini was booked before and on sudden death. If anything, the theatrics saved him. 23 min: Algeria have the ball in the net..Mahrez heads the ball down, and then knocks in the rebound, only for the offside flag to be waved. It was a good decision, and few complaints. Algeria now knocking on the door. 21 min: Algeria go close, with Owono making a series of saves, with Belaïli having one of them. The ball is bouncing all over the place, bobbling off the surface. 18 min: Algeria corner comes in, and Coco clears it. Good discipline so far from him and his fellow defenders...Siafa at the other end forces a save from M’Bohli, but the offside flag, delayed, comes up. 16 min: Equatorial Guinea put together some slick passing, but Siafa the striker is not having much fun up against a muscular Algerian defence. This game is a bruiser, and not one that Premier League fans watching their heroes are going to be able to view without some anxiety. 14 min: Feghouli attempts a pass down the flank, and Mahrez gets on the go, and that leads to an Algeria corner. Great defending from Equatorial Guinea. 12 min: Another minute, another break in play. More stops than the 55 night bus back from town. 11 min: Bensebaini with an amazing miss, scooping the ball over the bar though his blushes have been saved by the offside flag. 9 min: Ndong booked now, for hacking down Belaïli after Algeria break away after a poor free-kick from Salvador. There seems to be a foul a minute at the moment. 8 min: Second Algeria booking, Bensebaini is carded for a loose elbow. He wasn’t helped by some theatrics. 6 min: Algeria are not panicking at all, but don’t seem to be playing particularly quickly. That’s been the pattern of much of the football in Cameroon though it’s taken light a bit more over the last couple of days. Mahrez seems not to have touched the ball just yet from his wide position. 4 min: This already feels like a bad-tempered game, with Bounedjah booked for a clattering tackle. The striker is in for Leicester “legend” Islam Slimani, who drew a blank in the opening match. 3 min: On the commentary, John Salako just talked of the quality of the pitch, an opinion I am not sure I share. Looks like it’s had some hammer. Anyway, great noise from the fans in the stadium, with Algeria sounding the loudest. 1 min: And we are go in what could be a decisive game for one so early in the tournament. Equatorial Guinea are right in the face of Algeria from the start. The captains swap pendants, with the referee Mr Escobar - no relation - looking on. And we are soon to get underway. The previous match today was full of incident, let’s hope this one is as exciting. So no start for Benrahma for Algeria, who feature instead another West Ham alumni in Sofiane Feghouli, these days of Galatasaray. Algeria: M’Bolhi, Atal, Bensebaini, Benlamri, Mandi, Feghouli, Bendebka, Belaïli, Mahrez, Bennacer, Bounedjah Subs: Tahrat, Tougai, Brahimi, Belkebla, Slimani, Boulaya, Oukidja, Zorgane, Chétti, Benayada, Amoura, Benrahma Equatorial Guinea: Equatorial Guinea XI: Owono, Carlos Akapo, Obiang, Coco, Ndong, Ganet, Pepin, Salvador, Bikoro, Buyla, Siafa. Subs: Angel, Anieboh, Cosme, Belima, Magno, Sapunga, Miranda, Hanza, Nlavo, Eneme, Balboa, Javier Akapo Algeria’s start to the tournament, a 0-0 draw with Sierra Leone, was a disappointment but extended their unbeaten run to 27 matches. Equatorial Guinea lost only 1-0 to Ivory Coast, and could perhaps count themselves a tad unlucky. With Algeria facing the Ivorians in their last group game, a win here for the joint favourites would be helpful, particularly with Sierra Leone grabbing a highly dramatic draw from Ivory Coast. Riyad Mahrez and co need to find the scoring touch that deserted them in that opening match. Said Benrahma, who West Ham missed in losing to Leeds earlier today, may well get a start. Plenty riding on the first ever meeting between the two teams, then, in Douala’s Japoma Stadium, where that earlier game between Ivory Coast and Sierra Leone also took place. The pitch cut up badly for the Sierra Leone equaliser in injury-time, and that may be a factor here. Join me for a 7pm UK time kick-off.The lifelong West Ham fan Kate Longhurst’s looping header deep into injury time rescued a point against Tottenham, denying their London rivals the chance to move up to second in the WSL. “You want to score against the teams you don’t like,” said Longhurst, who found the net from West Ham’s only on-target effort after they played the final 24 minutes with 10 players, the defender Hawa Cissoko having received two yellow cards, either side of conceding the penalty from which Tottenham scored. Rosella Ayane scored that in a feisty and scrappy encounter, and although Rehanne Skinner’s side were denied a win they have surpassed last season’s points tally with half the season left to play. “We’ve got to make sure we put games beyond teams,” said Skinner. “That’s the next stage; we’ve got to be better than that.” Longhurst had done her best to boost the budding rivalry between the Tottenham’s and West Ham’s women’s teams before the game, with the French defender Cissoko telling Sky Sports that her teammate had left the coaches and players silent with a powerful talk before the reverse fixture. “We have to smash them because she’s going to kill us,” Cissoko said matter of factly of this game. Dagny Brynjarsdottir had given the Hammers a first win over their London rivals in November and there was no love lost between the two teams from the off at Barnet. Tottenham arguably edged the first half, with the forwards Jess Naz and Ayane particularly bright, but they struggled to test West Ham’s New Zealand goalkeeper Anna Leat, playing her first WSL game in the absence of the Asian Cup-bound Mackenzie Arnold. Despite the Spurs pressure, Olli Harder’s West Ham looked relatively untroubled and had the best chance of the half when the unmarked centre-back Grace Fisk headed over from close range. With West Ham struggling to hold on to the ball in the middle and Spurs lacking enough threat up front, both teams made changes for the second half, with Zaneta Wyne, who played under Harder at the Norwegian team Klepp IL, on in the middle and Tottenham’s top scorer Rachel Williams called upon. Spurs reaped the rewards for their continued pressure in the second half. Cissoko, on a yellow card and perhaps too fired up by Longhurst, clattered into the back of on-loan Tang Jiali, conceding a penalty but staying out of the book, and Ayane fired the spot-kick into the bottom corner and just out of reach of the diving Leat. Three minutes later and Cissoko was gone for the second time this season, receiving her second yellow for dissent, having booted away the ball after she felt she was unfairly penalised for a foul on Naz. With injury time well under way though, Longhurst’s stunning header from Byrnjarsdottir’s cross ensured West Ham share the spoils and put the team one point shy of the 15 they accumulated last season. “If anyone was going to do it, it was going to be her,” said Harder of his goalscorer. “It’s a great way to finish. I feel a bit sorry for Spurs – they did look to have played a game more – but it’s a point and I’ll take it.”“The plan? I don’t know ... to win,” Carlo Ancelotti had said, and that was what happened. Real Madrid have their first trophy of his second coming. It is a minor one, sure, taken from Spain to Saudi Arabia, but it seems unlikely to be the last. Not least because of the way they claimed the Super Cup: goals from Luka Modric and Karim Benzema inside the first hour were ultimately enough on a night where they had seemed to be easing their way to success, and then Thibaut Courtois appeared just at the moment when it looked like, actually, they might not. The Belgian had just made a couple of saves from substitute Nico Serrano as Athletic Bilbao rebelled against a fate that seemed pre-written and looked for a lifeline in the final 15 minutes. They had been getting a little closer with every minute, “warming me up” as Courtois put it afterwards, and now it seemed they had it when Eder Militão blocked Raúl García’s header with his hand and was sent off. There were five minutes left and Athletic had a penalty. “If they had scored that we would have had seven or eight minutes of heart attacks,” the goalkeeper said. García hit it to Courtois’s left as he went to the right, but he reacted fast and managed to save it with his left foot, sending the ball way into the air and Madrid to the title – lifted by the club captain Marcelo, sent on late to do the honours. For Athletic, this was a fourth final in a year but the third in a row they had lost. These two teams, historic clubs in Spain, where they have never been out of the first division, had not met in a final since 1958. Now Athletic handed back the Super Cup they had won against Barcelona this time 12 months ago. Madrid had done it their way, which is many ways really and certainly includes the goalkeeper. After a semi-final in which Barcelona had more of the ball but Madrid made it through, Fede Valverde running from his area to the other in extra-time, Ancelotti had sought to decriminalise the counterattack. In a way too few managers have been prepared to do, he calmly admitted that, yes, his team does quite often play on the break. But not always and, besides, with the players and the pace they have got, why wouldn’t they? “I’m not going to win every game on the counter and if I play possession I’m not going to either,” he said, “Let people say we play on the break: I’m delighted, because it’s not so easy, nor so simple.” Especially if your opponents have ideas that are not so different. That might have suggested a meeting in which Athletic and Madrid cancelled each other out, waiting deep for an offensive that never arrived, hoping for the chance to break. Instead the first half of this game was open and enjoyable. Both sides were indeed prepared to run, but that was not the only mode of progression, especially in Madrid’s case. The second half was largely a non-event until that final 15 minutes, Ancelotti’s team seemingly comfortably in control until the closing minutes. Athletic alternated between waiting and pressing high. They also began moves deep, drawing Madrid in, and there was a clarity about their attacks, willing to go for their opponents when the space was created. David Alaba twice had to slide in on Iñaki Williams: once sweeping the ball with his hand, the palm on the floor precluding it being a penalty. And if Madrid have athletes, they also have aesthetes: almost a decade on, that midfield is still perhaps the best, Modric still defying space and time. So of course is Benzema, better even than when Ancelotti last had him. Vinicius, unusually quiet here, gives them velocity but they are happy in possession too, shown when Toni Kroos dribbled his way out of the area on nine minutes and when the move that gave them the lead started with Courtois. Kroos and Casemiro were involved before Modric spread it right, where Rodrygo was running. Athletic backed off to their box, where the Brazilian laid it to Modric, who bent a superb shot into the corner. Madrid, gently tightening the screw as the first half went on, had a lead which doubled at the start of the second half when Yeray Álvarez threw himself into block a Benzema shot with his arm. Benzema put the penalty away and for a while it felt a little like everyone knew this was over. Madrid seemed to be enjoying it, just playing. Which Athletic couldn’t find the space or enough of the ball to do. And yet the danger hadn’t gone. In part perhaps because the belief that it had, Madrid dropping deeper and seemingly content just to see out time; certainly because this is Athletic, a team with limitations but no lack of pride. Yeray headed into the side-netting. Iñigo Martínez’s free-kick hit the wall. And then Serrano had his two efforts. Saving those was simple enough for Courtois. The penalty was different, but somehow he stopped that too, the man against whom Ancelotti took the European Cup eight years ago ensuring the first of a new era with some familiar old faces.Am I alone in meeting news of a solo project by Sue Perkins with delight tempered by anxiety? Delight because I find her a very companionable companion on whatever televisual journey we are about to undertake together – warm, witty, and perceptive without ever veering into condescension or cynicism. And anxiety in case this means that she and Mel Giedroyc have fallen out. As a pair they were closing in on national treasure status during the Bake Off years and the sight of such enduring friendship – the powerful suggestion that once off camera, these two women now in their early 50s, could still enjoy being absolute idiots together – was, and remains important to me. So this is the new outing for what I shall – unless otherwise informed by eight independent sources – cleave to thinking of as the latter half of emotionally inviolate duo Mel and Sue. This time Sue is travelling across California and Colorado as the presenter of Sue Perkins’ Big American Road Trip (Channel 4), setting off from just outside San Francisco in a fairly basic one-person caravan to experience the great outdoors (the girl from Croydon is rightly awed by the sheer size and spectacle on offer along the Pacific Coast Highway) and to talk to people along the way who have, through choice or necessity, taken up #vanlife. It is mainly those who have taken up the nomadic life by choice who are responsible for the hashtag. Instagram is full of curated grids of (mostly) twentysomethings who have opted out of the rat race and headed out on to the open road and all the opportunities for personal growth and filtered sunset shots it offers. Perkins, fortunately/carefully/generously (delete according to taste and your own weary cynicism levels), finds representatives of the least performative strand of the movement to interview. First come sweet young couple Blix and Bess, who are such wholesome Americans that it is charming to watch them try to work out what to do in the face of a riff by Sue about pubic hair in communal showers. “We’ve gone down a conversational cul-de-sac of my own making,” says Sue, when she realises. The pair are disarmingly honest about their desire to see all the touristy places that they would never have been able to afford to visit in a traditional manner, but also insightful about the more intangible benefits itinerant life has brought. Blix noticed how long it took to relax into the fact that people were just being friendly, often trying to share knowledge and experiences with newcomers – “and I was the jerk rejecting their energy”. Near Yosemite, Sue meets Alexandria, who has garnered 300,000 online followers during her seven years of van living. She shows Sue how best to dig a poo hole. “It’s so small,” says Sue. “Which means I have supplementary questions.” The last third of the programme is dedicated to older campers, who tend to be those who began living a version of #vanlife because circumstances required it. The mood among the community that has cohered around Bob Wells, made famous by his appearance in the Frances McDormand film Nomadland, is quiet, careful and tinged with sadness. Sue doesn’t press them on their individual reasons for coming to this life but it is evident – particularly among the women – that the past casts long shadows and that to live without trappings is not always to be wholly free. The programme is a standard gentle travelogue format done well. A presenter who manages to be irreverent without being disrespectful, who can engage at the right level with any interviewee and ad-lib jokes whenever things might otherwise flag, is always a joy. A willingness to improvise a burlesque routine (alongside Bess, who is a dancer) as “Perry Menopause” is also to be commended. As a fellow south-east Londoner also with “a pelvic floor like wet plasterboard” I can only salute La Perkins and wish her well on her way through Colorado next week, which is – in all but the strictly geographical sense – just about the furthest place from Catford or Croydon there is.Novak Djokovic’s deportation from Australia on the eve of the Australian Open is bad for tennis and an avoidable issue that could have been addressed long ago, Andy Murray has said. “It’s a tough one for [Djokovic],” said the Scot, speaking moments after the decision to cancel the world No 1’s visa and deport him from Australia was upheld by the courts. “Obviously, it’s not ideal for the tournament, either. I just think, overall, the whole situation has been bad for the sport.” Murray continued: “Now I hope the tennis is what gets spoken about, and what the players are doing on the court, and all the good stories that are happening. It just feels like the whole thing could have been avoided, or maybe addressed a number of months ago, rather than like it all happening right at the last moment.” One such event filled with good stories, that was overshadowed by Djokovic’s unfolding visa drama, was Murray’s run to the final of the Sydney International, just his second ATP final since 2017. He defeated two top 25 players, Reilly Opelka and Nikoloz Basilashvili before losing in the final to Aslan Karatsev, the top seed. Murray will again face Basilashvili, the 21st seed, in the first round of the Australian Open. The last time Murray was in Melbourne it is fair to say that a few things happened. By the beginning of 2019, Murray had been struggling badly with his left hip for two years, unable to even put on his socks without significant pain let alone contest gruelling five-set tennis matches. He announced in an emotional press conference before the tournament that retirement appeared to be on the horizon and after a classic, unforgettable first-round defeat against Roberto Bautista Agut, the tournament held a mini-retirement ceremony for him. It seemed to be the end. Murray says he does not remember much about what happened after the match, but the buildup to the event was evidently unforgettable. He spent the off-season having frank conversations with his family about the constant pain he was in which was hard to forget. “I’m still surprised that I was able to perform like I did with the lack of practice and preparation, and also how bad my body was feeling at the time. And yeah, it’s a great memory. Obviously, it turned out not to be my last match which I’m really happy about but it certainly could have been. Yeah, it would have been fine. It would have been a good way to finish.” On the subject of the ideal retirement, Murray says he has not thought about it much but he is honest and frank about how increasingly difficult the tour is for a man of his age with a family. “For me, it is becoming harder, like leaving the family and stuff, I find that more difficult now than what I did a couple of years ago. For example, if I had another injury again, which was going to be like a long rehab, or whatever, something happened to the hip, obviously, that would be the end.” Instead of heading home to contemplate the end of his career, Murray underwent hip resurfacing surgery as a new stage of his career began. He says, when comparing those days with now, that it is particularly pleasant not to wake up in pain any more. “Now, I sort of know that, yeah, like the end could be any time really now. So I’m just trying to make the most of every opportunity in terms of my performance and the kind of results whereas in 2019 it’s a good job I didn’t win that match as I wouldn’t have been able to play the next round. Here I can go in and physically I’m in a pretty good place.” The question for Murray remains exactly how good this place is and what his potential is at 34 years old and with a metal hip. Although he was battered by Karatsev in the Sydney final, he played at a high level, particularly in the vintage manner that he dismantled Opelka’s enormous serve in the final two sets of their semi-final. The second half of last season was the first time since 2017 that Murray was able to play regularly and build up his form with every tournament. It was a mixed bag of results: he clinched two top-10 wins in the indoor season, he was competitive against most top opponents and he demonstrated that he still possesses his particular combination of movement, intelligence and elite returning to at least mix with the best. But while his level clearly grew throughout last year, he was ultimately unable to piece together wins and move deeper in tournaments. He either struggled to perform in a consistent string of matches, or else he engaged in far too many long matches that robbed him of the ability to move efficiently through tournament draws. That he has registered a deep run so early in the season was an essential reaffirmation of the positive direction he continues to move in and how much more there could be to come.Bet Matthews set off on a trip of salvation from Queensland to Victoria last year, to visit her sister and ex-husband who had both been diagnosed with cancer. She was there to assist with whatever they needed, but in the end it was she who needed the help. The 73-year-old has diabetes and constant high blood pressure was causing her to have dizzy spells throughout the driving trip. In Cobar in western New South Wales, she couldn’t go on. After multiple visits to the local GP, her husband took her to the Cobar hospital for more specialised treatment. Unbeknown to her, the doctor she was about to see was nearly 14,000km away. “I was having a telehealth consult, because there was no hospital doctor and no doctor that could come to the hospital,” Matthews says. “I asked, ‘where are you from?’ and he said: ‘I’m in Canada’.” Over the course of her week-long stay, Bet had three consultations with the doctor, who conducted the appointments via telehealth with the assistance of nursing staff at the hospital. “He was a nice chap, but it was really strange sitting up in your hospital bed and having the nurses wheel the TV monitor into your room, and then the doctor was there,” Matthews says. The doctor Matthews saw is one of four Australian-trained medical practitioners living overseas who regularly treat rural and regional patients in the Western New South Wales local health district via telehealth, as part of a program known as the virtual rural generalist service. The virtual service is made up of a pool of 25 Australian-trained doctors, based both locally and internationally, with specialised GP experience in rural and regional communities. They provide consultations using video conferencing around the clock and have the power to assess patients and admit them to the local health facility or transfer them to a larger centre if necessary. Dr Shannon Nott, the district’s rural director of medical services, says the service has been a “real backbone” for regional and remote communities, particularly during Covid border closures. “It was really tough for us to get workforce into some of those communities,” Nott says. “The particular benefit of having doctors based overseas is the time difference, so for night shifts instead of having an Australian doctor on Australian time, tired and being woken in the middle of the night, we’ve got doctors that are overseas that do the Australian night shift only.” The service started in February 2020 and builds on a telephone support service that has been operating in the health district for more than 10 years. All doctors involved have committed to doing 25% of their shifts in person in a region; so far there have been 800 days of face-to-face contact. There are 35 rural and remote communities in the district, outside Bathurst, Orange and Dubbo; so far 20 hospitals use the service regularly, after hours or when there is a gap in staffing. “In the last year, the vast majority of the contracts for our rural and remote doctors in western New South Wales have been reliant on this service supporting people after hours,” Nott says. Richard Colbran, the chief executive officer of the NSW Rural Doctors Network, says specialised GPs, or rural generalists as they are known, are “not distributed well” and there needs to be trialling of measures to break the distribution issues. “If you are able to build a workforce approach that chases the sun – so you’ve got people who are refreshed, who are working during the day, they are appropriately skilled and trained – why in the digital era do they need to be in the local environment, or the state or even the same country?” Colbran says. Currently there is a shortage of rural generalists in Australia, the NSW Rural Doctors Network saying the number has more than halved in the last 10 years. Nott recognises that people don’t want to do what doctors did 30 years ago, where they worked 24/7 and felt the weight of the community. “There is no silver bullet in regard to fixing the challenges of the rural and remote medical workforce,” Nott says. “We acknowledge that rural communities want local doctors, so this is very much the aim, to support a workforce and to continue to recruit and retain doctors on the frontline.”Good morning, happy Monday, and apologies to those who’ve returned from holidays today. You’ve found yourself a moment of reprieve with Five Great Reads, a weekday summer wrap of worthwhile writing selected by me, Alyx Gorman, Guardian Australia’s galoshes, goulash and galavanting editor. Sign up to receive Five Great Reads as an email If you’re in search of breaking news, allow me to redirect you to our live blog. And if you can feel a headache coming on, here’s a handy guide to exercising with migraines. Now, on to the reads! 1. Re-defecting to North Korea Leaving one of the most oppressive regimes in the world is a difficult feat. But over the years, a small handful of North Koreans who fled the country have wound up returning. Justin McCurry looks at what makes them go back. People go back? Yes. This year, Kim Woo-joo, a 29 year old former gymnast snuck through the heavily reinforced demilitarised zone to return to North Korea, a year after fleeing. Then what happens? No one knows for sure. They may face harassment, interrogation or even imprisonment. And yet, they’re willing to take the risk. 2. Archaeology’s gender revolution Increasingly sophisticated DNA analysis has overturned long-held beliefs about key archaeological finds. What kind of beliefs? Well, one 1,500 year old grave site in Italy included a pair of skeletons buried together, holding hands. Dubbed the Lovers of Modena, we recently found out they were both men. At another grave site, presumed to belong to a Viking warrior because it was filled with weapons, it turned out the skeleton was biologically female. How long will it take me to read? About four minutes. 3. Ridding your house of pollution Everything from flame retardants to now-banned pesticides can linger in your home (and blood) for years, writes environment writer Anna Turns. Ridding your house of these persistent organic pollutants (or POPs) takes, as their name suggests, a lot of work. So eco-friendly cleaners? Actually, the first tip in the story is you can mostly skip those. What do I have to do then? To start with, dust your wifi router. 4. An ode to Spam Divisive and suspiciously delicious, to Asian diaspora communities all over the world, Spam is the taste of home, writes Rosheen Kaul. She’s suggesting four recipes to cook with the product, each with a unique history behind it. I’m vegetarian. No worries, there’s a plant based alternative that “looks and cooks just like Spam does”. How long will it take me to make? Every one of these dishes is kid friendly and works as a weeknight meal, or even a WFH lunch – they can be ready in between 20 and 40 minutes. 5. Daring public dunnies As Australians spend a summer outdoors, dodging Omicron, the value of excellent public facilities has never been clearer. Here, we pick out a few stunning loos. I have opinions about this. Good! We want you to tell us what your favourite public toilet is too.The tennis world reacted with a mixture of silence and disappointment to the news that Novak Djokovic would be deported from Australia after an extraordinary 12 days concluded with the federal court’s decision to uphold the cancellation of his visa. Andy Murray was conducting his pre-tournament media rounds in Melbourne, a day after his run to the final of the Sydney International, at the exact moment that the outcome of Djokovic’s court proceedings was announced. “Novak is someone I have known since we were 12 years old, he is someone who I respect and have competed against. I don’t like that he is in this situation and I don’t like that he has been in detention,” said Murray to the BBC, speaking minutes after the decision. “The situation has not been good all round for anyone. It feels everything here happened extremely last-minute and that’s why it became such a mess. Hopefully that won’t be the case at other events so there is no other situation like this. I wouldn’t want that for Novak, don’t want that for tennis and hopefully it is done now.” Djokovic’s visa had been cancelled by Alex Hawke, the immigration minister, on “health and good order” grounds. The Serb had immediately registered an application to the federal court in order to have his visa cancellation overturned, but Djokovic’s application was finally dismissed on Sunday. During Saturday’s media day, many of the most prominent players said they were dissatisfied by how Djokovic’s visa status had consumed all attention just days before the grand slam. “Honestly, I’m little bit tired of the situation because I just believe that it’s important to talk about our sport, about tennis,” said Rafael Nadal. Emma Raducanu, meanwhile, pointed out that events such as Murray’s run to the final of the Sydney International were being overshadowed. “I feel it has taken away a little bit from the great tennis that’s been happening over this summer in Australia,” she said on Saturday. Most players chose not to address Djokovic’s deportation on social media after his verdict. Those who spoke publicly on Sunday tended to be more sympathetic towards Djokovic, offering their support as he left the country. Alize Cornet, the French women’s No 1, noted the lack of reaction from her fellow players: “I know too little to judge the situation. What I know is that Novak is always the first one to stand for the players. But none of us stood for him. Be strong,” she wrote on twitter. Despite having been a frequent critic of Djokovic over the years, Nick Kyrgios has been one of the world No 1’s most vocal supporters among his peers over the past week. The Australian responded to the verdict with a “facepalm” emoji. Support also came from more predictable sources. Vasek Pospisil, the co-founder alongside Djokovic of the Professional Tennis Players Association (PTPA) and a close friend, immediately spoke for the Serb, stating that Djokovic was “ready to stay home” if he had not received a medical exemption. “Novak would never have gone to Australia if he had not been given an exemption to enter the country by the government (which he did receive; hence Judge Kelly’s initial ruling),” he wrote on Twitter. “He would have skipped the Australian Open and been home with his family and no one would be talking about this mess. There was a political agenda at play here with the elections coming up which couldn’t be more obvious. This is not his fault.” Pospisil misrepresented the verdict of Judge Kelly during Djokovic’s first hearing. The judge had ruled for Djokovic on a procedural basis due to border officials failing to give Djokovic sufficient time to contact his representatives upon his arrival at the airport. His fellow Serb Miomir Kecmanovic, who was supposed to be Djokovic’s opponent in the first round on Sunday, posted a statement on social media in which he pledged to represent Djokovic on the court: “I can’t even imagine how Novak feels, what he has been through for the last 10 days. I was very happy to have the honour of opening this year’s tournament with the first player in the world on Rod Laver Arena. Unfortunately, what I have been thinking about for the last seven days from the moment the draw was made now makes no sense.” In a statement, the ATP referred to the past 12 days as “a deeply regrettable series of events,” while lamenting the absence of Djokovic in the Australian Open draw. “We know how turbulent the recent days have been for Novak and how much he wanted to defend his title in Melbourne. We wish him well and look forward to seeing him back on court soon. ATP continues to strongly recommend vaccination to all players.” The final day before the start of the Australian Open brought one final reflection of Djokovic’s outsized impact over the event. The tournament normally releases its order of play for the first day of competition on Saturday in order to give players as much time as possible to prepare for their matches, but this year the draw was pushed back until after 4pm on Sunday. Djokovic was initially included in Monday’s order of play as the last night match on Rod Laver Arena against Kecmanovic. But by the end of the day, his name had been scrubbed from all lists. As Salvatore Caruso, a lucky loser, prepared to take Djokovic’s spot in the draw, the world No 1 boarded the 10:30pm flight to Dubai and started on his way back home.