Endemic ill-health in England’s “left behind” neighbourhoods costs the country almost £30bn a year because people are often too ill to work and die earlier, a report claims. The cost of lost productivity results directly from those very deprived areas having much worse health than the rest of the country, according to parliamentarians and academics. Experts from the Northern Health Science Alliance (NHSA) have calculated that the economy would grow by that amount if health in those areas was improved to such an extent that local people began to enjoy the same health as those in better-off places. Thursday’s report, by the NHSA and all-party parliamentary group for left behind neighbourhoods (LBNs), highlights the scale of the challenge Boris Johnson faces in meeting his pledge to level up England’s poorest and richest areas. “The health of people living in left behind neighbourhoods is considerably worse than the health of people living in the rest of the country,” said Dr Luke Munford, the report’s lead author and a lecturer in health economics at the University of Manchester. “This is true across all measures of health.” The report shows rates of obesity, lung conditions, high blood pressure, mental health problems and other diseases are much higher than the national average in the 225 LBNs. This means people there have less “healthy life expectancy” and also shorter lives and thus are less productive over their lifespan than those elsewhere. For example, men in the poorest areas die on average 3.7 years earlier than their counterparts in the rest of England while women live three years fewer. Both sexes in those regions also typically live 7.5 years less in good health – free of disease and disability – than those in better-off places, which also limits their ability to work, while 9.1% of people say their health is “bad” or “very bad” compared with 5.5% in England as a whole. Despite that, people in LBNs work the longest hours in England, the authors found. They spend an average of 36.9 hours a week working, a little more than those elsewhere. However, they earn less and are sometimes in areas of high unemployment, which can depress wages, the report said. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, has described the stark disparities in health as “the disease of disparity” and pledged to make tackling them a key element of the government’s levelling up strategy. However, publication of a white paper setting out the detail of how levelling-up would be achieved by the time of the next general election in 2024 was delayed last year and is due soon. The 225 places have been identified as left behind neighbourhoods by combining data from the Community Needs Index with that from the Index of Multiple Deprivation. They have poor physical and digital connectivity, low community engagement and a lack of community spaces, as well as high levels of social and economic deprivation. They are mainly post-industrial areas of the Midlands and north of England as well as coastal towns. The co-chairs of the group are Paul Howell, the Conservative MP for Sedgefield in Durham – Tony Blair’s old seat, and Dame Diana Johnson, the Labour MP for Kingston upon Hull. The researchers found that people in LBNs have much lower gross added value – a measure of productivity – than those elsewhere. That and other factors, such as poorer educational attainment, mean that the £20,400 they earned on average in 2018 was £8,256 less than the rest of England. Given that just over 15 million people live in the 225 LBNs, the total loss of productivity relative to the rest of the country is £124.1bn a year, the academics calculated. The 23.8% of that sum that can be directly explained by worse outcomes in local council areas containing at least one LBN equates to £29.8bn. “It is unacceptable that those living in the poorest areas of the country can expect to die more than a decade earlier than those in wealthier areas,” said David Finch, the assistant director of healthy lives at the Health Foundation thinktank. “Only 47% of people with a health condition or disability that limits their ability to work are in employment, compared with 81% of those without. And areas with high levels of income deprivation have greater concentrations of poor health. For example, in Hartlepool in the north-east, 21% of working-age people have a work limiting disability compared to 11% in Hillingdon in London,” Finch added. He urged ministers to use a “whole government approach”, in which every department plays its part in reducing health inequalities if they hoped to succeed. That would involve helping low-income families to cope with the rising cost of living and ensuring that long-term investment in infrastructure is designed to promote good health, he added. “Without this, levelling up is likely to remain little more than a slogan.” David Buck, an expert in health inequalities at the King’s Fund, said: “What is really needed is a much longer term and strategic look at how government finance reaches areas of the greatest need over time as a matter of course, not a beauty contest; how high-quality businesses are attracted to these areas and stick there; and how social infrastructure is valued and boosted and is not seen as a cost on the public purse but a long-term investment in people’s health and in their productivity.” The Department of Health and Social Care has been approached for comment.Millions of older people in the UK are facing an energy emergency, with a leading charity saying people are being forced to switch off their heating, limit hot showers and live off soup and sandwiches to pay their increased energy bills. Age UK has urged ministers to take immediate and decisive action to “mitigate the potentially devastating impact of the escalating crisis” caused by rising energy bills, which could go up by another 50% in April. In a letter this week to Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, and Thérèse Coffey, the work and pensions secretary, the charity said it was concerned that “many older people on low incomes already feel under so much financial pressure that they are rationing their energy use”. “For example, we have heard from older people who are too worried to use their oven and are living off soup and sandwiches instead, showering only every two days rather than daily, and constantly watching their smart meter and turning their heating off once their daily spending exceeds the meagre limit they have set,” Age UK said. Older energy bill payers are more likely to live in fuel poverty, which is expected to reach record highs in the UK this year because of increased gas and electricity costs. The global gas crisis caused the fastest rise in energy bills on record in October, and the average bill could increase further by April to cover the cost of bankrupt suppliers. Consumer groups and energy suppliers have repeatedly called on the government to act. Their proposals include the Treasury cutting the 5% rate of VAT on energy bills, moving green levies into general taxation, and helping to defer the cost of protecting customers affected by the collapse of dozens of suppliers in recent months. Age UK said the government must reassure older householders that they would not “face an energy bill in the spring that will be beyond their means to pay”. Age UK’s charity director, Caroline Abrahams, said: “The astronomical hike in energy prices now widely anticipated has already forced many deeply anxious older people on low incomes to turn their heating down below what is comfortable or advisable, with some switching it off altogether for some or all of the day and night. “This situation will have a devastating impact on the health of our older population unless the government intervenes quickly and takes their fears away.” She added: “Ministers will have to go considerably further than offering token gestures of financial support such as adding £10 a year to the Warm Home Discount Scheme from next year. Energy price rises on the scale we are now seeing are unprecedented and the government’s response must be equal to the threat they pose to older people living on low and modest incomes.” Age UK has urged older people to call its free national advice line before turning their heating off or down to make sure they are receiving all the financial support available. • The Age UK advice line is 0800 169 65 65Embattled casino group Crown Resorts says it is ready to accept a takeover bid from Blackstone after the US private equity group sweetened its offer by $400m. If the $8.87bn bid goes ahead it will end James Packer’s association as a shareholder with the company, which has been mired in scandal for two years after government inquiries revealed money laundering at its casinos and the criminal links of junket operators who brought in high-rolling gamblers. Packer stands to pocket about $3.1bn in return for the 37% of Crown held by his private investment company, Consolidated Press Holdings. In a statement to the ASX, Crown said that if Blackstone made a binding offer at the new price of $13.10 a share, and there were no better deals on the table, it was the board’s “current unanimous intention to recommend that shareholders vote in favour of the proposal”. Packer is under pressure to sell his stake in the company after a Victorian royal commission into Crown in October said he should be required to reduce it to less than 5% by September 2024. The inquiry found Packer’s investment company had “abused its position as a dominant shareholder, which included retaining significant control over the affairs of the company, even after he resigned as chairman in 2018”. In his report, tabled in state parliament, commissioner Ray Finkelstein said there were “a litany of failings” in the way Crown dealt with anti-money laundering rules and that it had “facilitated money laundering” through a bank account held by a subsidiary. The former federal court judge recommended a special manager be appointed to oversee the operation of its Melbourne casino for the next two years. Victoria’s royal commission followed an inquiry in NSW that found that Crown had facilitated money laundering at its Melbourne and Perth casinos and that some junket operators were linked to organised crime. The NSW inquiry in turn came after the publication in 2019 of the Crown Unmasked series, which made a series of allegations about the casino company, by Nine Entertainment’s 60 Minutes and its newspapers. A royal commission is also under way in Western Australia and is set to hear final submissions from counsel assisting, the company and others on 1 February and 2 February. Consolidated Press Holdings has been contacted for comment. Blackstone first indicated its interest in Crown in April 2020, when it bought almost 10% of the company from Melco Resorts &amp; Entertainment, a Hong Kong gambling group that was previously a joint venture partner with Crown in casinos in Macau. It made a non-binding offer for the company at $11.85 a share in April last year and since then has progressively made the proposed deal more attractive by dropping conditions and increasing the price it is willing to pay. Any takeover would be subject to regulatory approval in Victoria, NSW and WA. Crown shares were trading about 8.1% higher at $12.58 early on Thursday after closing at $11.63 on Wednesday.Thanks for following along – this blog is now closed. You can catch up with the latest coronavirus coverage here. We have also launched a new live news feed here with all the current developments. The Dutch foreign minister Wopke Hoekstra has announced he tested positive for Covid-19. Hoekstra, who was only sworn in Monday, had been in Brussels on Tuesday where he met with the European Union’s foreign policy chief Joseph Borrel and Belgian foreign minister Sophie Wilmes. Europe: Switzerland will halve its quarantine time to five days. France is poised to lift blanket ban on UK travellers ‘by end of the week’. Denmark is to offer a fourth coronavirus vaccination to vulnerable citizens as it faces record infection numbers from the Omicron variant. Sweden will cut the recommended time interval between the second and third Covid vaccine shot to five months from six. Greece will extend restrictions by a week at restaurants and bars to help curb the Omicron variant. Doctors in Spain will be awarded up to €49,000 (£40,882) each in compensation for working without proper personal protection gear in the first few months of the pandemic. Boris Johnson has admitted and apologised for attending a No 10 garden drinks event in May 2020. Johnson said he went to thank staff before going back into his office 25 minutes later. The UK government’s operation of a “VIP lane” for suppliers of personal protective equipment during the coronavirus pandemic was illegal, a judge has ruled. Germany has reported 80,430 coronavirus cases - a new daily record - and 384 deaths, according to figures from the Robert Koch Institute. Austria also set a new record of 18,427 daily Covid cases. Russia’s deputy prime minister Tatiana Golikova said that the government will prepare new measures to combat Covid by the end of the week. More than half of people in Europe could contract the Omicron in the next two months if infections continue at current rates, the WHO said. Asia: China is battling coronavirus outbreaks in several cities, severely testing the country’s strict “zero-Covid” strategy just weeks before Beijing hosts the Winter Olympics. The northern city of Tianjin has ordered a second round of Covid testing on all 14 million residents after the discovery of 97 cases of the Omicron variant during initial screenings that began Sunday. A Chinese woman became an overnight sensation after she posted video diaries documenting her life after being stuck at a blind date’s house when the city was put under lockdown. Story here. In Australia, state and territory leaders will consider relaxing isolation requirements for the trucking and logistics sector, as the prime minister, Scott Morrison, calls for patience over the country’s disrupted supply chains. Novak Djokovic has blamed his agent for an “administrative mistake” when declaring he had not travelled in the two weeks before his flight to Australia and acknowledged an “error of judgment” by not isolating after he tested positive for Covid. Americas: Quebec, Canada’s second-most populous province, has announced plans to impose a ‘health tax’ on residents who refuse to get the Covid-19 vaccination for non-medical reasons. World Health Organization experts have warned that repeating booster doses of the original Covid vaccines is not a viable strategy against emerging variants. Federal health authorities in America have said the Omicron Covid-19 variant is so contagious it is likely most people in the US will be infected, and compared the pandemic to a “natural disaster”. Authorities said even as Omicron shatters records for new cases, they are hopeful the surge will quickly subside, and said the US needs to focus on ensuring hospital systems do not collapse amid the surge. “I think it’s hard to process what’s actually happening right now, which is [that] most people are going to get Covid, all right?” said Janet Woodcock, the acting head of the Food and Drug Administration. “What we need to do is make sure the hospitals can still function … [that] transportation, other essential services are not disrupted while this happens.” Read the full story here. Hospitals in Greater Manchester have called for urgent military support as the region’s NHS creaks under pressure from the Omicron variant. Soldiers could be asked to carry out basic care needs, such as hydration and nutrition, for patients in so-called super-surge beds, as well as ancillary support including porter work, admin tasks and cleaning. It comes as the rising demand for hospitals in the region surpasses last year’s peak, with staff absences across all areas on the increase too. The highly transmissible Omicron variant has seen mini-Nightingale-style wards open at a number of NHS hospitals in Greater Manchester, with the Royal Oldham understood to be facing significant pressure. Samantha Lock back with you on the blog reporting to you from Sydney. Here’s a quick snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across Australia. The state of NSW recorded 92,264 Covid cases and 22 deaths with 2,383 in hospital while Victoria reported 37,169 cases and 25 deaths with 953 hospitalised. British skiers could soon be able to return to French slopes after an announcement that France is due to lift its blanket ban on non-essential travel from the UK, Jon Henley and Nazia Parveen report. The French government’s official spokesman, Gabriel Attal, said after a weekly cabinet meeting on Wednesday that Paris would ease travel restrictions from the UK to France in the next few days. “I confirm that a further easing of the restrictions with the UK will be announced in the coming days,” Gabriel Attal told reporters. “Work is continuing. I hope that the announcement can be made by the end of the week.” France dramatically tightened restrictions on travel from and to Britain on 18 December in an attempt to curb the spread of the highly transmissible Omicron variant, effectively banning all non-essential journeys by requiring vaccinated and unvaccinated travellers to show a “compelling reason” for travel. The rule, which effectively limited entry from the UK to France and EU nationals and British citizens resident in France, was later eased to allow people in “for the pursuit of an economic activity requiring an on-site presence that cannot be postponed.” The rules also require all arrivals from the UK to present a negative PCR or antigen test taken within the previous 24 hours, rather than 48 hours, and to quarantine in France for seven days – reduced to 48 hours if they can produce a new negative test. On December 30, the French government suspended one of the new rules to allow British nationals who were legally resident in other EU countries to transit through France to reach their homes by road and rail. Border officials would “show tolerance” in order to allow people to return home after the Christmas and New Year period, the interior ministry said, without specifying when the rule would be reimposed. On Wednesday, Attal said he had said at the time that the new rules were introduced that “if we continued to see the same situation, that is the Omicron variant becoming dominant in France, of course we would continue to ease the restrictions.” More on this story here: France poised to lift blanket ban on UK travellers ‘by end of the week’ Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Quebec’s announcement that it will impose a healthcare tax on unvaccinated residents has prompted a fierce debate, as the province looks to salvage its crumbing healthcare system amid the latest Covid wave. Story here. A Chinese woman became an overnight sensation after she posted video diaries documenting her life after being stuck at a blind date’s house when the city was put under lockdown. Story here. The Omicron variant of Covid-19 is dangerous - and especially so for those who have not been vaccinated against the disease, the World Health Organization said. “While Omicron causes less severe disease than Delta, it remains a dangerous virus, particularly for those who are unvaccinated,” WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told a press conference. “We mustn’t allow this virus a free ride or wave the white flag, especially when so many people around the remain unvaccinated.” The “overwhelming majority” of people admitted to hospitals around the world were unvaccinated, he added. Sweden will cut the recommended time interval between the second and third Covid vaccine shot to five months from six. “The purpose of the shorter time interval is for more people to be able to be vaccinated earlier. The regions should not have to stand idle with unused capacity,” the health agency chief epidemiologist, Anders Tegnell, said in a statement. A number of other countries, including the UK, Denmark and France, have already reduced the interval between the second and third shots of the vaccine for at least some sections of their populations, sometimes to as little as three months. Greece will extend restrictions by a week at restaurants and bars to help curb the Omicron variant. The country imposed curbs on bars, restaurants and nightclubs over the Christmas holidays last month, which were due to end on 17 January. The restrictions, which have forced bars, nightclubs and restaurants to close at midnight, with no standing customers and no music, will be extended to 24 January, health authorities said on Wednesday. A double mask will still be mandatory in supermarkets and transport. The UK reported 129,587 new Covid cases and 398 more deaths within 28 days of a positive test. The figures compare with Tuesday’s total of 120,821 cases and 379 deaths. The latest data shows 398 deaths were recorded today – the second day in a row that the daily figure has hit an 11-month high. Wednesday’s number is the highest since 24 February 2021, when 442 deaths were reported. Germany should make Covid-19 vaccinations mandatory for all adults, chancellor Olaf Scholz told parliament, brushing off heckling from opposition lawmakers who accused him of fomenting social divisions. Scholz credited his new government’s measures to tighten curbs on public life and step up booster doses for preventing an even worse onslaught. But as Omicron increases its spread, infections would likely continue to rise and measures such as mandatory vaccination will be needed, he said, adding: “With the decision not to get vaccinated, one ultimately is not just making a decision for oneself but also for 80 million others.” Doctors in Spain will be awarded up to €49,000 (£40,882) each in compensation for working without proper personal protection gear in the first few months of the pandemic. A doctors’ union in Valencia, on the east coast of Spain, took the region’s government to court for failing to protect its health workers in the first three months of the Covid-19 pandemic. Denmark is to offer a fourth coronavirus vaccination to vulnerable citizens as it faces record infection numbers from the Omicron variant, the health minister said. The move comes as lawmakers agreed to reopen theatres, cinemas, museums, entertainment parks and botanic gardens, as well as allowing spectators at indoor and outdoor sports events, albeit with limited attendance, as hospitalisation rates and deaths have stabilised despite the surge in cases. The European Union’s drug regulator has expressed doubts about the need for a fourth dose and said there was currently no data to support this approach as it seeks more data on the fast-spreading variant. [see 3.13pm.]. The Biden administration has announced a new set of measures to keep classes open, including doubling Covid testing capacity in schools with 10 million more tests, as the Omicron variant spreads rapidly through the US. An estimated 4.3 million people in the UK had Covid in the week ending 6 January, figures from the ONS showed. [see 2.41pm.]. The UK government’s operation of a “VIP lane” for suppliers of personal protective equipment during the coronavirus pandemic was illegal, a judge ruled. In a written judgment, Mrs Justice O’Farrell said the Good Law Project and EveryDoctor, which together had challenged the lawfulness of the way billions of pounds worth of contracts were awarded through the high priority lane, had established that its operation was “in breach of the obligation of equal treatment”. More than 32bn items of PPE with a value of £14bn were bought through directly awarded and negotiated contracts. Story here. Switzerland will halve its quarantine time to five days to help tackle a wave of Covid infections that threatens to hamstring the economy. The reduction in the self-isolation requirement will go into effect from Thursday. This could be done because the Omicron variant had a shortened time between infection and transmission to other people, the government said. The government also proposed extending until the end of March curbs on public life that were tightened last month. It is trying to avoid not only another lockdown but also mandatory vaccinations, a route neighbouring Austria has taken. Tunisia will reimpose a night curfew and ban all gatherings for two weeks from Thursday to counter the rapid spread of Covid, the government has said in a move critics decried as aimed at stopping protests. The ban on gatherings and a request to avoid travel within the country except for emergencies comes two days before a planned demonstration against the Tunisian president, Kais Saied, called by major political parties. A senior official in the main opposition Ennahda party, Mohamed Goumani, told Reuters on Wednesday the protest would go ahead in defiance of the new ban. Boris Johnson, the UK prime minister, admitted attending a gathering in the Downing Street garden during the first lockdown and apologised to the nation while arguing it was a work event and “technically” broke no rules. Johnson said he went into the garden of Downing Street on 20 May 2020 to thank staff before going back into his office 25 minutes later. He said at the time he believed it was a “work event” and in hindsight he should have sent everyone back inside. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, rejected Johnson’s version of events and called on the prime minister to resign. “The only question is: will the British public kick him out, will his party kick him out, or will he do the decent thing and resign?” Starmer said. Story here. Quebec’s announcement that it will impose a healthcare tax on unvaccinated residents has prompted a fierce debate, as the province looks to salvage its crumbing healthcare system amid the latest Covid wave. The Canadian province’s premier, François Legault, said on Tuesday that those who had chosen to remain unvaccinated would pay a “health contribution”, acknowledging growing friction in the province as the unvaccinated draw on a greater share of the scarce medical resources. The Quebec news site La Presse warned the tax could target vulnerable members of society who often lack the resources or information needed to access vaccines. Minorities, including Black and Indigenous residents, also have a long history of discrimination in the province’s healthcare system. “They must not become the scapegoats of the collective fed up,” the paper wrote. But La Presse concluded the tax was necessary tool in the fight against the virus. “In this exceptional context, asking non-vaccinated people to pay a reasonable price can be explained. It’s a question of fairness. Everyone must contribute to the war effort.” The province has not released a timeline for when it could impose the tax – the first of its kind in North America – or how much it might charge. Austria, which rolled out a similar tax in November, requires residents over 14 years of age pay €3,600 (US$4,100) every three months they remain unvaccinated. Get the full story here: Quebec health tax for unvaccinated residents prompts fierce Covid debate In case you missed it earlier, I’d like to highlight once again the story we all deserve - of a Chinese woman who became an overnight sensation after she posted video diaries documenting her life after being stuck at a blind date’s house. Ms Wang went for dinner on Sunday at her blind date’s residence in the central Chinese city of Zhengzhou, where a recent outbreak of Covid cases sent thousands into quarantine in parts of the city. As she was finishing her meal, the area was put under lockdown. She was unable to leave her date’s house as result, she told the Shanghai-based news outlet the Paper this week, saying she had gone to the city for a week-long trip to meet potential suitors from the southern province of Guangdong. Here is my colleague Vincent Ni’s story: Woman’s diary goes viral as lockdown in China forces her to stay with blind date The Omicron variant of Covid-19 is dangerous - and especially so for those who have not been vaccinated against the disease, the World Health Organization said on Wednesday. The WHO said the huge global surge in cases was being driven by Omicron but insisted there should be no surrender to the variant of concern. “While Omicron causes less severe disease than Delta, it remains a dangerous virus, particularly for those who are unvaccinated,” WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told a press conference. He went on: We mustn’t allow this virus a free ride or wave the white flag, especially when so many people around the remain unvaccinated. In Africa, over 85% of people are yet to receive a single dose of vaccine. We can’t end the acute phase of the pandemic unless we close this gap. Tedros said he had wanted every country to have 10% of their population vaccinated by the end of September 2021, 40% by the end of December, and 70% by mid-2022. But 90 countries had still not reached 40%, 36 of them still short of the 10% mark, he said. The “overwhelming majority” of people admitted to hospitals around the world were unvaccinated, he added. And while vaccines remain very effective at preventing death and severe Covid-19 disease, they do not fully prevent transmission, and so the risk of a more deadly variant emerging was real, he said. More transmission means more hospitalisations, more deaths, more people off work - including teachers and health workers - and more risk of another variant emerging that is even more transmissible and more deadly than Omicron. On the news that the number of deaths worldwide had stabilised at around 50,000 per week, Tedros said: Learning to live with this virus does not mean we can, or should, accept this number of deaths. The WHO emergencies director, Michael Ryan, added: This is not the time to declare this is a welcome virus. Sweden will cut the recommended time interval between the second and third Covid vaccine shot to five months from six, Reuters reports. The decision will affect people between the age of 18 and 64. People above 65 were already eligible to get their booster shot five months after the second. Children aged 12 to 17 will still have to wait six months. A number of other countries, including the UK, Denmark and France, have already reduced the interval between the second and third shots of the vaccine for at least some sections of their populations, sometimes to as little as three months. “The purpose of the shorter time interval is for more people to be able to be vaccinated earlier. The regions should not have to stand idle with unused capacity,” the health agency chief epidemiologist, Anders Tegnell, said in a statement. Sweden has vaccinated 86% of the population aged 12 and up with one shot and 82% with two shots or more. The country stood out early in the pandemic by opting against lockdowns, instead focusing on a mostly voluntary strategy based on social distancing and good hygiene. It has an official Covid death toll of over 15,000, several times higher per capita than its Nordic neighbours but lower than most other European countries. Greece will extend restrictions by a week at restaurants and bars to help curb the Omicron variant, which has dominated the country and has driven a surge in Covid infections in recent weeks, Reuters reports. The country imposed curbs on bars, restaurants and nightclubs over the Christmas holidays last month, which were due to end on 17 January. The restrictions, which have forced bars, nightclubs and restaurants to close at midnight, with no standing customers and no music, will be extended to 24 January, health authorities said on Wednesday. A double mask will still be mandatory in supermarkets and transport. Authorities have said that Omicron variant, which is highly contagious, is dominant in the community, after it was first detected in early December. Greece reported 32,694 new infections and 80 related deaths on Tuesday, bringing the total official number of infections since the pandemic began to 1,568,215 and the death toll to 21,559. It registered a record of 50,126 coronavirus infections in a day on 4 January. The UK has reported 129,587 new positive Covid-19 cases and 398 more deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the ONS. The figures compare with Tuesday’s total of 120,821 cases and 379 deaths. The latest data shows 398 deaths were recorded today – the second day in a row that the daily figure has hit an 11-month high. Wednesday’s number is the highest since 24 February 2021, when 442 deaths were reported. The new data also showed that 139,584 people had received their booster or third dose, bringing the total number of booster or third doses administered in the UK to 35,953,243. Germany should make Covid-19 vaccinations mandatory for all adults, chancellor Olaf Scholz told parliament on Wednesday, brushing off heckling from opposition lawmakers who accused him of fomenting social divisions, reports Reuters. It comes the same day Germany reported a record of 80,430 coronavirus infections, where the previous record was 65,000 in November. The Robert Koch Institute, the country’s national disease control agency, said 384 people had died in the previous 24 hours, bringing the death toll from coronavirus in Europe’s most populous country to about 115,000. Scholz credited his new government’s measures to tighten curbs on public life and step up booster doses for preventing an even worse onslaught. But as Omicron increases its spread, infections would likely continue to rise and measures such as mandatory vaccination will be needed, he said, adding: With the decision not to get vaccinated, one ultimately is not just making a decision for oneself but also for 80 million others. Schools going virtual, airlines canceling flights, pharmacies and testing centres closing temporarily, shelves emptying in grocery stores because of transportation delays, blood donations dropping to crisis levels for the first time ever and the country’s hospitals are becoming stretched. This is the US in the grip of the Omicron variant. Omicron may cause milder symptoms in some people, but its effects are ricocheting throughout America and creating some of the greatest challenges of the Covid-19 pandemic. “We have supply shortages, we have transportation shortages, that are a result of people being out because of Covid, and especially Omicron being so infectious. And that is obviously limiting the workforce, and limiting the workforce is creating some of the havoc that we’re all experiencing,” said Ezekiel Emanuel, vice-provost at the University of Pennsylvania. Joe Biden has vowed to keep businesses and schools open, but some experts wonder if that’s possible given the nature of Omicron and the lack of adequate measures to combat it. “The economy cannot stay open and schools cannot stay open when so many people are getting sick,” said Margaret Thornton, an educational researcher at Princeton School of Public and International Affairs. “We must take action to slow the spread in order to keep schools running, to keep businesses running,” she said – but much of that action has been slow to happen. Read more here: ‘The economy cannot stay open’: Omicron’s effects ricochet across US Doctors in Spain will be awarded up to €49,000 (£40,882) each in compensation for working without proper personal protection gear in the first few months of the pandemic. A doctors’ union in Valencia, on the east coast of Spain, took the region’s government to court for failing to protect its health workers in the first three months of the Covid-19 pandemic. The Associated Press reports: The lawsuit brought by a doctor’s union is the first of its kind to be won in Spain, whose health care system was pushed to the brink when COVID-19 first struck. The judge ordered compensation between €5,000 - 49,000 (£4,171 - 40,882) to be paid to the 153 doctors who formed part of the suit, adding the lack of personal protection suits created a “serious safety and health danger for all health workers, especially for doctors due to their direct exposure”. “This ruling is groundbreaking in Spain,” said Dr. Victor Pedrera, secretary general of the Doctors’ Union of Valencia CESM-CV, told AP. Pedrera, a family doctor, said he got ill with Covid-19 shortly after it hit Spain in March 2020 and spent two months at home “quite badly off and with no idea of what was being done for treatment.” Those doctors who were forced to work without proper protection but did not get infected nor were forced to isolate will receive 5,000 euros. The compensation increases to 15,000 euros for those who were forced to isolate, 35,000 euros for those who were infected but did not need hospital care, and to 49,000 euros for those who needed hospital treatment. Valencia’s government will appeal the ruling. Regional chief Ximo Puig apologised to the medical workers, adding that the initial impact of the pandemic was “completely unexpected”. As families grieving for lost loved ones call on authorities for answers, there are likely to be similar legal proceedings on the horizon. France’s former health minister Agnès Buzyn was charged in September with “endangering the lives of others”, according to the prosecutor in a special court that deals with ministerial accountability. In the UK, a public inquiry is due to begin in the spring. Hello, it’s Georgina Quach here, taking over from Lucy Campbell. Denmark is to offer a fourth coronavirus vaccination to vulnerable citizens as it faces record infection numbers from the Omicron variant, the country’s health minister said on Wednesday. The move comes as lawmakers agreed to ease restrictions at the end of the week including the reopening of cinemas and music venues, as hospitalisation rates and deaths have stabilised despite the surge in cases. “We are now embarking on a new chapter, namely a decision to offer the fourth jab to the most vulnerable citizens,” the health minister, Magnus Heunicke, said. The European Union’s drug regulator has expressed doubts about the need for a fourth dose and said there was currently no data to support this approach as it seeks more data on the fast-spreading variant. Fellow EU member Hungary has said it is considering deploying a fourth shot. Chile and Israel have already begun a rollout. Denmark saw a surge in daily infections in mid-December, prompting new restrictions including the closure of theatres, cinemas, entertainment parks and conference centres, as well as measures to limit large crowds in stores and shops. However, even as infection rates remain near record levels above 20,000 a day, hospital admissions and deaths have stabilised at levels below those seen a year ago. “We are not in a worst case scenario,” Heunicke told reporters. “We have the epidemic under control again. It’s a feat of strength by the entire society.” Lawmakers agreed to reopen theatres, cinemas, museums, entertainment parks and botanic gardens, as well as allowing spectators at indoor and outdoor sports events, albeit with limiting attendance. Denmark is helped by high support for Covid vaccination, with four out of five having received two jabs and just over half of the population with three jabs. Data from the country’s top infectious disease authority, Statens Serum Institut (SSI), show that unvaccinated people are five to six times more likely to be hospitalised after getting the virus compared with those vaccinated. The Biden administration has announced a new set of measures to keep classes open, including doubling Covid testing capacity in schools with 10 million more tests, as the Omicron variant spreads rapidly through the US, Reuters reports. The United States reported 1.35 million new coronavirus infections on Monday, shattering the global record for daily cases in any one country. Omicron is now estimated to account for 98.3% of total new cases circulating in the country, the Centers for Disease Control &amp; Prevention (CDC) said. The gigantic wave of infections has disrupted plans for students and teachers to return to school and for workers to go back to the office. In response, the number of Covid tests available to schools will be increased by 10 million per month, the White House said in a statement on Wednesday, adding this will help schools more than double the volume of testing compared to November 2021. Half of the new free rapid tests will be distributed each month to help kindergarten to 12th grade (K-12) schools remain open, the statement said, while lab capacity will be available to support five million monthly PCR tests for schools. Critics have accused president Joe Biden of not focusing enough on testing in the fight to control surging Omicron cases and hospitalisations, amid growing reports of acute shortages of test kits around the country. The White House and top health officials have defended the response, including announcing earlier this month that 500 million rapid tests would be available free to all Americans in January. The new steps come as some school districts move to virtual classes again to escape the Omicron wave. The politics over how to keep schools open is also expected to be a significant issue in the upcoming midterm elections and has already been a subject of intense debate, with Republicans saying the administration has not done enough on the issue. Other steps announced on Wednesday include CDC and states working together to meet demand for additional tests for school districts. The first such deliveries will be made later this month, the administration said. Federal agencies will ensure federal testing sites can support K-12 schools, connecting local school districts with testing providers and offering full reimbursement to schools that set up diagnostic and testing programs. The administration said it had so far distributed $10 billion in resources to states for testing at schools, funding that was included in the coronavirus legislation signed into law last year. The White House said those efforts have resulted in 96% of schools being able to open in-person classes this month, up from 46% of schools in January 2021. Last year, the CDC endorsed a test-to-stay strategy, which allowed schools to use frequent testing to keep students in class after exposure to someone with Covid, as an alternative to mandatory quarantine. The agency will release additional materials later this week to help schools implement this strategy, the White House said. Zimbabwe’s president, Emmerson Mnangagwa, said on Wednesday that China would be donating another 10 million doses of its Covid vaccine over the course of 2022, Reuters reports. Zimbabwe, like most African countries, is struggling with low rates of vaccination, due to availability issues and also to vaccine hesitancy or public apathy. The country has so far fully vaccinated just over a fifth of its population of 15 million people, mostly using vaccines either purchased from or donated by China. Nearly a third of Zimbabweans have received at least a single dose of the Chinese vaccine. “The assistance, comprising four million Sinopharm doses and six million Sinovac doses, is in addition to the two million doses Zimbabwe has received as donations since February 2021 from the People’s Republic of China,” Mnangagwa said. China’s ambassador to Zimbabwe, Guo Shaochun, said the 10 million doses would be delivered in batches throughout 2022. To date, the southern African country has officially recorded 223,765 Covid infections and 5,201 deaths, according to health ministry data. The percentage of people testing positive for Covid continued to increase in all four nations of the UK in the week ending 6 January, according to new data from the Office for National Statistics. Covid infections compatible with the Omicron variant continued to increase across England, Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland, the ONS said, adding that Delta variant compatible infections have fallen to very low levels and Omicron is now the dominant variant across all UK countries. In total, the ONS estimates showed about 4.3 million people in the UK had Covid that week. The ONS estimates that 3,735,000 people in England had Covid that week, equating to around 1 in 15 people. While the estimate for the previous week had also been around 1 in 15 people, the estimated number of infected people was 3,270,800. The latest figure therefore marks an overall increase in the number of infections. In England, the percentage of people testing positive has increased among age groups aged 50 years and over, the ONS said. However, infections remain lowest in those aged 70 years and over; in all other age groups, the percentage of people testing positive has increased over the most recent two weeks, but the trend is uncertain in the most recent week. Covid infections continued to increase across all regions of England except the East of England, and London, the ONS found. The percentage of people testing positive has decreased in London in the most recent week and in the East of England, the trend is uncertain, it said. In Wales, the percentage of people testing positive also continued to increase in the week ending 6 January. The ONS estimates that 169,100 people in Wales had Covid, equating to around 1 in 20 people. In Scotland, the percentage of people testing positive continued to increase in the week ending 7 January. The ONS estimates that 297,400 people in Scotland had Covid, equating to around 1 in 20 people. And in Northern Ireland, the percentage of people testing positive continued to increase in the week ending 6 January. The ONS estimates that 99,200 people in Northern Ireland had Covid, equating to around 1 in 20 people The full data can be found here. France’s Institut Pasteur said in a report published on Wednesday that it expected to see a peak of new Omicron infections in mid-January, followed by a peak in hospital admissions in the second half of the month. On Tuesday, France registered a record daily high of nearly 370,000 infections and a seven-day average high of more than 283,000. The number of people in intensive care units with Covid rose by 65 to 3,969. Here is my colleague Peter Walker’s story on the UK prime minister’s apology for attending a “bring your own booze” event in the No 10 garden during the first lockdown in May 2020. Boris Johnson insisted it was a “work event” which “technically” broke no rules. The UK government’s operation of a “VIP lane” for suppliers of personal protective equipment during the coronavirus pandemic was illegal, a judge has ruled. In a written judgment, Mrs Justice O’Farrell said the Good Law Project and EveryDoctor, which together had challenged the lawfulness of the way billions of pounds worth of contracts were awarded through the high priority lane, had established that its operation was “in breach of the obligation of equal treatment”. Describing the allocation of offers to the VIP lane as “flawed”, the judge said: There is evidence that opportunities were treated as high priority even where there were no objectively justifiable grounds for expediting the offer. She added: The claimants have established that operation of the high priority lane was in breach of the obligation of equal treatment under the PCR [public contract regulations] … the illegality is marked by this judgment. More than 32bn items of PPE with a value of £14bn were bought through directly awarded and negotiated contracts. The full story is here: Use of ‘VIP lane’ to award Covid PPE contracts unlawful, high court rules Switzerland will halve its quarantine time to five days to help tackle a wave of Covid infections that threatens to hamstring the economy, Reuters reports. Health authorities had given their blessing on Tuesday for the move, which comes as tens of thousands more people a day are infected with the highly transmissible Omicron variant. Officials worry that the healthcare system could be overwhelmed, with two-thirds of the Swiss population having had two doses and just 30% having had a booster. The government also proposed extending until the end of March curbs on public life that were tightened last month. It is trying to avoid not only another lockdown but also mandatory vaccinations, a route neighbouring Austria has taken. “The epidemiological situation is critical and remains difficult to assess,” the government said. It added that although Omicron seemed to be less deadly than other Covid variants, it expected an increase in hospitalisations because of the very high number of infections, which rose to 32,881 new cases on Wednesday. The reduction in the self-isolation requirement will go into effect from Thursday. This could be done because the Omicron variant had a shortened time between infection and transmission to other people, the government said. Measures introduced in December included the need for people to prove they have been vaccinated or recovered from Covid to gain entry to many indoor venues, as well as making working from home mandatory. National authorities have reported more than 1.6m confirmed infections on Switzerland and tiny neighbour Liechtenstein since the pandemic began in early 2020. More than 12,000 have died of the respiratory ailment. The eastern canton of the Grisons ordered all residents with nursing training to register in case they were needed to relieve pressure on hospitals. “It can be assumed that the sharp increase in coronavirus cases will push medical care, or rather the human resources in the nursing professions, to their limits,” the regional government said. Tunisia will reimpose a night curfew and ban all gatherings for two weeks sfrom Thursday to counter the rapid spread of Covid, the government has said in a move critics decried as aimed at stopping protests. The ban on gatherings and a request to avoid travel within the country except for emergencies comes two days before a planned demonstration against the Tunisian president, Kais Saied, called by major political parties. A senior official in the main opposition Ennahda party, Mohamed Goumani, told Reuters on Wednesday the protest would go ahead in defiance of the new ban. A curfew was imposed during the first wave of the pandemic in 2020 and again for much of last year, but was lifted in September as cases dropped. The new curfew will be in place for at least two weeks and run from 10pm to 5am each night. The government’s perceived poor response to the pandemic, including a botched vaccine rollout, raised the political pressure before Saied dismissed parliament and seized broad powers in July, moves his critics said was a coup. Leaders of another two parties that had joined the call for protests on Friday accused the government of restoring the health restrictions for political reasons. “We will be on Revolution Street to protest whatever the cost,” Ghazi Chaouachi, the head of the Democratic Current, which had 22 MPs in the 217-seat in the now-suspended parliament, told reporters, using a nickname to describe Tunis’s Avenue Habib Bourguiba. The measures were intended “to prevent a wave of popular anger that they can only confront by citing health conditions”, said the leader of the smaller Al Joumhouri party, Issam Chebbi. Imagine being on a first date you couldn’t end? That is what happened to a woman in China whose video blogs about going into a citywide lockdown during a blind date have gone viral, AFP reports. More than 100 cases have been reported in the central Chinese city of Zhengzhou since last week, as China tries to contain multiple local outbreaks of the Delta and Omicron variants. A woman was having dinner at the homes of her date when parts of the city were abruptly placed under lockdown last Wednesday. “Just after I arrived in Zhengzhou, there was an outbreak and his community was put under lockdown and I could not leave,” she told the Shanghai-based outlet the Paper on Tuesday, adding that she went there for a week-long trip to meet potential suitors. “I’m getting old now, my family introduced me to ten matches … The fifth date wanted to show off his cooking skills and invited me over to his house for dinner.” Since then, she posted short videos documenting her daily life in lockdown, which show her date cooking meals for her, doing household chores and working at his laptop while she sleeps in, according to clips published by local media. So far it seems romance has yet to blossom during their prolonged date. “Besides the fact that he’s as mute as a wooden mannequin, everything else [about him] is pretty good,” the woman told the Paper. “Despite his food being mediocre, he’s still willing to cook, which I think is great.” She said the recent surge in online attention had prompted her to remove the videos. She added: Thanks everyone for your attention … I hope the outbreak ends soon and that my single sisters also find a relationship soon. Vladimir Putin has said Russia has two weeks to prepare for a fresh wave of Covid infections driven by the Omicron variant after the WHO warned of a surge in Europe, AFP reports. Russia has lifted nearly all the restrictions designed to limit the spread of the virus, despite an increasing caseload and growing Omicron infections. It is the worst-hit country in Europe in terms of Covid-related deaths. “We see what is happening in the world,” Putin told a meeting of cabinet ministers on Wednesday. “We have at least a couple of weeks to prepare.” Regional and federal authorities should take steps with businesses to limit the impact of the new variant, he added. Russia found itself in an “extremely difficult situation”, said Putin. He urged the prime minister, Mikhail Mishustin, to increase domestic vaccination rates, including with Sputnik V, which the Kremlin chief claimed was “perhaps more efficient” than other vaccines used globally. On Tuesday, the World Health Organization said more than half of people in Europe were likely to catch Omicron by March. Russia has only recently emerged from a deadly wave of the Delta variant. Related: Omicron could infect 50% of Europeans in next two months, says WHO Russia’s statistics agency said in December that about 87,000 people had died from the coronavirus in November alone, bringing the country’s total pandemic related deaths to more than 600,000, which is nearly twice the official figure given by a government Covid website. There is widespread vaccine scepticism in Russia. Despite several domestically produced jabs being available for free for months now, fewer than halfthe country’s 146 million has been inoculated as of Wednesday, according to a government tally. Following a strict – but brief – national lockdown in the beginning of the pandemic, Russia has held back on introducing measures to restrain the virus in the hopes of protecting its struggling economy. The pandemic is also driving a demographic crisis in Russia. In 2020, the population shrank by 510,000 people – the biggest decline in 15 years, Rosstat calculated. With a sense of smell up to 100,000 times more sensitive than humans’, dogs have been employed in the service of sniffing out everything from contraband to crop molds to cancer. Yet while researchers first began exploring whether canines could be effective agents in the fight against Covid early in the pandemic, only in recent months have conclusive, peer-reviewed studies begun verifying the hypothesis that dogs know Covid when they smell it. In late 2021, scientists at Florida International University published a double-blind study of canine Covid detection in which the four participating pups demonstrated a 97.5% accuracy rate in identifying biomarkers associated with Covid-19. “It’s one of the highest percentages I’ve ever seen, and I’ve been doing this work for over 25 years with all kinds of detector dogs,” says FIU’s Dr. Ken Furton, a leading scholar in forensic chemistry specializing in scent detection. “It’s really remarkable.” Another study from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine found dogs could identify Covid 82%-94% of the time, whereas recent German research put their success rate at 95%. The full story is here: ‘A protective bubble’: Covid-sniffing dogs help scientists – and Metallica – spot infection The British prime minister has apologised for attending a garden drinks event during the first lockdown in May 2020. Johnson said he went into the garden of Downing Street on 20 May 2020 to thank staff before going back into his office 25 minutes later. He said at the time he believed it was a “work event” and in hindsight he should have sent everyone back inside. He told MPs: I know the rage they [the public] feel with me over the government I lead when they think that in Downing Street itself the rules are not being properly followed by the people who make the rules. For more, Andrew Sparrow’s live blog is here: The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, is about to face the most difficult PMQs of his premiership, where how he decides to address the partygate affair will determine his political future. My colleague Andrew Sparrow will be covering the session over on the UK politics live blog. You can read along here: A senior minister has said Ireland should be in a position to start easing restrictions to slow the spread of Covid from next month once the number of people requiring critical care remains stable, Reuters reports. Ireland has the second highest incidence rate of Covid in Europe but also one of the continent’s highest uptake of booster vaccines, helping keep the number of patients in intensive care stable and well below the peak of previous waves of the disease. The daily increase in the number of hospital admissions has also slowed in recent days and the communications minister, Eamon Ryan, said that if the critical care figure holds steady, the economy would emerge from the current curbs. “I am very confident we will be able to ease restrictions as we go into February. The science says that this will be a short wave, if we can get through it with our hospital numbers down, then we will be able to start lifting restrictions,” Ryan, the leader of the junior coalition Green party, told reporters on Wednesday. The government closed nightclubs and cut capacity at indoor events in early December, before widening the constraints on crowds and ordering bars and restaurants to shut at 8pm two weeks later as the Omicron variant spread rapidly. The deputy prime minister, Leo Varadkar, said on Tuesday that restrictions would likely be eased on a phased basis. Previously the government has lifted the most recently imposed curbs first and further reopened the economy every two to three weeks. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ Germany has reported 80,430 coronavirus cases – a new daily record – and 384 deaths, according to figures from the Robert Koch Institute. Austria also appears to have set a new record of 18,427 daily Covid cases according to reports. World Health Organization experts have warned that repeating booster doses of the original Covid vaccines is not a viable strategy against emerging variants. Russia has confirmed it has 698 Omicron cases. While total numbers of daily cases of Covid hover around 17,000-18,000 each day, down from a peak of 41,335 registered in early November, deputy prime minister Tatiana Golikova said the government will prepare new measures to combat Covid by the end of the week. Hungary’s daily tally of new Covid-19 cases has risen to 7,883, up from 5,270 reported a week earlier, but the number of patients treated in hospital declined over the week, the government has said. In Bulgaria, more than 5,200 people were in hospitals with Covid, including 580 in intensive care. In the capital, Sofia, planned operations have been suspended as hospitals prepared to expand wards for Covid-19 patients. Botswana’s President Mokgweetsi Masisi has left isolation just over a week after testing positive for Covid without symptoms, the government has said. In the UK, the day’s Covid news has been dominated by allegations that a party took place at the British prime minister’s residence during the March 2020 lockdown. Boris Johnson has refused to either confirm or deny he attended the alleged party. He will face opposition leader Keir Starmer in parliament today. Saudi Arabia has registered its highest daily number of new Covid infections, breaking through 5,000 new cases in a single day for the first time. Kyrgyzstan’s healthcare ministry has said it had confirmed the Central Asian nation’s first cases of the Omicron variant. China is battling coronavirus outbreaks in several cities, severely testing the country’s strict “zero-Covid” strategy just weeks before Beijing hosts the Winter Olympics. The northern city of Tianjin has ordered a second round of Covid testing on all 14 million residents after the discovery of 97 cases of the Omicron variant during initial screenings that began Sunday. Quebec, Canada’s second-most populous province, has announced plans to impose a ‘health tax’ on residents who refuse to get the Covid-19 vaccination for non-medical reasons. In Australia, state and territory leaders will consider relaxing isolation requirements for the trucking and logistics sector, as the prime minister, Scott Morrison, calls for patience over the country’s disrupted supply chains. Novak Djokovic has blamed his agent for an “administrative mistake” when declaring he had not travelled in the two weeks before his flight to Australia and acknowledged an “error of judgment” by not isolating after he tested positive for Covid. Andrew Sparrow is following Covid and politics developments in the UK, which are extremely intertwined at the moment. You can find his live blog here. I’m now handing you over to my colleague Lucy Campbell to bring you the rest of the day’s international coronavirus news. Tom Phillips in Rio de Janeiro and Uki Goñi in Buenos Aires report for us on how Omicron is dimming optimism as South America enters the pandemic’s third year: As the pandemic’s second, gruelling year drew to a close and Covid rates in Rio de Janeiro plunged to levels unseen since it began, the Brazilian city’s health secretary, Daniel Soranz, celebrated a desperately needed respite. “We’ve been through such painful, difficult months … this is now a moment of hope,” the 42-year-old doctor said last November as carioca life regained some semblance of normality, hospitals emptied and the city’s effervescent cultural scene was reborn. But the new year, and the arrival of the highly contagious Omicron variant, has brought Soranz and many others crashing back down to Earth as coronavirus cases surge across Latin America with consequences that remain unclear. “It’s really tiring,” Soranz admitted this week as infections in his beachside city soared to their highest ever levels and plans for Rio’s rumbustious annual carnival were cast into doubt. “This pandemic has been going on for almost two years. It’s exhausting. But there’s nothing to be done,” Soranz said, noting how 20% of Rio’s health workers – about 5,000 people – had been infected since December. Similar angst is being voiced around South America, which, having witnessed some of the pandemic’s bleakest moments – with bodies dumped in mass graves and patients starved of oxygen in overwhelmed hospitals – had been enjoying a long-awaited moment of optimism after becoming one of the world vaccination champions. Nearly 65% of South Americans have been fully vaccinated, according to the University of Oxford’s Our World in Data project, compared with about 62% in Europe and the US, and less than 10% in Africa. Read more here: Omicron dims optimism as South America enters pandemic’s third year A quick snap from Reuters that Saudi Arabia has registered its highest daily number of new Covid infections, health ministry data showed, breaking through 5,000 cases for the first time. Cases in the kingdom, which has the Gulf’s largest population at about 35 million, have risen dramatically since the start of the year with the global spread of the Omicron variant. The country on Wednesday reported 5,362 new cases and two deaths, rising above the previous peak of daily infections in June 2020 of 4,919. Here is some more, this time from Associated Press, on events in the northern Chinese city of Tianjin, which has ordered a second round of Covid testing on all 14 million residents after the discovery of 97 cases of the Omicron variant during initial screenings that began Sunday. Residents were asked to remain where they are until the results of all the nucleic acid tests are received, the official Xinhua News Agency said. Xinhua said authorities have carried out almost 12m tests so far, with 7.8m samples returned. The city that about an hour from Beijing. High-speed rail service and other forms of transportation between the cities have been suspended, leading to some disruptions in supply chains, including for packaged food items sold in convenience stores. Tianjin’s Covid prevention and control office said all who have tested positive in the initial testing round were found to have the Omicron variant, of which China has so far only reported a handful of cases. The source of the outbreak is still unknown and many who are spreading the strain may be doing so unwittingly because they show no symptoms. Andrew Sparrow is live with his Covid and politics blog for what is going to be a very busy and turbulent day in Westminster. You can follow that here. I’ll be continuing with international and global Covid news here. Here is our political editor Heather Stewart with her take on what faces Boris Johnson today: Boris Johnson faces a make-or-break session of prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, with furious Conservative MPs awaiting his explanation of the “bring your own booze” garden party in May 2020. Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, said: “He has an opportunity now to come clean to the British public, who are devastated by these allegations.” More than 10 Conservative MPs have publicly criticised the gathering, details of which emerged in a leaked email from Johnson’s principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds. The Amber Valley MP Nigel Mills said Johnson’s position would be “untenable” if he attended the party. “If the prime minister knowingly attended a party, I can’t see how he can survive having accepted resignations for far less,” he told BBC News. “He accepted the resignation of his spokesperson [Allegra Stratton] for not attending a party but joking about it at a time of much lighter restrictions. I just think that’s untenable.” Many more Tory MPs are expressing anger in private, though some are prepared to await the findings of an inquiry by the civil servant Sue Gray into a string of parties in Downing Street. Read more of Heather Stewart’s report here: Johnson faces crunch PMQs as pressure mounts over No 10 party China is battling coronavirus outbreaks in several cities, severely testing the country’s strict “zero-Covid” strategy just weeks before Beijing hosts the Winter Olympics. In the northern port city of Tianjin, two confirmed cases of the highly transmissible variant were discovered over the weekend. Local virus prevention official Zhang Ying said on Saturday that the strain of virus identified had been transmitting for “at least three generations” – indicating weeks of earlier spread – with the source unclear. “We are highly concerned about whether the virus has spilled over to areas outside Tianjin... especially Beijing,” Zhang said. Xi’an is in its third week of a strict lockdown as it races to stamp out a 2,000-case outbreak, one of the largest in China for months. Residents may not leave their homes or travel out of the city, famed for its Terracotta Warriors. Agence France-Presse also report that several cities in the central province of Henan – which lies near Xi’an – have strengthened virus controls in response to hundreds of new infections since late December. The province on Wednesday reported 87 new local cases. The provincial capital, Zhengzhou, has imposed a partial lockdown and ordered its nearly 13 million residents to get tested. After logging a handful of cases in recent days, the southern tech hub Shenzhen just across the border from Hong Kong locked down some housing compounds, launched mass testing of residents and truckers, and shuttered some long-distance bus stations and ferry routes. Beijing last week sealed off its Winter Olympics “closed loop”, which will cocoon thousands of athletes and Games staff for weeks without direct physical access to the outside world. Anyone entering the bubble must be fully vaccinated or face a 21-day quarantine when they arrive. Everyone inside will be tested daily and must wear face masks at all times. Another little update from Russia here, where Reuters report that the deputy prime minister, Tatiana Golikova, said that the government will prepare new measures to combat the rise in Covid cases by the end of the week. Cases in Russia have generally been declining from a peak of 41,335 registered in early November, although the government today confirmed there are 698 Omicron cases. The line of questioning for Labour’s deputy leader Angela Rayner on the BBC Radio 4’s Today programme has touched on the technicalities of whether the 20 May party that is at the centre of the UK politics news today really counted as a party. Rayner said she did not accept that Downing Street staff should have been able to meet up outside during the first lockdown because they were key workers or that the alleged gatherings could have been for work reasons. PA Media quote her saying: I don’t accept that sending out invitations to ‘bring your own booze, the weather is lovely, come out into the garden’ to 100 staff as work, to be honest. Asked whether she thought the garden of No 10 constituted a workplace, added: Many key workers are NHS staff who were working very heavy shifts, 12-hour shifts with full PPE on - they didn’t break out into the garden with cheese and wine and bring your own booze scenarios. They were working incredibly hard watching people’s loved ones die, holding smart phones and iPads in front of them so they could say goodbye to their loved ones - it is not acceptable to say: “This is a workplace garden, so we all cracked open the bubbly because it was a really nice day.” Many people at the time understood the rules, and the rules were very clear. A couple of quick snaps from Reuters here. Austria appears to have set a new record of 18,427 daily Covid cases – according to newspaper Kronen Zeitung. Russia, meanwhile, has confirmed that it has 698 cases of the Omicron virus. The country recorded 17,946 new daily Covid cases, up slightly from the day before. PA Media have confirmed that Keir Starmer will attend PMQs today at noon. There’s been a little bit of stirring up by some conservative voices that NHS guidelines suggest you should work from home if possible on the seventh day after coming out of isolation, suggesting that Starmer might be breaking those rules if he attended Westminster today. However, that has been very quickly slapped down by people pointing out that Jacob Rees-Mogg ended remote attendance of parliament, so it isn’t possible for MPs to attend PMQs remotely anymore. There’s a flurry of tweets from political journalists that Labour leader Keir Starmer has tested negative again for Covid this morning and so will be in parliament to face Boris Johnson at PMQs. Assuming Boris Johnson also attends, of course … As I mentioned earlier, this morning’s Covid UK news has been rather more about the politics of the pandemic than the actual disease itself, although PA Media have highlighted today a recent blog post by Dr Richard Cree, an intensive care consultant at the James Cook University Hospital in Middlesbrough, which has an optimistic outlook that he country can “ride out the Omicron wave”. He writes: Across the country, the number of people being admitted to hospital following infection remains high. However, the number of people being admitted hasn’t risen as high as I feared it might and it may even be starting to plateau. I will admit that I thought things might be worse by now but I’m all too happy to be proved wrong. It’s looking increasingly likely that we may be able to ‘ride out’ the Omicron wave after all. While stressing that people would still die from Covid during this phase of the pandemic, he also said: There is now no doubt that the Omicron variant is far less severe than its predecessors. In many respects, this fourth wave feels like it is due to a different virus. Most of the patients who have required admission to the Covid Intensive Care Unit are relatively young and unvaccinated. The few vaccinated patients that we are admitting have either not received a booster dose or have significant existing medical problems that cause them to be immunosuppressed. Here’s a little bit more from Angela Rayner, the Labour deputy leader in the UK, being interviewed on Sky News. She said: The frustration is, not only is it around the fact that Boris Johnson shouldn’t have been breaking the law and breaking the rules, and he should come to the house and speak to the British people as quickly as possible about that. But it’s the fact that for time and time again now he said that nothing happened, no rules were broken. And the allegation essentially now is that he was actually attending this party during lockdown. So it shows that he’s not only broken the rules, but he’s lying to the British public. And I think that makes this position completely untenable. I think he should go, but I think more crucially now is MPs, his Conservative MPs, have to ask themselves the question: “Why are we propping up this man, who has lied to the British public, and who broke the rules and broke the law. Hungary’s daily tally of new Covid-19 cases has risen to 7,883, up from 5,270 reported a week earlier, but the number of patients treated in hospital declined over the week, the government has said. The government said 29% of the new infections were caused by the Omicron variant, although Krisztina Than reports for Reuters that some private labs have reported much higher figures. Away from UK political shenanigans for a moment, Botswana’s President Mokgweetsi Masisi has left isolation just over a week after testing positive for Covid without symptoms, the government has said. “His medical team has assessed his health status and subsequently cleared him because he continues to have no Covid associated symptoms,” government spokesman John-Thomas Dipowe said. Reuters report that new coronavirus infections have risen in the southern African country since the detection of the Omicron variant late last year, from fewer than 300 every three days before Omicron to an average of more than 2,500. But health officials say there has not been a feared surge in hospitalisations. Botswana has fully vaccinated nearly three quarters of its eligible population of around 1.3 million people. The suggestion doing the rounds from journalists on Twitter is that we should have been enjoying the company of transport secretary Grant Shapps this morning. The government has instead opted not to put a minister forward. Here’s more from Angela Rayner on Sky News. Labour’s deputy leader said: If you look at our death rates they have been pretty shocking. We’ve seen that waste in terms of public procurement contracts. While there has been, you know, the vaccination programme that the NHS works on, and our great scientists in the UK with great success, there have been failings that the government has shown throughout the pandemic. But this is the number one critical one for me. Is that the prime minister, the allegation is that he’s lied and he’s broken the rules and broken the law, and that is the most serious allegation to put to a prime minister at a time of crisis. Some speculation from political journalist Paul Waugh here about how Boris Johnson might attempt to defuse the situation today. Here are some of the early quotes from Labour’s deputy leader Angela Rayner on Sky News. She said: I think it’s shameful that Boris Johnson over the last couple of days hasn’t answered the central question yes or no. Were you at a party at 10 Downing Street when everyone else was in lockdown? He could have cleared this up within the last couple of days. I think it’s not unsurprising that no one can turn up today to answer to it, because quite frankly, to anyone who lost a loved one who was not able to visit them and see them in their last hours, it’s pretty despicable to find that they were partying at number 10. She said that Keir Starmer, Labour’s leader, had tested negative for Covid yesterday, and so, provided he tested negative again this morning, would be taking PMQs against Boris Johnson rather than her. There’s been a rather weird interlude on Sky News in the UK where they were trying to interview a part-time GP Fui Mee Queck who wanted to explain why she didn’t want to take the vaccine, but she appeared to cut the interview abruptly short over the line of questioning that Kay Burley was taking. So they then immediately went to an improvised sofa chat with Labour’s deputy leader Angela Rayner, who started talking about the British prime minister’s failure to come clean over 10 Downing Street parties as “shameful”. I’ll have some quotes from that in due course. In the UK, the opposition Labour deputy leader has said Boris Johnson’s position would be “untenable” if it is proved that he had attended parties in contravention to lockdown rules. Angela Rayner told BBC Breakfast: “It is very simple for me, I’ve been asking the prime minister for the last couple of days, you just have to say, were you at this party or not on 20 May?” “He can clear this up very quickly and he has refused to do so, so far, and he has really undermined the office of prime minister by letting this carry on and continue because he refuses to tell the British public what they deserve to hear, and that’s whether or not he broke the lockdown rules and whether he was at this party or not.” Asked whether Labour would call for Johnson to resign, Rayner said: “Boris Johnson has to account for his actions and the ministerial code is very clear that if he has misled Parliament and he has not abided by that code, then he should go.” She added that if it proved he had “lied to the British public, lied to parliament and he has attended parties during lockdown, then his position is untenable”. In Australia, state and territory leaders will consider relaxing isolation requirements for the trucking and logistics sector, as the prime minister, Scott Morrison, calls for patience over the country’s disrupted supply chains. With estimates from industry that between 20% and 50% of the transport and logistics workforce is currently out of action as a result of Covid exposure, the government is also pushing for national cabinet to agree to scrap testing requirements for border crossings. The federal government is also set to allow international students to work more than 40 hours a fortnight in affected sectors, in an attempt to ease workforce pressures in critical industries. After urgent talks with industry groups and unions on Tuesday night and Wednesday morning, Morrison convened a meeting of the national coordinating mechanism on Wednesday, which was also attended by senior ministers and the heads of the infrastructure, treasury and health departments. Morrison said that the challenge being posed by escalating case numbers linked to the Omicron outbreak was “keeping things moving”. “That’s what riding this wave of Covid means, and of course … with so many cases appearing every day and that expected to continue until its peak, this will have an obvious impact right across our supply chains,” he said. Read more of Sarah Martin’s report: Isolation rules may be relaxed for transport workers as Scott Morrison asks for patience on shortages A very quick snap from Reuters here, that Kyrgyzstan’s healthcare ministry has said it had confirmed the Central Asian nation’s first cases of the Omicron variant. PA Media are carrying some slightly more detailed quotes from Conservative MP Huw Merriman on the BBC’s Today programme. Here’s what he said: I’m the type that doesn’t go around calling for people to resign until evidence is known, and that includes opposition MPs. I think from the Prime Minister it’s what took place, what did he attend, more clarity is needed because we’re back where we were a month ago before the inquiry was set up where people are demanding answers. We’re all in the dark - and that includes me. As a reminder, we aren’t expecting to hear from any UK government minister this morning – none appear to have been willing or been selected to do any media appearances. Last time the government was in this sort of mess – when the video emerged showing No 10 aides laughing about a Christmas party during Covid restrictions – it was Sajid Javid who cancelled his appearances, later saying the “upsetting” video was a factor. The front pages of newspapers in the UK make grim reading for Boris Johnson and his government this morning. And even the New York Times strikes a slightly exasperated tone over the story. Their daily briefing newsletter this morning includes this snippet: Boris Johnson, the British prime minister, is accused – yet again – of violating his government’s own lockdown rules over a May 2020 garden party at 10 Downing Street. Before the emergence of the Omicron variant, one of the main areas of interest of the pandemic was the rising case numbers in eastern Europe. That story became kind of subsumed into the broader Omicron wave. Yesterday coronavirus infections in Bulgaria reached a record high of 7,062, largely fuelled by Omicron. Reuters report the virus has killed 89 people in the past 24 hours in the Balkan country, according to official figures, bringing the total death toll to 31,761. More than 5,200 people were in hospitals, including 580 in intensive care. In the capital, Sofia, planned operations have been suspended as hospitals prepared to expand wards for Covid-19 patients. At present, Bulgarians have to wear masks indoors and on public transport and show a health pass, given to people who are vaccinated, recovered or who have tested negative for the virus, to get into restaurants, cafes and shopping malls and gyms. A new government that took office last month has appealed to vaccine-sceptic Bulgarians to get inoculated and offered a one-time cash reward of 75 levis ($43.50 USD/£32 GBP) to pensioners who opt to get fully vaccinated or take a booster. In an attempt to lead by example, lawmakers voted to make the health pass mandatory for entry to parliament from 24 January. There’s been a whisper of defence for the embattled British prime minister on Radio 4 this morning from at least one Conservative MP, Huw Merriman. Liberal Democrat leader Ed Davey has already been on the airwaves in the UK, and he has called directly for the British prime minister Boris Johnson to resign. He told BBC Breakfast: One of my constituents, a neighbour, Andrew, emailed me yesterday. And when he saw the headlines of a party at 10 Downing Street, he said “Please don’t let it be on 20 May, because that was a day of my dad’s funeral.” And he was very emotional and angry to know that it was 20 of May. And I think there are hundreds and thousands of people like Andrew across the country, who are really hurting, you know, extremely emotional about this, and I think they want the prime minister now to resign. And I agree with them. Boris Johnson is now incapable of leading our country through this public health crisis. I think he’s actually now a threat to the health of the nation, because no one will do anything he says. He’s shown to have been deceitful. So Boris Johnson must now resign. Hello from London, it is Martin Belam here taking over from Samantha Lock. I suspect that the morning media round in the UK is going to offer us a lot more heat about Boris Johnson and lockdown parties than it is going to offer light about the current status of Covid in the country. I’ll bring you the key lines from those TV and radio interviews as they emerge. As far as I can tell, Labour’s deputy leader Angela Rayner will be appearing, the SNP’s Westminster leader Ian Blackford will be doing the rounds, Liberal Democrat leader Ed Davey has already been on, but Sky News say that the government has put no minister forward to face questions this morning. Returning briefly to the unfolding Djokovic saga, Guardian reporter Paul Karp has written a handy timeline covering the tennis star’s diagnosis and movements before his travel to Australia. What did Djokovic say before arrival in Australia? On 1 January, Djokovic’s agent submitted an Australian travel declaration on his behalf, declaring “no” when asked: “Have you travelled or will you travel in the 14 days prior to your flight to Australia?” Djokovic had obtained an exemption to vaccination requirements from the Tennis Australia chief medical officer, approved by a Victorian government independent review board, stating that he had received a positive PCR test to Covid-19 “recorded on” 16 December. What did Djokovic say in court documents? Djokovic’s affidavit to the federal circuit court challenging his visa cancellation set out this timeline: 18 November – the Australian government granted him a visa 16 December – he “was tested and diagnosed with Sars-CoV-2” 22 December – his second PCR test returned a negative result 1 January – he authorised his agent to submit his travel declaration 2 January – he received a border travel permit from the Victorian government 4 January – he flew from Spain to Melbourne via Dubai 5 January 11.30pm – he arrived in Melbourne 6 January – his visa was cancelled Read the full timeline here. World Health Organization experts have warned that repeating booster doses of the original Covid vaccines is not a viable strategy against emerging variants. One in seven people who have tested positive for Covid could still be infectious if released from isolation upon receiving a negative lateral flow result after five days, new data suggests. More than half of people in Europe could contract the Omicron in the next two months if infections continue at current rates, the WHO added. UK former health secretary Matt Hancock has tested positive for Covid after contracting the virus for a second time. Novak Djokovic has blamed his agent for an “administrative mistake” when declaring he had not travelled in the two weeks before his flight to Australia and acknowledged an “error of judgment” by not isolating after he tested positive for Covid. India recorded 194,720 new Covid-19 cases on Wednesday, the most since late May, health ministry data showed. Germany has reported 80,430 coronavirus cases - a new daily record - and 384 deaths, according to figures from the Robert Koch Institute. Indonesia kicked off its Covid-19 booster campaign for the general public, prioritising third shots for the elderly and people with compromised immune systems. New Zealand’s navy has conducted an unusual mercy mission to retrieve two people stranded in Singapore for 18 months due to Covid-19. Colombia is set to reduce the waiting period for a Covid-19 booster vaccine from six to four months, president Ivan Duque has said. The Chinese city of Tianjin has started a new round of Covid-19 testing today among its 14 million residents to block the spread of Omicron. Quebec, Canada’s second-most populous province, has announced plans to impose a ‘health tax’ on residents who refuse to get the Covid-19 vaccination for non-medical reasons. Australia’s most populous state, New South Wales, suffered its deadliest day of the pandemic, with surging Omicron infections leading to staff shortages that have disrupted supply chains and hampered the economy’s recovery. People in NSW, Australia are to report all positive rapid antigen test (RAT) or face a $1,000 fine. One in seven people who have tested positive for Covid could still be infectious if released from isolation upon receiving a negative lateral flow result after five days, new data suggests. Across the UK people are now allowed to leave self-isolation on day seven, provided they have had two negative lateral flow tests in the past 24 hours and do not have a fever. However, the prime minister has indicated he is in favour of further reducing the quarantine time to five days, if backed by scientific evidence. Experts have cautioned there is presently little data to back the move. According to work previously released by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), the proportion of people estimated to remain infectious five days after the onset of Covid symptoms, or a positive Covid test, is 31%. A small Japanese study has similarly suggested a substantial proportion of those infected with the Omicron variant remain infectious at five days. Read the full story here. Novak Djokovic has blamed his agent for an “administrative mistake” when declaring he had not travelled in the two weeks before his flight to Australia and acknowledged an “error of judgment” by not isolating after he tested positive for Covid. The world No 1 released a statement on Wednesday in a bid to address what he called “continuing misinformation” about his activities in December before he came to Australia in a bid to retain his Australian Open crown. But Djokovic’s statement, posted to Instagram, did not address reports by Der Spiegel claiming apparent anomalies with his 16 December PCR test result. The reporting has raised questions about the positive Covid diagnosis that forms the basis of his exemption to travel to Australia. Wednesday’s statement claims he wasn’t notified of his positive result until 17 December despite Djokovic’s affidavit to the federal circuit court that he was both “tested and diagnosed” on 16 December. Read the full story here. India is reporting almost 200,000 new Covid infections in a single day. The Asian nation recorded 194,720 new Covid-19 cases on Wednesday, the most since late May, health ministry data shows. Another 442 deaths were also reported. Union health secretary Rajesh Bhushan has written to chief secretaries of all states to take immediate measures to ensure optimal availability of medical oxygen at health facilities, the Times of India reports. The origin of the Omicron outbreak in Tianjin, China is eluding authorities, who have warned of the need to prepare for a “worst case scenario”. Health officials are investigating how the new strain of Covid-19 arrived in the city after genomic sequencing showed the current cases had a different source to earlier imported cases. China’s first imported cases of Omicron arrived in Tianjin in early December, but Zhang Ying, deputy director of Tianjin’s CDC told state media on Monday they did not match the source of the current cases. We cannot directly rule out that the virus is imported directly, because the spread of virus is not only through humans, but it can be spread via objects or environmental [contamination]. We are still investigating other possibilities for the virus to be imported to Tianjin directly…There is another option – would it be possible that it is not imported but came from other areas [in China] and spread to Tianjin? We are tracing this simultaneously and we have found some clues already.” China has frequently attributed infections to imported cold chain goods, despite it being generally considered a slim chance of infecting people by international scientists. Tianjin today launched a second round of testing among the population of 14 million. The first round detected 77 cases among the first 7.9 million tests. Germany has reported more than 80,000 new daily Covid-19 infections, marking a new daily record. A total of 80,430 coronavirus cases and 384 deaths were recorded for Tuesday, according to figures from the Robert Koch Institute. In Norway, the country also set a new daily record with 9,622 new infections registered in the last 24 hours, This is 3,000 cases more than the average of the previous seven days (6,622), local media reports. And a big thank you to very alert reader Francisco Javier Torres Tobar who brought these figures to my attention. Indonesia has kicked off its Covid-19 booster campaign for the general public on Wednesday, prioritising third shots for the elderly and people with compromised immune systems. The government hopes to provide 21m booster shots in January to people who received their second jabs at least six months ago. Some 117 million people in Indonesia have already received two doses of the vaccine. The Moderna vaccine was provided as a booster for healthcare workers in July last year. President Joko Widodo said: “This effort is important to increase the immunity of society, considering the Covid-19 virus keeps mutating.” Indonesia has reported more than 4.2 million cases and more than 144,000 deaths since the pandemic began. Indonesia’s Food and Drug Authority on Monday approved emergency-use authorisation for the Sinovac, Pfizer, AstraZeneca, Moderna and Zifivax vaccines, all of which will be used as booster shots. Several other vaccines are also being examined for emergency-use authorisation. New Zealand’s navy has conducted an unusual mercy mission to retrieve two people stranded in Singapore for 18 months due to Covid-19. A medical condition meant the two could not fly to New Zealand, and their shrinking bank balance made staying in Singapore difficult. According to documents released under the Official Information Act, the mission occurred after an adviser to New Zealand’s high commission to Singapore interceded on the pair’s behalf, saying their position was “very unique” and he feared “their situation could turn into one that is even worse”. The couple, whose case was first reported by Stuff, received a special exemption to travel on board the HMNZS Canterbury, which was being refurbished in Singapore at the time. The ship left Singapore in November 2021. The journey took 19 days, meaning the couple did not need to quarantine upon arrival in New Zealand. Read the full story here. Colombia is set to reduce the waiting period for a Covid-19 booster vaccine from six to four months, president Ivan Duque has said. The country previously mandated that people wait six months for their booster shots after completing their initial vaccinations. Duque made the announcement in a video message that he later uploaded to Twitter. Everyone aged 18 and over who has had both doses, or one dose in cases like Janssen, can now have their booster doses after four months instead of six.” Those who are infected with Covid-19 are now able to have their vaccines 30 days after their isolation ends, rather than six months after, Duque added. Colombia has also reduced quarantine times for those who test positive and show symptoms, regardless of vaccination status, to seven days, from 14 days previously. Similarly, unvaccinated people who have been in contact with an infected person must isolate for seven days, Duque said. However, those who have been vaccinated and have had contact with an infected person who do not show symptoms will not have to isolate, though they should continue to use masks and observe sanitary measures, he said. Colombia has so far recorded more than 5.3 million coronavirus infections and 130,460 deaths, according to government figures. The Chinese city of Tianjin has started a new round of Covid-19 testing today among its 14 million residents to block the spread of Omicron. Tianjin reported 33 domestically transmitted coronavirus infections with confirmed symptoms for Tuesday, up from 10 a day earlier, national data showed. The city ordered a half-day off for employees at companies and other institutions on Wednesday and required them to remain at home to comply with the city’s second round of mass testing, the local government said in a statement, Reuters reports. In the central city of Anyang, where Omicron has also been detected in the community, local symptomatic cases number surged to 65 on Tuesday from just two a day earlier. The two cities have restricted residents’ movement within the cities and made it harder for people to leave town as mass testing campaigns are ongoing. Including infections in Tianjin and Anyang, mainland China reported a total of 166 local symptomatic cases for Tuesday, more than 110 a day earlier. There were no new deaths, leaving the death toll at 4,636. Quebec, Canada’s second-most populous province, has announced plans to impose a ‘health tax’ on residents who refuse to get the Covid-19 vaccination for non-medical reasons. Premier François Legault announced the new “contribution” for the unvaccinated on Tuesday, adding that it will apply “in the next few weeks”. “A health contribution will be charged to all adults that don’t want to get vaccinated,” he said. “Those who refuse to get the shot bring a financial burden to hospital staff and Quebecers. The 10% of the population can’t burden the 90%.” Read the full story here. World Health Organization experts have warned that repeating booster doses of the original Covid vaccines is not a viable strategy against emerging variants. the WHO Technical Advisory Group on Covid-19 Vaccine Composition (TAG-Co-VAC) said: A vaccination strategy based on repeated booster doses of the original vaccine composition is unlikely to be appropriate or sustainable. Covid-19 vaccines that have high impact on prevention of infection and transmission, in addition to the prevention of severe disease and death, are needed and should be developed.” The group said there could be a need to update the existing vaccines to better target emerging Covid variants such as Omicron and called for the development of new jabs that not only protect people who contract Covid against falling seriously ill but also better prevent people from catching the virus in the first place. It also suggested that vaccine developers should strive to create jabs that “elicit immune responses that are broad, strong, and long-lasting in order to reduce the need for successive booster doses”. Until new vaccines have been developed, the group said, “the composition of current Covid-19 vaccines may need to be updated”. According to the WHO, 331 candidate vaccines are currently being worked on around the world. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog, ready to take you through all the Covid news this Wednesday. Let’s dive right in with the news that World Health Organization experts have warned that repeating booster doses of the original Covid vaccines is not a viable strategy against emerging variants. “A vaccination strategy based on repeated booster doses of the original vaccine composition is unlikely to be appropriate or sustainable,” the WHO Technical Advisory Group on Covid-19 Vaccine Composition (TAG-Co-VAC) said. The group said there could be a need to update the existing vaccines to better target emerging Covid variants such as Omicron. According to the WHO, 331 candidate vaccines are currently being worked on around the world. Over in Quebec, Canada’s second-most populous province, has announced plans to impose a ‘health tax’ on residents who refuse to get the Covid-19 vaccination for non-medical reasons. Premier François Legault announced the new “contribution” for the unvaccinated on Tuesday, adding that it will apply “in the next few weeks”. “A health contribution will be charged to all adults that don’t want to get vaccinated,” he said. “Those who refuse to get the shot bring a financial burden to hospital staff and Quebecers. The 10% of the population can’t burden the 90%.” Here’s a quick summary of all the latest developments: People in NSW, Australia are to report all positive rapid antigen test (RAT) or face a $1,000 fine. German police have drawn criticism for using an app to trace Covid contacts from bars and restaurants. Bolivia’s vice president and six cabinet ministers are in isolation after testing positive for the coronavirus, the government said Tuesday. UK former health secretary Matt Hancock tests positive for Covid after contracting the virus for a second time. About three-quarters of teachers in France plan to strike on Thursday to protest against the government’s shifting rules on Covid forcing the closure of half the country’s primary schools, a union has warned. France’s health ministry is expected to announce a record of more than 350,000 new Covid infections over a 24-hour period, according to the health minister, Olivier Véran. Novak Djokovic’s defence of his Australian Open title remains in doubt after reports that he might have given misleading information to Australian immigration officials. Immigration Minister Alex Hawke is still considering whether to cancel Djokovic’s visa. Sweden announced a record 70,641 new Covid cases since Friday. It also said there were a 54 new deaths from Covid. The US recorded a record number of hospitalisations due to Covid-19, as the daily infection rate soared to more than 1.35m. There were 145,982 people hospitalised with coronavirus on Monday, according to the US Department of Health and Human Services. More than half of people in Europe could contract the Omicron in the next two months if infections continue at current rates, the World Health Organization has warned. The WHO also warned that it is too too soon to treat Omicron as a flu-like endemic illness. Senior emergency officer for Europe, Catherine Smallwood, said: “We still have a huge amount of uncertainty and a virus that is evolving quite quickly, imposing new challenges. We are certainly not at the point where we are able to call it endemic. The central Chinese city of Anyang has ordered five million people to begin home confinement in a new lockdown to curb the spread of Omicron variant.The Novak Djokovic saga proves the need for an urgent review of the immigration minister’s “godlike” visa cancellation powers, migration experts and advocates for refugees and asylum seekers have argued. The visa cancellation working group, Asylum Seeker Resource Centre and Refugee Advice and Casework Service made the call on Thursday, as Djokovic awaits an imminent decision from the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, about whether to re-cancel his visa. Expectations within government that Hawke will cancel the visa, leading to Djokovic’s deportation before the Australian Open unless he can challenge it successfully in court, were raised by the tennis star’s statement on Wednesday. In it, Djokovic blamed his agent for an “administrative mistake” when declaring he had not travelled in the two weeks before his flight to Australia, and acknowledged an “error of judgment” by not isolating after he tested positive for Covid. Experts and advocates say the saga has drawn attention to Australia’s dysfunctional cancellation framework and mandatory detention regime, including the plight of asylum seekers at the Park hotel in Melbourne, where Djokovic was held before a court win on Monday secured his release. Hawke is considering cancelling Djokovic’s visa using a personal power that does not guarantee the visa-holder natural justice. Since rule changes in 2014, Coalition governments have cancelled more than 10,000 visas under separate provisions regarding character grounds, a frequent sticking point in Australia’s relationship with New Zealand. Sanmati Verma, the deputy chair of the visa cancellation working group, said Djokovic’s case “has thrown light on the longstanding unfair and arbitrary use of the commonwealth’s cancellation and detention powers”. “Most visa holders whose visas are cancelled on arrival are denied time to provide a response and the chance to get advice from a lawyer. “Many are turned around at the border quickly while in immigration clearance with little or no recourse to redress, even if they face serious harm in their home country. “Those not immediately deported are detained. The laws currently in place require people to be mandatorily detained until they are either granted a visa or deported, resulting in many people being detained for years, even indefinitely.” Dr Carolyn Graydon, principal solicitor of the Asylum Seeker Resource Centre, said conditions in detention centres are “deplorable and pose a constant risk to the health and safety of detainees”. Sarah Dale, principal solicitor of the Refugee Advice and Casework Service said an inquiry into minister’s powers could help restore “substantive and procedural rights” to those facing visa cancellation. Although Australia’s harsh border policies tend to have bipartisan support, Labor has been critical of the Morrison government’s handling of the Djokovic saga, with Anthony Albanese describing it as “diabolical” on Thursday. “This was the biggest sporting story in the world for months,” Albanese told Channel Nine’s Today program. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Novak Djokovic, best tennis player in the world, No 1 ranked, nine-time champion, shooting for his 21st grand slam. “And no one knew that he wasn’t vaccinated? He’s made that a bit public. “How is it that a visa was granted in the first place? This has been diabolical for Australia’s reputation, just in terms of our competence here.”I’ve been online for a long time. When I first got on the internet, I spent most of my time in an AOL teen chatroom. I wasn’t even a teenager – I was 10 years old. But to the AOL chatroom, I was 16-year-old Casey from America who could snowboard and skateboard and surf and rollerblade backwards and smoke while doing any of those things. Alex could barely razor scooter and I thank the internet to this day for giving me the chance to wear that hat (a backwards-fitted cap, obviously) just once. I don’t feel bad about the lying because I don’t think anyone else in that chatroom was actually a teenager; I’m guessing it was 50% children like myself and 50% adult criminals. Do I regret it? Well, when you consider that’s where I first started receiving funny memes and that I also didn’t give out my home address, not even once, then no, I have absolutely zero regrets. I steer clear of the chatrooms now (especially the teen ones) but I’m still big into the funny side of the internet. Here are 10 things I find very funny. 1. ‘It starts right now!’ You just know this guy had been rehearsing his “And it starts right now!” line around the house the night before. Rarely do you capture someone fail with such accuracy and enthusiasm. I bet he still had that big smile on his face when he was underwater. 2. This Michael Jackson tweet We all have that thing we tell people growing up, only to one day find out it wasn’t what it seemed. I went to school with a girl who told me she was a Filipino princess so I told everyone I knew a princess. Then when I was 20 I saw her working at Boost and figured that a princess wouldn’t have to work. I googled the Philippines and turns out it’s a republic. Also, if she was a princess she should have been at a rich school – I always thought our school was fine but now I realise I managed to get an “education” without the Philippines coming up in class once. Anyway, I love this tweet where this adult man realises his life has been a lie. 3. Slippery guy This is a video a friend showed me last year featuring a man he calls “the slipperiest guy in the world”. The only thing funnier than a video of someone falling over is a video of someone who never stops falling over. 4. Greentext soccer story Before Reddit, the worst people on the internet hung out on 4chan. I’m sure some still do but I don’t dare check. 4chan is such a basic HTML website that sharing information has to be done with limited text and has led to a short story style of writing called “greentext”. To me it’s almost poetry but I wouldn’t say that over there or they might add it to their manifestos. Excuse the fuzziness, it’s from 2011 and been copied a tonne of times. To me, this is the funniest greentext I’ve come across. 5. The Simpsons Rock Eisteddfod I was struggling to explain the Australian Rock Eisteddfod Challenge to a friend from overseas once when I decided to look on YouTube for some clips. That’s how I found this bizarre performance. I never thought my memory of my own school’s eisteddfod piece – a jazz ballet number to the Prodigy’s Breathe – could be outdone, but I was wrong. Enjoy this interruptive dance from 1997, depicting the seven deadly sins through The Simpsons. I particularly enjoy Maggie’s backflips at 5:25. 6. Thomas Sainsbury’s ‘Boomer Dad and the Car Park’ Thomas Sainsbury is a New Zealand comedian and has my favourite Instagram account. He does a lot of characters and sketches. It was difficult to pick just one video to share – I decided to go with his impression of a boomer trying to pay for parking, but I also highly recommend his supportive work mum. 7. Fern Brady’s jumper tweet What I wouldn’t give to meet the builder and hear his side of things. Take some time to read the responses to this tweet. Just story after story of similar embarrassing misfortunes. They hurt so bad it’s good. 8. Hot Dad Productions Protective Dad Hot Dad Productions are a Melbourne-based comedy group who make lots of great videos. This sketch is one of my favourites. Not all their videos feature dads being hot but this one does. 9. Onion kid This kid eating an onion. I don’t know if they think it’s something other than onion or if they know perfectly well it’s an onion. I don’t need nor care to know. Just enjoy it for what it is – a kid eating an onion. 10. Tig Notaro keeps running into Taylor Dayne Tig Notaro is one of my favourite comedians and this is one of my favourite bits of hers. Somehow Tig continually runs into 80s pop singer Taylor Dayne. The end of this clip gets a little awkward with a musical performance by a special act – you’ll never guess who! I’ve watched this video a bunch of times but only just now noticed who the uploader was … can you guess … yeah, Taylor Dayne. Alex Ward is a comedian and writer. You can follow her on Instagram and TikTok or see her perform at Melbourne’s Malthouse Outdoor Stage, Sydney Opera House and Adelaide fringe festival.Allowing fossil fuel companies to extract gas from beneath the Lake Eyre basin would “blow out of the water” the Queensland government’s emission targets and make it more difficult for Australia to comply with its international obligations, a new report says. Origin Energy was given approval by the state government to begin exploration for gas on leases in the basin in late December. If allowed to proceed the application could open up the region – home to one of the last major free-flowing desert river systems – to the extraction of fossil fuels across 225,000 hectares of Queensland’s channel country. Though the licences only allow for exploration, the Queensland academic Ian Lowe examined the potential emissions that would be created if the basin were opened up to production and found that it would derail the state government’s plan to lower emissions. His analysis modelled the emissions created over two scenarios: a high-activity scenario where the gas is produced for export and a low-activity scenario where only minimal work takes place. Under the former, Lowe found gas extraction in the area would generate 199m tonnes of CO2-equivalent a year, while in the latter activity would produce 16m tonnes of CO2-equivalent a year. This is because the gas resource has an unusually high concentration of CO2, ranging from 30% to 35%. Because of this, a large amount of CO2 would be released during the process of extracting the gas – even before it was processed, shipped and burned. “I’d not come across anything like that level of CO2 in other gas fields,” Lowe said. “Even if there wasn’t a leakage of methane and even if the gas was burnt somewhere else so that it didn’t count against Australia’s emissions targets, there’d be a significant release associated with getting the gas out of the ground.” Under the high-activity scenario, Lowe said, extraction and export of gas from the basin would soak up a significant portion of Australia’s national carbon budget and “require a 60% reduction just to stay where we are, let alone moving towards zero”. This would make it more difficult for Australia to satisfy its international agreements under the Paris agreement. But even under the low-activity scenario, Lowe found the yearly emissions created required would amount to half the yearly reduction under the state government’s 2030 emissions reduction target. “The conclusion I came to is even a modest extraction of gas, would blow out of the water Queensland’s stated emissions target,” Lowe said. Under its plan to reach net zero by 2050, the government is aiming for a 30% emissions reduction below 2005 levels by 2030. A government spokesperson insisted its emissions targets “are achievable” and said it was working with industry to “investigate ways to reduce fugitive emissions from resource activities, particularly in the Bowen Basin”. “The channel country leases were required to be issued under previous legislation and are for exploration only – they are not for the production of petroleum or gas,” the spokesperson said. “Any on ground exploration activities would require an Environmental Authority from the Department of Environment and Science, and an approval under the Regional Planning Interests Act, subject to stringent assessment criteria.” The state government “expects industry to reduce emissions, including fugitive emissions” and “more consultation will be done” before permission was granted to Origin to develop its field. Origin was contacted for comment. The International Energy Agency suggested in May that limiting global heating to 1.5C, a goal set out in the Paris agreement, meant the exploration and exploitation of new fossil fuel basins had to stop in 2021. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Ellie Smith, a spokesperson for Lock the Gate Alliance Queensland, which commissioned the report, said it showed the responsibility of meeting the 2030 emissions target was being left to other sectors of the economy. This was because “at the moment in Queensland we have no direct regulation of emissions”, Smith said. “It feels like the fossil fuel industry pushing to get as much gas out of the ground in the dying days of the industry. They know, we all know, it’s the end of the fossil fuel industry. “It’s clear they’re just trying to push and push and push on every front, whether it’s just Queensland, Northern Territory, WA, New South Wales – there’s new development everywhere.”A New Zealand man has had a cockroach pulled from his ear three days after first feeling a squirming sensation. Zane Wedding said he initially thought the problem was just water in his ear. The Aucklander had been for a swim at a local pool on Friday morning and fell asleep on his couch that evening. He woke up with a blocked ear – and the feeling there was something wriggling inside. On Saturday, Wedding had his ear syringed. He was given antibiotics, instructions to blow-dry the side of his head, and a suggestion he return if he still felt movement. “Immediately after, it felt way worse,” said Wedding. He went deaf in one ear and was unable to sleep. The hairdryer didn’t help. He joked: “I’ve been cooking it [with the hairdryer] since Saturday.” Wedding then booked into an ear specialist. On Monday, she peered into his ear. “Literally the second she looked, she said, ‘Oh my god … I think you have an insect in your ear.’” It took a few minutes, a suction device and tweezers to pull the now-dead cockroach from Wedding’s ear. Wedding gave it to the specialist as a memento; she had never extracted an insect before.New Zealand’s decision to resettle a former vice-president of Afghanistan and 13 family members has sparked controversy, with some asking why hundreds of Afghans who helped New Zealand forces or were associated with them remain trapped abroad and in fear for their lives. Sarwar Danish had already escaped to Turkey before recently arriving in New Zealand, according to Stuff, which first reported the news. Associate immigration minister Phil Twyford said Danish, a member of Afghanistan’s Hazara minority, was resettled partly because of his human rights advocacy. But one Afghan translator who worked with the New Zealand SAS told Stuff the case highlighted the need for the new Zealand government to do more. “It’s very frustrating that someone … with zero connection to New Zealand has been resettled in this country, when people who directly supported the New Zealand SAS have been left behind.” Assadullah Nazari, president of New Zealand’s Hazara Afghan Association, said he supported Danish’s resettlement but noted there were hundreds of Hazara still at risk in Afghanistan who want visas. “To see that they are still there and suffering – that the Taliban are killing them – and that Danish has been brought from a safe place in Turkey? It just doesn’t seem fair.” Nazari said the government should do more to resettle others who remain in grave danger in Afghanistan. Danish declined to comment when approached through an intermediary. New Zealand has granted 1,400 visas to Afghans as part of its response to the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan in August. Twelve hundred were to Afghans associated with New Zealand’s presence in Afghanistan, and 200 to Afghans at “extreme risk” from the Taliban. Danish, the second vice-president in the administration of then-president Ashraf Ghani, is part of the latter category. However, of the Afghans granted visas, only 800 have actually arrived in New Zealand, in part because New Zealand Defence Force (NZDF) evacuation efforts from Kabul were cut short in late August after a fatal terrorist attack. Following the attack prime minister Jacinda Ardern said, “The future evacuation will look different to what it has to date, and it will be difficult and it may take longer, but we are not giving up on bringing those who need to come home, home.” At the time, one interpreter who had been approved for a resettlement visa accused New Zealand’s government of “total betrayal” for stopping evacuation flights, asking, “What will happen to us?” A Newshub analysis late last year found that of the 547 Afghans granted visas because they or an immediate family member had worked with the NZDF, just 60 had made it to New Zealand. Due to the closure of New Zealand’s border in 2020 due to Covid-19, INZ declined to process a number of visa applications from Afghans – wrongly, according to a later high court ruling. The high court also required INZ to prioritise processing resettlement applications from at-risk Afghans. However Raza Khadim, a former Afghan translator for the NZDF and a spokesperson for the Afghan Veterans Interpreters Association, said the process remained “super slow”. New Zealand’s Foreign Ministry says it will not consider new resettlement applications from Afghans and their families who helped New Zealand forces. Now, some visa enquiries are going unanswered. According to one New Zealand citizen and Hazara who went to Afghanistan prior to the country’s collapse to help his daughter-in-law’s family escape, he has not heard from INZ or the Foreign Ministry after repeated applications and enquiries. They are now moving around the country to avoid the Taliban, who are targeting the family. “I don’t know what I should do. I don’t know how to handle this situation. But I can’t leave them here,” said the man, who the Guardian has chosen not to name for safety reasons. INZ declined to comment on the man’s case for privacy reasons. Asked about Danish’s case, Sue Moroney, chief executive of Community Law, said: “I’m really reluctant to pit people against each other … everyone is in a precarious situation.” She noted however, “What we’re surprised about is that INZ would prioritise other visa applications to process over the ones they’ve been instructed by the high court to fix. [Danish’s resettlement] alarms us from that perspective.”Sydney festival chair, David Kirk, has described the board’s failure to grasp the potential ramifications of accepting funding from the Australian Israeli embassy, which sparked a mass walk out of artists, as “just a miss”. In an interview with Guardian Australia on Thursday, Kirk issued a public apology, saying he regrets the distress to artists that the controversy over the sponsorship decision had caused. Kirk admitted that the festival board was unaware of the sponsorship deal until he noticed the Israeli government logo on the festival program in late November. But he rejected the suggestion this amounted to either a failure in communication between management and the board, or a failure to recognise whether a risk assessment was needed. “It was just a miss,” he said. “We followed all of our normal processes. “And the next question becomes… are your normal processes fit for purpose in the current environment? And that’s something that we’re going to look into in the independent review that we have confirmed and absolutely committed to undertaking.” Kirk said a yet-to-be-appointed independent two-member panel would launch the review as soon as the festival concludes later this month. But he would not say whether the festival would cease accepting sponsorships from foreign governments in the future. “We don’t want to preempt the review,” he said. “We just need to make sure it’s independent. The board has already had discussions about the broad nature of it … and we will work with [the independent reviewers] on the terms of reference, and get on with it as soon as the festival is over.” But neither he, the festival’s director Olivia Ansell, or anyone else would be resigning over the issue, Kirk said. Kirk also rejected the suggestion that the way to quell dissent among festival participants and the wider community might be to return the $20,000 sponsorship to the Israeli government. “That’s not something we think is appropriate in the circumstances,” he said. “I think if we had understood, had the foresight to realise that this would be the sort of issue that it has become, then we would have had detailed discussions and we would have considered what the best way forward was, but we didn’t. “We are very sorry for the fact that we put artists in a situation where they felt compromised or have been pressurised, and have either been in a position where they’ve felt the need to withdraw their work or continue with their work [and] have been subjected to pretty serious social media pressure to withdraw. “We really regret that. We accept that we caused that and the review that we intend to undertake is focused on ensuring this ever happens again.” The money was to fund a Sydney Dance Company production of Decadence, devised by Tel Aviv choreographer Ohad Naharin, and an invitation-only Q&amp;A session hosted by the Israeli embassy at the Opera House during the 2022 festival. The latter did not go ahead because of concerns over Covid-19. An Israeli embassy spokesperson told the Guardian on Wednesday that Ansell approached the embassy with the sponsorship proposal in early July. A festival spokesperson told the Guardian “management approached the embassy in the second half of last year”.The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection requested information from minority leader Kevin McCarthy. Committee chair Bennie Thompson sent a letter to McCarthy requesting his voluntary cooperation with the panel, but it’s unclear whether the Republican leader will actually appear before investigators. Two other Republican congressmen have already rejected requests to speak to the committee. Senate leader Chuck Schumer will maneuver existing congressional rules to evade the first GOP filibuster threat to passing voting rights legislation. In a memo to Senate Democrats, Schumer outlined a strategy wherein the House would amend an unrelated bill about Nasa to include provisions from two stalled voting reform bills. After passing that bill, the Democrats would send it to the Senate asap, where Democrats could start debate on it with a simple majority rather than a 60-vote supermajority. Joe Biden will attend Senate Democrats’ caucus lunch tomorrow to discuss voting rights and filibuster reform. The news comes one day after the president called on Senate Democrats to change chamber rules to allow voting rights bills to advance. “Let the majority prevail,” Biden said in Atlanta, Georgia. “And if that bare minimum is blocked, we have no option but to change the Senate rules, including getting rid of the filibuster for this.” Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell criticized Biden’s speech on voting rights as “profoundly unpresidential”. “Twelve months ago, a newly-inaugurated President Biden stood on the West Front of the Capitol and said this: ‘My whole soul is in this: bringing America together, uniting our people, and uniting our nation,’” said McConnell, who vehemently opposes filibuster reform. “Yesterday, the same man delivered a deliberately divisive speech that was designed to pull our country farther apart.” The price of goods and services in the US jumped by 7% in December compared to the same month last year, according to the latest report from the labor department. The increase marks the seventh consecutive month in which inflation has topped 5%. – Joan E Greve and Maanvi Singh Chuck Schumer’s loophole strategy will allow the Senate to bypass an initial filibuster and at least get the Democrats’ voting reform proposals onto the floor for debate. But the tactic won’t get Senate Democrats past a 60-vote requirement to end debate pass the reforms. Instead, when Republicans move inevitably to block a motion to close debate, Schumer could then propose to establish a new precedent to move ahead with a simple majority. Joe Biden has endorsed filibuster rule changes to get Democrats’ voting rights bills passed, as states enact unprecedented voting restrictions. My colleagues Sam Levine and Jewel Wicker covered the speech the president gave in Atlanta yesterday, in which he endorsed filibuster reforms: Biden did not endorse a specific change to the rules but said he backed changing the filibuster, which currently requires 60 votes to advance legislation – an insurmountable challenge for the voting rights legislation given lack of support from Republicans. Biden did not mention Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, the staunchest defenders of the filibuster from the Democratic side of the chamber, by name in his speech. But he made it clear his patience has run out after months of negotiations at the White House and on Capitol Hill within his caucus to try to find a way forward on voting rights. “I’ve been having these quiet conversations with members of Congress for the last two months. I’m tired of being quiet,” he said, his voice rising. He also appealed to senators’ legacies, saying that those who did not stand up at this moment for voting rights would be remembered on the side of some of the most infamous racist political leaders in US history, including those supporting segregation or the Confederacy, as opposed to civil rights proponents. “How do you want to be remembered? Do you want to be on the side of Dr King or George Wallace? Do you want to be on the side of John Lewis or Bull Connor? On the side of Abraham Lincoln or Jefferson Davis?” he said. Read more: Chuck Schumer will maneuver existing congressional rules to evade the first GOP filibuster threat to passing voting rights legislation. In a memo to Senate Democrats, Schumer outlined a strategy wherein the House would amend an unrelated bill about Nasa to include provisions from two stalled voting reform bills. After passing that bill, the Democrats would send it to the Senate asap, where Democrats could start debate on it with a simple majority rather than a 60-vote supermajority. This strategy would allow Democrats to evade an initial filibuster from Republicans seeking to block debate on the bill, but the GOP could still block a final vote on it. If that sounds a bit outlandish, here’s the strategy again: 1. The House will take up an amendment on Nasa leasing property, which they’re calling the “shell” bill. 2. House will remove that legislation’s existing language, and replace it with the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. 3. The House will pass the updated legislation, and send it to the Senate, where Schumer will file a motion to concur with the House. The US is turning to Wendy Sherman, its veteran negotiator, to safeguard peace in Europe. No one in government has spent more time in high-stakes talks with hostile states than the 72-year-old deputy secretary of state, who has represented the US at two rounds of critical discussions with Russia this week. She was part of an extraordinary mission 23 years ago, led by the former defence secretary William Perry, to try to do a deal with North Korea. For many North Koreans, it was the first time they had seen an American, and the regime went all-out to put on a show of a joyfully contented country. At one point, a bus stopped in front of the delegation, seemingly by chance, and its passengers poured out and went straight into a dance routine. “Everything was supposed to be ‘spontaneous’,” Sherman later told the Guardian. “And there was a cameraman following everything we did with a 1950s hand-cranked camera. It was all rather surreal. “When we wanted to talk, we walked outside, even knowing there might be bugs in the trees. When we wanted to get a message across and were not sure who we should be talking to, we would sit in a waiting room and speak, knowing we were being listened to.” Read more: Zack Harold in Charleston, West Virginia reports: Last fall, Krista Greene missed a week of work after her sons were exposed to Covid and could not return to school. Greene, who manages a tutoring center and yoga studio in Charleston, West Virginia, does not receive any paid time off. Normally, she would have been worried about this loss of income. But the Greene family’s budget had recently become a little more flexible, thanks to the monthly child tax credit payments that began in July 2021. “The first thing I said to my husband was, ‘The Biden bucks are coming next week, so I won’t miss any bills,’” Greene said. Families probably received their final monthly payments in December after Congress failed to pass the Build Back Better Act. The legislation, the cornerstone of the Biden administration’s domestic policy, would have made the payments permanent. But one Democrat stood in the way – Greene’s senator, Joe Manchin. A week before Christmas, Manchin appeared on Fox &amp; Friends and announced he would not vote for the Build Back Better Act, effectively poleaxing Biden’s plans in a Senate evenly divided between Democrats and Republicans. “I have always said, ‘If I can’t go back home and explain it, I can’t vote for it,’” Manchin said in a press release after the television appearance. “Despite my best efforts, I cannot explain the sweeping Build Back Better Act in West Virginia and I cannot vote to move forward on this mammoth piece of legislation.” The announcement came after months of negotiations between Manchin and the White House, some of which involved the child tax credit. Manchin wanted to limit the credit to families making $60,000 or less annually. He has also said he will not support a permanent credit unless it includes a work requirement. The child tax credit was one of a number of Biden proposals that were surprisingly popular in the deeply Republican state of West Virginia – not least because Manchin’s constituents have benefited from it more than most. Ninety-three per cent of West Virginia children – about 346,000 in all – qualified for the credit payments. That extra $250 to $300 per child a month lifted about 50,000 of those children above the poverty line, according to the West Virginia Center for Budget and Policy (WVCBP). Now that the credits have vanished, so will those advancements. The timing could not be worse. Like the rest of the country, West Virginia is suffering a surge in inflation unseen in decades, a surge that disproportionately affects the poor. Read more: The ruling striking down Ohio’s legislative districts is perhaps the most significant ruling of the redistricting cycle. That’s because this is the first time the Ohio supreme court is stepping in to enforce anti-gerrymandering provisions Ohio voters adopted in 2015. This redistricting cycle was the first time those provisions were in effect and the Republicans on the 7-person panel charged with drawing districts in Ohio essentially ignored it. The amendment requires the support of members of both parties on the panel to pass a map that will be in effect for 10 years. But Republicans made little effort to work with Democrats, drew maps in secret, and passed their own plan on partisan lines. Under the state constitution, that plan could only be in effect for four years. They also made little effort to comply with the more explicit requirements that districts reflect the partisan makeup of Ohio. In one piece of particularly baffling logic, Republicans said they could be entitled to as much of 81% of seats in the legislature because they had won 81% of statewide elections in the last decade. Advocates had expressed deep frustration that lawmakers had so blatantly ignored the amendment. But their last hope was that the supreme court would stop the plan from going into effect, sending a message to future lawmakers that blatant efforts to gerrymander would not be tolerated. The supreme court sent such a message on Wednesday. The Ohio supreme court has struck down new maps for the state legislature, saying they were so skewed to benefit Republicans that they violated the state constitution. The ruling was 4-3. Maureen O’Connor, a Republican and the court’s chief justice, broke with Republican colleagues to cast the deciding swing vote. A panel of seven lawmakers tasked with drawing districts in Ohio now has 10 days to come up with a new map. The court found that the plan, which would have given Republicans a 62-37 advantage in the Ohio House and a 23-10 advantage in the state senate, provisions of the Ohio constitution that require partisan fairness in mapmaking. Those provisions say that districts cannot be drawn to “primarily to favor or disfavor a political party” and that the partisan makeup of districts should reflect the partisan results of statewide races over the last 10 years. Voters overwhelmingly approved the changes in a 2015 ballot referendum. Republicans have won about 54% of the vote over the last decade in Ohio. But would have controlled nearly two thirds of each chamber in the legislature. There is still a separate lawsuit pending before the court challenging Ohio’s congressional districts, which are also heavily distorted to benefit the GOP. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection requested information from minority leader Kevin McCarthy. Committee chair Bennie Thompson sent a letter to McCarthy requesting his voluntary cooperation with the panel, but it’s unclear whether the Republican leader will actually appear before investigators. Two other Republican congressman have already rejected requests to speak to the committee. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer called out centrists Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema for opposing filibuster reform. “I don’t want to delude your listeners, this is an uphill fight,” Schumer said last night, at an event with the liberal think tank Center for American Progress. “Because Manchin and Sinema do not believe in changing the rules.” Joe Biden will attend Senate Democrats’ caucus lunch tomorrow to discuss voting rights and filibuster reform. The news comes one day after the president called on Senate Democrats to change chamber rules to allow voting rights bills to advance. “Let the majority prevail,” Biden said in Atlanta, Georgia. “And if that bare minimum is blocked, we have no option but to change the Senate rules, including getting rid of the filibuster for this.” Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell criticized Biden’s speech on voting rights as “profoundly unpresidential”. “Twelve months ago, a newly-inaugurated President Biden stood on the West Front of the Capitol and said this: ‘My whole soul is in this: bringing America together, uniting our people, and uniting our nation,’” said McConnell, who vehemently opposes filibuster reform. “Yesterday, the same man delivered a deliberately divisive speech that was designed to pull our country farther apart.” The price of goods and services in the US jumped by 7% in December compared to the same month last year, according to the latest report from the labor department. The increase marks the seventh consecutive month in which inflation has topped 5%. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. House minority leader Kevin McCarthy was recently asked whether he would be willing to share information with the select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. “I don’t really have anything to add. I have been very public, but I wouldn’t hide from anything,” the Republican congressman said late last month. That statement will be put to the test now that the select committee has formally requested information from McCarthy, who will have to decide whether he will join other Republican congressmen in refusing to speak to investigators. Bennie Thompson, the chair of the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection, said in his letter to Kevin McCarthy that the panel is interested in “how the President’s plans for January 6th came together, and all the other ways he attempted to alter the results of the election”. “For example, in advance of January 6th, you reportedly explained to Mark Meadows and the former President that objections to the certification of the electoral votes on January 6th ‘was doomed to fail,’” Thompson said. “How did they respond? Why were they nevertheless so confident that the election result would be overturned?” The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection shared a letter that chair Bennie Thompson sent to minority leader Kevin McCarthy requesting information from him. “We write to request your voluntary cooperation with our investigation on a range of critical topics, including your conversations with President Trump before, during and after the violent January 6th attack,” Thompson said in the letter. “You have acknowledged speaking directly with the former President while the violence was underway on January 6th.” Thompson argued that McCarthy could provide insight into “President Trump’s state of mind during the January 6th attack,” as well as after the insurrection occurred. Thompson proposed a date of February 3 or February 4 for McCarthy to appear before the panel, but again, it seems unlikely that the Republican leader will voluntarily agree to speak to investigators. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection will invite minority leader Kevin McCarthy to appear before the panel. “We’re going to invite the minority leader,” the chair of the committee, congressman Bennie Thompson, told a group of reporters on Capitol Hill, per Politico. It seems unlikely that McCarthy will voluntarily agree to speak to investigators. So far, two sitting Republican congressmen -- Jim Jordan of Ohio and Scott Perry of Pennsylvania -- have declined requests to appear before the committee. In a Sunday letter to Thompson, Jordan accused the panel of “an outrageous abuse” of its authority, arguing the request for his testimony was “far outside the bounds of any legitimate inquiry”. Joe Biden made an unscheduled stop at the US Capitol to pay his respects to Harry Reid, the late Senate majority leader who is lying in state today. The president also spoke at Reid’s funeral in Nevada on Saturday, saying of his former Senate colleague, “His story was unmistakably American. He was proof that there is nothing ordinary about America, and that Americans can do anything given half a chance.” Schools going virtual, airlines canceling flights, pharmacies and testing centers closing temporarily, shelves emptying in grocery stores because of transportation delays, blood donations dropping to crisis levels for the first time ever and the country’s hospitals are becoming stretched. This is the US in the grip of the Omicron variant. Omicron may cause milder symptoms in some people, but its effects are ricocheting throughout America and creating some of the greatest challenges of the Covid-19 pandemic. “We have supply shortages, we have transportation shortages, that are a result of people being out because of Covid, and especially Omicron being so infectious. And that is obviously limiting the workforce, and limiting the workforce is creating some of the havoc that we’re all experiencing,” said Ezekiel Emanuel, vice-provost at the University of Pennsylvania. Joe Biden has vowed to keep businesses and schools open, but some experts wonder if that’s possible given the nature of Omicron and the lack of adequate measures to combat it. “The economy cannot stay open and schools cannot stay open when so many people are getting sick,” said Margaret Thornton, an educational researcher at Princeton School of Public and International Affairs. “We must take action to slow the spread in order to keep schools running, to keep businesses running,” she said – but much of that action has been slow to happen. On a non-filibuster topic, Joe Biden attempted to downplay the labor department’s latest report on inflation, which showed that US prices increased by 7% from December 2020 to December 2021. That marks the sharpest rise since 1982. “Today’s report—which shows a meaningful reduction in headline inflation over last month, with gas prices and food prices falling—demonstrates that we are making progress in slowing the rate of price increases,” Biden said in a statement. “At the same time, this report underscores that we still have more work to do, with price increases still too high and squeezing family budgets.” The US president described inflation as a “global challenge,” noting that many other nations around the world are struggling with rising prices as well. “America is fortunate that we have one of the fastest growing economies—thanks in part to the American Rescue Plan—which enables us to address price increases and maintain strong, sustainable economic growth,” Biden said. “That is my goal and I am focused on reaching it every day.” Meanwhile, Republicans pointed to the report as the latest sign that Biden’s economic agenda is failing American families struggling to financially recover from the coronavirus pandemic. “This trend isn’t ‘transitory,’ and it’s all happening under Democrats’ one-party control,” House minority leader Kevin McCarthy said. Senator Jon Tester said repeatedly that the filibuster had been weaponized and bemoaned the fact that it made it possible for any one senator to essentially kill legislation and then fundraise off it. “They have a different perspective on what the long-term impacts are,” Tester said during an event hosted by the left-leaning Center for American Progress Action Fund. “Some of the folks in the caucus think we need to keep doing what we’ve been doing because that’s what we’ve been doing in the past,” he said. Tester, who himself was at one point hesitant about changing the filibuster, made it clear Wednesday he supports creating a carveout from the rule for voting rights legislation. “I do think that bipartisan is always the best. But at some point in time … you have to say this is important for democracy, important for our country, maybe the most important thing I’ll ever do for our country,” he said. “My preferred solution is to do the filibuster change for everything. The truth is, if we need a carveout to protect voting rights. I’m there and I will do it.” Senator Joe Manchin, a key Democrat who is a staunch defender of the filibuster rule, still isn’t on board with changing the filibuster rules. Senator Jon Tester, a Montana Democrat who has been part of a small group trying to reach an agreement to change the filibuster with Manchin, said they were still searching for some kind of solution. “As of this morning, we’re not where we need to be to have them on board,” Tester said during an event hosted by the left-leaning Center for American Progress Action Fund. He added, “But I continue to be hopeful. Continue to use every persuasion power that I have to move the ball forward, to get everybody, all 50 of us, to a point where we can get this freedom to vote act passed.” Chuck Schumer, the senate majority leader, has pledged his caucus will hold a vote on sweeping voting rights legislation and filibuster changes no later than Monday. But the comments from Tester underscore how far the party still has to go to reach some kind of consensus. Schumer said Tuesday evening that Democrats faced an “uphill battle.” Joe Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris are set to visit senate Democrats and “work the phones” over the next few days to try and get agreement on the issue. Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell fiercely criticized Joe Biden’s speech on voting rights, describing it as “profoundly unpresidential”. “Twelve months ago, a newly-inaugurated President Biden stood on the West Front of the Capitol and said this: ‘My whole soul is in this: bringing America together, uniting our people, and uniting our nation,” the Republican leader said in a floor speech this afternoon. “Yesterday, the same man delivered a deliberately divisive speech that was designed to pull our country farther apart.” In his speech, Biden called on Senate Democrats to change chamber rules to allow voting rights bills to advance, after Republicans repeatedly used the filibuster to block the proposals. “I ask every elected official in America: How do you want to be remembered?” Biden said. “Do you want to be on the side of Dr King or George Wallace? Do you want to be on the side of John Lewis or Bull Connor? Do you want to be on the side of Abraham Lincoln or Jefferson Davis?” McConnell, who vehemently opposes filibuster reform, condemned the speech as “rhetoric unbecoming of a president of the United States”. “Unfortunately, President Biden has rejected the better angels of our nature. So it is the Senate’s responsibility to protect the country,” McConnell said. “This institution cannot give in to dishonorable tactics.” Donald Trump hung up on a national US radio station halfway through a scheduled interview on Tuesday, after being confronted about his election lies. Trump, who has continued to falsely claim he won the 2020 presidential election instead of Joe Biden, was heard becoming increasingly irritated through the interview with National Public Radio before abruptly signing off. The ending meant NPR, which had been promised a 15-minute interview, had to make do with just nine minutes, much of it consisting of a vexed Trump talking over host Steve Inskeep. The segment, which aired on Wednesday, ended with Inskeep asking Trump if Republicans must repeat Trump’s increasingly unhinged allegations of election fraud in order to win his endorsement. “They are going to do whatever they want to do – whatever they have to do, they’re going to do,” Trump said. Audio: Full story: Senate Republicans are rallying round Senator Mike Rounds, after Donald Trump rounded on him. Roundly speaking, this block exists merely so I could write that sentence. But now it’s here, here’s what Rounds said, a taste of how he was rounded upon simply for being fair and … square … with the truth, and some expressions of support. Rounds, to ABC: “The election was fair, as fair as we have seen. We simply did not win the election, as Republicans, for the presidency.” Trump, in a statement: “Is he crazy or just stupid? … I will never endorse this jerk again.” Mitt Romney: “Mike Rounds speaks truth knowing that our republic depends upon it.” Mitch McConnell, Republican leader, to CNN: “I think Senator Rounds told the truth about what happened in the 2020 election. And I agree with him.” John Thune, senior Republican from South Dakota, also to CNN: “I say to my colleague, welcome to the club.” Trump’s endorsement threat may just have become irrelevant – or of course been conveniently forgotten – when Rounds next runs for re-election. In 2026. The White House confirmed that Joe Biden will attend Senate Democrats’ meeting tomorrow to discuss voting rights and filibuster reform. “On the heels of the President’s speech yesterday, he and the vice-president will be working the phones over the next several days pushing members of the Senate to support voting rights legislation and changes to Senate rules,” the White House told the press pool. “In addition, tomorrow afternoon, the president will meet with the Senate Democratic caucus to discuss the urgent need to pass legislation to protect the constitutional right to vote and the integrity of our elections against un-American attacks based on the Big Lie, and to again underline that doing so requires changing the rules of the Senate to make the institution work again.” In his speech in Atlanta, Georgia, Biden called on Senate Democrats to change rules to allow voting rights bills to advance, but some centrist holdouts – namely Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema – are withholding their support. Because of the 50-50 split in the Senate, majority leader Chuck Schumer needs the support of every Democrat before he can move forward. Mitch McConnell, of course, did not like Biden’s speech. Calling it “profoundly unpresidential”, the Senate minority leader said today: “I have known, liked, and personally respected Joe Biden for many years. I did not recognize the man at the podium yesterday.” Here’s where the day stands so far: Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer called out centrists Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema for opposing filibuster reform. “I don’t want to delude your listeners, this is an uphill fight,” Schumer said last night, at an event with the liberal think tank Center for American Progress. “Because Manchin and Sinema do not believe in changing the rules.” Joe Biden will attend Senate Democrats’ caucus lunch tomorrow to discuss voting rights and filibuster reform. The news comes one day after the president called on Senate Democrats to change chamber rules to allow voting rights bills to advance. “Let the majority prevail,” Biden said in Atlanta, Georgia. “And if that bare minimum is blocked, we have no option but to change the Senate rules, including getting rid of the filibuster for this.” The price of goods and services in the US jumped by 7% in December compared to the same month last year, according to the latest report from the labor department. The increase marks the seventh consecutive month in which inflation has topped 5%. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. The ex-girlfriend of Matt Gaetz has reportedly given testimony to a federal grand jury in connection to a sex-trafficking investigation involving the Republican congressman. NBC News reports: The ex-girlfriend, whose name is being withheld by NBC News to respect her privacy, has been in talks for months with prosecutors to receive an immunity deal. Under a possible deal, she would avoid prosecution for obstruction of justice in return for testifying in an investigation into whether Gaetz in 2017 had sex with a 17-year-old female for money and whether months later he and others violated a federal law prohibiting people for paying for prostitutes overseas. Legal sources familiar with the case say Gaetz is being investigated for three distinct crimes: Sex trafficking the 17-year-old; violating the Mann Act, which prohibits taking prostitutes across state lines; and obstructing justice. Gaetz has repeatedly denied wrongdoing. One of Gaetz’s close friends, Joel Greenberg, pleaded guilty last year to six federal crimes, including sex trafficking of a child. The MSNBC anchor Mehdi Hasan might’ve come up with the most succinct among many appalled reactions to the New York Times columnist Thomas Friedman’s suggestion that Democrats consider a Joe Biden-Liz Cheney ticket in 2024, to promote national unity and keep Donald Trump out of power. Hasan tweeted: “Kill. Me. Now.” Using the example of the right-left national unity government in office in Israel in succession to that country’s own Trumpish leader, Benjamin Netanyahu, Friedman enlisted the help of Steven Levitsky, a political scientist and co-author of How Democracies Die: America is facing an existential moment, Levitsky told me, noting that the Republican party has shown that it isn’t committed any longer to playing by democratic rules, leaving the US uniquely threatened among western democracies. … So Biden-Cheney is not such a crazy idea? I asked. “Not at all,” said Levitsky. “We should be ready to talk about Liz Cheney as part of a blow-your-mind Israeli-style fusion coalition with Democrats. It is a coalition that says: ‘There is only one overriding goal right now – that is saving our democratic system.’” Cheney, from Wyoming, is one of two anti-Trump Republicans on the 6 January House committee. She is also the daughter of Dick “Darth Vader” Cheney, the former vice-president with whom she stood, otherwise alone on her side of the House, through a commemoration of the Capitol attack last week. Some on the left found the sight of the architect of the Iraq war in common cause with Democrats … disturbing. Oddly enough, Hasan didn’t much like Friedman’s suggestion either. The Times man, Hasan wrote, was “also one of Obama’s favorite columnists. If you want to understand why US politics, and especially Democratic party politics, is so messed up, consider that the current and previous Democratic presidents have both taken advice from Thomas Friedman. Kill. Me. Now.” For what it’s worth, Levitsky has been warning of the dangers of Republican fascism, now at a high pitch, for some time. Here’s a Guardian piece with his co-author Daniel Ziblatt from January 2018: Joe Biden will travel to Capitol Hill tomorrow to join Senate Democrats’ meeting about the path forward for passing voting rights bills. “President Biden is expected to attend tomorrow’s Senate Dem Caucus lunch to discuss the push to pass voting rights and potential changes to Senate rules,” a senior Democratic aide said. The news comes one day after Biden delivered an impassioned speech on voting rights in Georgia, calling on the Senate to change chamber rules to allow voting rights bills to advance. “Let the majority prevail,” Biden said in Atlanta. “And if that bare minimum is blocked, we have no option but to change the Senate rules, including getting rid of the filibuster for this.” However, it remains unclear whether Biden’s words swayed centrist senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, who have expressed reluctance to amending the filibuster. Tomorrow’s meeting will give the president and majority leader Chuck Schumer another opportunity to convince those holdout senators. House speaker Nancy Pelosi argued it was fitting for Harry Reid to receive a final honor at the US Capitol, where he represented Nevada for more than three decades. “From his humble roots in Searchlight to the spotlight of Capitol Hill, his entire life was defined by defying long odds,” the Democratic speaker said. “The twelve years that he and I served together as leaders in our respective houses allowed me the privilege of watching him defy those odds every day. Indeed, to see him lead and legislate was to see a master at work.” Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer praised Harry Reid for dedicating his life to public service and helping to shape the modern-day Congress. Speaking at the Capitol ceremony to honor the late Senate majority leader, Schumer said, “We celebrate Harry Mason Reid’s final return to the Capitol because we must. “Few have shaped the workings of this building like our dear friend from Nevada. Few have dedicated their lives to the work of the people quite like Harry did. Today, our feelings of both loss and gratitude are immense.” The casket of Harry Reid has arrived at the US Capitol, where the former Senate majority leader will lie in state today. Lawmakers gathered in the Capitol Rotunda to pay their respects to Reid, who led the Senate Democratic caucus from 2005 to 2017. Reid died late last month at the age of 82 after being diagnosed with pancreatic cancer in 2018. Barack Obama and Joe Biden both spoke at Reid’s funeral in his home state of Nevada over the weekend, remembering him as a dedicated leader who stood up for his beliefs. “Harry would always have your back, like the kids I grew up with in Scranton,” Biden said. “His story was unmistakably American. He was proof that there is nothing ordinary about America, and that Americans can do anything given half a chance.” One reporter asked Joe Manchin for his response to Joe Biden’s speech on voting rights legislation and Senate filibuster reform. Biden said in Atlanta, Georgia, yesterday, “When it comes to protecting majority rule in America, the majority should rule in the United States Senate.” Manchin told CNN, “He understands. We all understand how the Senate works.” He did not provide any further insight into what Senate rule changes he may support. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer has met with both Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema in the past day, since Joe Biden called on Democrats to change the filibuster to pass voting rights bills. Speaking to reporters after his meetings with the centrist senators, Schumer said Democrats are “not there yet” on agreeing to rule changes. Asked by NBC News whether he still planned to hold a vote in the coming days, Schumer replied, “The answer is we’re going to hold a vote, yes.” The Democratic leader has set a deadline of 17 January, Martin Luther King Day, to vote on rule changes that would clear the way for voting rights bills. The price of goods and services in the US continue to rise at rates unseen in decades, jumping 7% in December compared to the same month last year – the seventh consecutive month in which inflation has topped 5%. The news represents a blow to the Biden administration and the Federal Reserve, which until recently have characterized soaring prices as a “transitory” phenomenon brought about by supply chain issues triggered by the pandemic. On Wednesday, the labor department said the consumer price index (CPI) – which measures what consumers pay for a wide range of goods – rose 0.5% last month compared with November and 7% compared with December 2020. Price increases in housing and used cars and trucks were the largest contributors to the inflation rate, with 0.4% and 3.5% increases in price compared with November, respectively. Food prices also continued to increase, though the 0.5% jump in prices is not as high as increases seen in previous months. Despite the focus on centrists Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, it’s unclear whether the other 48 members of the Senate Democratic caucus support changing the filibuster. Politico reported on Monday: Mark Kelly is not yet committed to a change in the Senate rules that would allow elections reform legislation to pass by a simple majority. A centrist who is up for reelection in November, Kelly said Monday he is still undecided just days before he may have to vote on proposals to weaken the filibuster. ... For a caucus that prides itself on unity, there’s plenty of nuance in Democrats’ views. Some, like Sen. Jon Tester (D-Mont.) like a talking filibuster but are ‘not crazy’ about making an exception for voting rights. Meanwhile, Sen. Jeanne Shaheen (D-N.H.) says reform is needed but is promoting more modest changes. She cites the near-impossible odds the party faces in getting all 50 Democrats on board for changing the filibuster unilaterally, also known as the ‘nuclear option.’ And with the 50-50 split in the Senate, majority leader Chuck Schumer cannot afford a single defection within the caucus if he wants to get rule changes approved and pass voting rights bills. The Guardian’s Sam Levine and Jewel Wicker report: Joe Biden on Tuesday gave his most forceful endorsement to date of changing the Senate filibuster rule in order to pass sweeping voting rights legislation, saying he was “tired of being quiet” in a high-profile speech in Georgia. In one of the most significant speeches of his presidency so far, Biden drew a connection in history between the civil rights movement, the 6 January attack on the US Capitol by extremist supporters of Donald Trump, and the unprecedented efforts in many states to restrict the vote over the last year. He said America was at a moment to choose “democracy over autocracy”. But despite the passion, some prominent Georgia civil rights activists, proclaiming themselves more interested in action than speeches, declined to attend the event in Atlanta on Tuesday where Biden and Vice-President Kamala Harris spoke and urged progress in Congress to pass key legislation currently stalled there. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer called out centrists Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema by name last night, after Joe Biden urged Democrats to change the filibuster to clear the way for a voting rights bill. “I don’t want to delude your listeners, this is an uphill fight,” Schumer said at an event with the liberal think tank Center for American Progress. “Because Manchin and Sinema do not believe in changing the rules.” Schumer’s comments came hours after Biden delivered his most direct appeal yet for filibuster reform, arguing that senators needed to prioritize the health of American democracy above all else. “Let the majority prevail,” Biden said in Atlanta, Georgia. “And if that bare minimum is blocked, we have no option but to change the Senate rules, including getting rid of the filibuster for this.” But it’s unclear whether the pressure campaign is going to work. Manchin indicated yesterday that he still wants bipartisan support for any rule changes, which seems virtually impossible given Republicans’ unified opposition to filibuster reform. And given the 50-50 split in the Senate, Schumer cannot move forward unless he has the support of every Democratic senator. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.Lacking the votes to change the filibuster rules that have stalled their sweeping voting rights legislation, Senate Democrats are pushing ahead with a new strategy that would utilize an unusual loophole maneuver to open debate on the bills. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer outlined the plan in a memo obtained by the Associated Press and others on Wednesday, on the eve of Joe Biden’s visit to meet privately with Senate Democrats about the path forward. In the memo, Schumer detailed a strategy wherein the House would amend an unrelated bill about Nasa to include provisions from two stalled voting reform bills: the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. After passing that bill, which they are calling a “shell” bill, the Democrats would swiftly send it to the Senate, where Democrats could start debate on it with a simple majority. This strategy would allow Democrats to evade an initial filibuster from Republicans seeking to block debate on the bill. Senate filibuster rules currently require 60 votes to advance legislation in most cases. Schumer’s maneuvering wouldn’t ultimately resolve the fact in an evenly split Senate, Republicans could still use the filibuster to block a final vote on passing the legislation, nor does it resolve the fact that two key senators, Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, remain opposed to amending the filibuster. But the latest tactic could create an off-ramp from their initial approach, which was to force a vote by Monday on Senate filibuster changes as a way to pressure Manchin and Sinema to go along with the changes. “We will finally have an opportunity to debate voting rights legislation, something that Republicans have thus far denied,” Schumer wrote in the memo to his Democratic colleagues. “Senators can finally make clear to the American people where they stand on protecting our democracy and preserving the right of every eligible American to cast a ballot.” By setting up a debate, Schumer will achieve the Democrats’ goal of shining a spotlight that spurs senators to say where they stand. The floor debate could stretch for days and carry echoes of civil rights battles a generation ago that led to some of the most famous filibusters in Senate history. “I wouldn’t want to delude anybody into thinking this is easy,” Schumer told reporters Wednesday. He called the push an “uphill fight”. The move comes amid a significant week for the party’s push for voting rights. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris traveled to Georgia this week to speak out in support of the legislation. In a fiery speech, Biden called for changes to the filibuster and told senators they would each be “judged by history” if they failed to act. For Democrats and Biden, the legislation is a political imperative. Failure to pass it would break a major campaign promise to Black voters, who helped hand Democrats control of the White House and Congress, and would come just before midterm elections when slim Democratic majorities will be on the line. Schumer had set the Martin Luther King Jr holiday, on 17 January, as a deadline to either pass the voting legislation or consider revising the filibuster rules. It’s unclear if a vote on rule changes will still happen. Possibilities include setting a requirement that 41 senators be present in the chamber to sustain a filibuster. Manchin threw cold water on the hopes Tuesday, saying he believes any changes should be made with substantial Republican buy-in. And there aren’t any Republican senators willing to sign on.Crowds at the Australian Open will be capped at 50% after a surge in Covid cases prompted the Victorian government into a last-minute change of its ticketing policy. Ticket sales for the year’s opening grand slam tennis tournament in Melbourne will be restricted to 50% capacity for sessions which have not already sold more than that. In a statement, the Victorian government said already-purchased tickets will remain valid, and there would be no changes to ground pass access. “Face masks will be mandatory for all patrons, except when eating or drinking, and the event will align with Victoria’s statewide Covid-safe settings,” the statement read. “This includes a density limit of one person per two square metres for all indoor hospitality. “Ventilation will be improved in indoor areas of Melbourne Park, with HEPA filters to be installed in some spaces after a ventilation assessment is completed for the venue. “As Covid-19 hospitalisations and cases continue to rise in Victoria, these mitigation strategies are proportionate and designed to assist in limiting the spread of Covid-19.” The build-up to this year’s Open has been overshadowed by the saga surrounding defending champion Novak Djokovic. The world No 1, who spent four days in an immigration detention hotel after his Australian visa was cancelled by border officials, remains in limbo, despite winning a court challenge against the decision earlier this week. Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, is yet to decide whether to use his personal powers to deport the unvaccinated star. Victoria recorded 37,169 cases of Covid on Thursday, three days out from the start of the tournament, with 25 deaths recorded and 953 people in hospital. “These updates to arrangements for the Australian Open will mean that fans, players and the workforce can look forward to a terrific Covid-safe event in Australia’s event capital,” said Jaala Pulford, the acting minister for tourism, sport and major events. “Melbourne Park is the best place on the planet to watch the tennis and thousands of spectators will be able to experience the iconic Australian Open from Monday.” Last year’s tournament was also played in front of reduced crowds due to the pandemic. Tennis Australia has been contacted for comment.As a nation, are Australians mature enough to acknowledge past wrongs? Do we even possess the base metal of curiosity to engage across cultures, when our disparate understandings of space, time and country struggle in translation? In 宿 (stay), a premiere work at Carriageworks for Sydney festival, two skeletons are found in a dried-up creek bed on a remote Queensland farm, drawing together three women who have never met. Written and directed by S Shakthidharan (Counting and Cracking), the production deploys live acting, music, dancing and singing blended with recorded music and performance on 10 high-definition vertically hung screens. Dancer and actor Jasmin Sheppard, best known for playing the eponymous Patygerang as a member of the Bangarra Dance Theatre ensemble, brings her exquisite dancing repertoire to the role of Violet, whose Tagalaka ancestors have for some 75,000 years been custodians of the land where the skeletons were found. But Violet has now moved away. Violet receives a call from an anglo-Maltese woman, Thwayya (Aimée Falzon), who faces the loss of her farm, and for whom “forever” means five generations of living on this country. A family document offers clues to the death and destruction that binds the women’s pasts, presenting a puzzle as complex as modern Australian identities while attesting to the racist hierarchical control that colonisers placed on Aboriginal and Chinese labour. A third woman’s story is told via the large screens, as Tsuet-Cheng (Natalie Alexandra Tse) returns from Sydney to Singapore for “tomb sweeping day”, when families visit cemeteries to talk with ancestors. Between bursts of a Chinese plucked instrument called a guzheng, as well as flute, cello, drums, percussion and tabla, the on-screen banter between the musicians drops early hints about the familial links between the women. Inspired by the stories and cultural ceremonies of some ensemble members, this narrative concert is thematically ambitious and emotionally affecting, particularly in Sheppard’s final scene doubling as an ancestor, Daisy, alongside actor, vocalist and guitar player Charles Wu as a 19th-century Chinese gold prospector, An Hoo. Presented by Western Sydney company Kurinji and Singapore sound ensemble SAtheCollective, 宿 (stay) achieves so much in its 70 minutes, ranging across cultural genocide, remembrance, empathy and identity. However, the large theatre space at times overwhelms Sheppard and Falzon on stage, speaking to each other from opposite ends, and their early interactions are stilted. This could be improved by bringing the two actors to the centre of the stage much earlier. A little more clarity is needed when the women switch roles, too. The screens meanwhile are effective, particularly when depicting the high-rise Singapore tower blocks and the vast Tagalaka country, but too much is mediated by them. Perhaps the impracticalities of bringing Singaporean performers to Australia during the Covid-19 era necessitated an over-reliance on these large monitors, and limited the number of actors present on stage to three. Yet the production finds its feet as it progresses, Sheppard and Falzon acknowledging common ground across space and time, even when their mutual past is bound by sinister, gut-wrenching act that is viscerally played out in the work’s denouement. 宿 (stay) plays at Carriageworks until 16 January. Mask-wearing is mandatory for all Carriageworks indoor venues, although patrons may take them off to eat and drink in the foyer only. One foyer bar is open, and lines are socially distanced. Double-vaccination status is checked at the door and a QR check in is also required. The show runs for 70 minutes, with no interval, and is in Bay 17, an indoor theatre, with capacity of 570. In line with current state regulations, the venue is able to seat patrons at 100% capacity.The newspaper front pages have piled the pressure on Boris Johnson as the prime minister fights for his political life over the scandal of the “bring your own booze” lockdown-era party at Downing Street. The Mirror’s banner headline on Thursday is “Disgrace”, set below a picture of Johnson giving his humiliating apology to the Commons for “not realising” the event in the back garden of 10 Downing Street on 20 May 2020 was a party. In a lengthy subhead, the Mirror says: “First, Johnson said no rules were broken … then he said he didn’t know about any parties … now he admits he was at one of them … but didn’t realise it was a party.” The Guardian’s main headline is “PM’s future on knife-edge after No 10 party apology”, and reports that there is widespread “derision” over his claim that he did not realise he was attending a party. Times also has a picture of a grim-faced Johnson in the Commons and the headline “Defiant PM refuses to quit as polls slip further”, while the FT has “Johnson faces Tory calls to quit after attending lockdown party” and the i says “Tories call on ⁦Boris Johnson to resign”. The Scotsman naturally takes the strong Scottish angle on the drama given the role played by Tory leader Douglas Ross in leading calls for the prime minister to quit: “Scots Tories lead rebellion despite ⁦Johnson’s apology”. The Daily Record’s splash is a bit more direct – “Cock and Bull Tory” – and nor does the National hold back, screaming “Liar”. The Telegraph takes a slightly different tack with its story headlined “Sunak leaves Johnson in limbo”, focusing on the chancellor’s half-hearted backing for the embattled PM. A comment piece by columnist Juliet Samuel on the front page has the headline “PM buys time at cost of public mockery by admitting he’s an idiot”. In a possible sign of the seriousness of the situation, the Mail and Express have both decided it is time to circle the wagons around the PM – a sharp contrast with their treatment of the story earlier this week. “Operation Save Boris” says the Mail, reporting that “cabinet rallies round” but that “ambitious Rishi’s lukewarm support” spells trouble ahead. Express headline is “I’m Sorry … but now prove you can deliver for Britain”. The Star joins in the fun with a splash headline saying “Rules are only for little people!” and the Metro has “Sorry… not sorry”. On any other day, the news that the civil case can proceed against Prince Andrew over sexual abuse allegations would lead most papers. Only the Sun rates it as the best today though with the splash head: “Damned old Duke of York”. Further afield, the Washington Post says there is one question that Britons are asking: What were you doing on 20 May 2020?”. It says “heartbreaking” interviews with people about their lockdown sacrifices reveal a “growing sense of betrayal” and increase pressure on Johnson. Also in the US, the furore has prompted the New York Times to round up all those other grovelling apologies. In Spain, El Pais says Johnson “does what no one would expect, and acts as if he is exempt from the rules that apply to the rest of the mortals”. The French newspaper Libération says that after “arrogant victories and pungent slogans”, the party is over for Johnson.Queensland will tear down its border checkpoints and roadblocks from Saturday – a move announced alongside news that the state had recorded its deadliest day since the start of the pandemic. The border restrictions have been in place for six months. The measures to protect “Fortress Queensland” have been popular within the state, successful in suppressing Covid outbreaks and hardline towards people caught on the wrong side of the border from their families, their homes and their livelihoods. With the state poised to reach another vaccination milestone – 90% double-dose coverage in the adult population – authorities say the border is no longer needed. As Omicron spreads through Queensland – which recorded 14,914 cases and six deaths on Thursday – police said the sentry duty is no longer the best use of their time. From 1am on Saturday, people will be allowed in without requiring a border pass, evidence of a negative Covid test, or evidence of vaccination. “The border restrictions have served their purpose, which is to allow every Queenslander access to a vaccine,” the Queensland chief health officer, John Gerrard, told reporters on Thursday. “And now the virus, as expected, is spreading through Queensland.” The health minister, Yvette D’ath, said border restrictions were becoming “less important by the day”. “It was important throughout 2021, [when] we controlled those people coming from hotspots and had restrictions around that,” D’ath said. “[Now] we don’t want to spend our time looking at whether we need to be declaring and changing hotspots. We should assume that anyone travelling around Australia domestically could have the virus and so it is a lot less important to worry about where people are coming from around Australia and much more importantly about where they are going.” Local restrictions preventing unvaccinated people from accessing certain public venues, such as cafes, will remain in place. The police commissioner, Katarina Carroll, said the change would free up resources. “I welcome this announcement today,” Carroll said. “Since the establishment of the first border checkpoint in March 2020, this has been a significant operation for the Queensland Police Service. “This change … will enable us to reprioritise, get back to business as usual and make sure that now we prepare for the peak over the next couple of weeks.” Carroll said police performed 3.68m vehicle checks at the borders during the past two years; turned around 35,902 vehicles and met almost 30,000 arriving flights. Queensland has 26 Covid-positive people in intensive care, with 10 on ventilators. Another 530 people with Covid-19 are in hospital wards. The increasing case numbers have led to today’s six deaths – all people aged over 70 – the most recorded by Queensland since the start of the pandemic. The relatively few Covid deaths in the state – just seven prior to the recent reopening of the borders, compared with more than 2,000 elsewhere – had been the key measure of success of the isolationist policy that separated communities along the border. There have now been 17 deaths in total in Queensland, and health authorities are bracing for a peak of cases early next month.The federal health department bought $62m worth of rapid antigen tests on Monday using the “extreme urgency or events unforeseen” provisions of its procurement rules as it seeks to secure stock to meet its commitment to provide free rapid antigen tests to lower-income Australians. But the massive buying spree by the federal government could further exacerbate the shortage of tests on the open market. Some suppliers are notifying customers that they are unable to secure supply from their importers and distributors. Rapid Proof, a Melbourne-based online retailer, told customers on Tuesday it could no longer supply Hough brand tests because the company “could not meet supply”. Hough is one of the five companies contracted by the federal government on Monday to provide tests. Hough will provide $4.4m worth of rapid antigen tests to the Department of Health between 10 to 17 January, according to the note. Chief executive Greg Hough said the government had asked for priority but his company was fulfilling orders in the order they were received. He said the problem causing delays was at Sydney airport, where ground staff had been hit hard by Covid-19. He said he had been waiting for three days for a plane to be unloaded, with more delays expected for incoming shipments in the next few days. The full contract notes published on Wednesday show the federal government has used a provision in its procurement rules which allow it to avoid going to open tender. Each note says the government relied on the “extreme urgency or events unforeseen” condition to avoid an open tender process. The tests were approved for general use in September, and the government has been telling the public for months the new strategy is to live with the virus now that there are high vaccination rates. Hough told the Guardian he had begun speaking to the government 18 months ago about supplying tests. “Let’s put it this way: they don’t move fast.” A spokesperson for the department said they purchased RAT supplies in accordance with Commonwealth Procurement Rules (December 2020), which reflect the Australian government’s commitment to sustainable procurement practices. “It is doing so through negotiations with suppliers through normal commercial channels, and is not seeking to place itself ahead of other commercial and retail entities.” The spokesman said no mandate has been issued by the government to divert RAT supplies. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said while the prime minister didn’t need to be “Nostradamus”, he should have listened to health experts and planned for the current Covid-19 outbreak. “The national plan made it clear that once we opened up there would be an increased number of infections and we needed to make sure we planned for it,” he told the ABC. He added: “Some $62m of RATs that have been purchased were because of urgent and ‘unforeseen circumstances’ as part of the tender. Well, this was foreseen ... we needed Scott Morrison to do his job but he just went through saying, ‘We will all be together at Christmas, it will all be right,’ without putting in place [the] mechanisms required.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Leaders will decide at national cabinet on Thursday a date for when concession card holders will able to access the tests from pharmacies, as well as rubber-stamp arrangements for the scheme. The Australian Council of Trade Unions has again called for rapid antigen tests to be free and easily accessible ahead of the meeting. The ACTU secretary, Sally McManus, said the first priority was keeping workers safe, as leaders discuss adding more industries and workers to the list of close contacts exempt from quarantine requirements. “The current conflict over this issue is a result of the Morrison government’s refusal to make RATs free,” she said. “Employers do not want to pay, leaving the cost to be borne by individual workers. “Rapid antigen tests are an essential part of keeping workers and the whole community safe, and this is the only way that businesses will be able to stay open and function.” The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, appeared to rule out any widespread scheme to make tests free, as they are in the UK. “This idea that everybody gets them for free, I don’t know about that,” he told the Nine Network. “The money doesn’t fall out of the air, we take it off your wages, salaries, businesses, to pay for them. It goes on the credit card and you pay for it later on.” with Australian Associated PressLook, I am aware of how this will sound, but it’s true: there’s a problem with the youth of today. They do not listen. They cannot be reasoned with. They are afraid to meet you in the marketplace of ideas. They’d rather cry and whinge than actually do anything to solve their problems. And yes, I can already hear the counter-argument that the youth that I am talking about is specifically seven weeks old and is simply not capable of the kind of debate I’m seeking. Frankly, I am as tired of this excuse as I am just, in general, tired – which is to say very, very, very tired. When the task was put to me to come up with an argument for Guardian Australia’s summer series, I toyed with a number of takes on a variety of topics, all the while knowing that there was truly only ever one argument in my heart. And since I cannot have that argument with the very small person who deserves to hear it, I will air it out here. The thesis is simple and applies to all ages: you need to go to sleep. Everyone needs sleep and “everyone” includes you. I don’t care how adorable you look with your big eyes looking up at me, the fact that they’re open is a problem. You don’t need me to yammer on about the health benefits of sleep. You weren’t born yesterday. You were born seven weeks ago. Do you know how you turn seven weeks into seven weeks and one day? You go to sleep. I know it’s tempting to stay up late. I’ll admit there are times when I stay up far later than I should. Like you, it feels almost spiteful when I do it. It’s as if I’m protesting against how much of our time is taken up by work and other responsibilities. Did you know the modern person works more than a medieval peasant? That’s ridiculous! It’s understandable that you would try to scrape back whatever leisure time you can, even if it means staying up late into the night doing vaguely nothing. But you are not protesting against capitalism by sitting up for a few extra hours at night. Rather, you are taking away your own ability to endure it. And furthermore, you are a baby. You do not have to go to work tomorrow. I do. Go to sleep. Anyway, who are you trying to impress? No one thinks it’s cool you’re staying up late. We’ve all stayed up late before. Staying up late is out. It’s very pre-pandemic. Late nights are over. All the best television is on demand. Young people drink less alcohol, hopefully zero in this case. Brunch is the new dinner. Nightclubs are banned and only the most incompetent bouncer would believe your fake ID. Stay in. Go to sleep. Do you think you’re missing out on something? Let me tell you a harsh truth that helps keep me from doing one last doomscroll. I’ve never, ever received an email or seen a tweet in those last moments before sleep that I was happy to have read. Trust me, it can wait until the morning. Your problems will still be there on the other side. You’ll need your rest to deal with them. You’ll sleep better if you don’t check in the first place. Not to mention, and I cannot stress this part enough, you are a baby. You have no deadlines. Of course you’re tired. We’re all tired. I can tell that you’re cranky, too. Something about the constant screaming tipped me off. Yes, I’m very perceptive. Hey, do you think you’d find it easier to regulate your emotions if you, oh, I don’t know, went to sleep? Just a thought. Think of it this way, my very small friend: there will come a time when all you want in life is to take a little nap. Sleep is an incredibly sought-after commodity. It’s so badly needed that millennials take pride in talking about how tired they are, as if that isn’t a tedious premise for a chat or, god forbid, a whole article. You can sleep whenever you want! How lucky are you? There is nothing I would like more than a little snooze. If someone was offering to pop me on their knee, give me a burp, then tuck me in, why, I would jump at the opportunity and be very grateful. I’d say you should grasp it with both little hands. Has this convinced you? Is it getting through at all? You know what, it’s too late for us to argue like this. Let’s sleep on it, and we’ll have this same chat tomorrow night. James Colley is a writer and comedianOnly a handful of people have spotted the dazzling blanket octopus in the wild, making it one of the rarest sights in the marine world. The technicolour marine mollusc was spotted last week by reef guide and marine biologist Jacinta Shackleton, off the coast of Lady Elliot Island in the Great Barrier Reef . “When I first saw it, I thought it could have been a juvenile fish with long fins, but as it came closer, I realised it was a female blanket octopus and I had this overwhelming sense of joy and excitement,” she said. “I kept yelling through my snorkel, ‘it’s a blanket octopus!’ I was so excited I was finding it difficult to hold my breath to dive down and video it.” Blanket octopuses are extremely rare. The first sighting of a live male was made 21 years ago just north of the Great Barrier Reef in the Ribbon Reefs by Dr Julian Finn, a senior curator of marine invertebrates at Museums Victoria, and colleagues. In the New Zealand Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research, he noted they are the “most extreme example of sexual size-dimorphism in a non-microscopic animal”. While females grow up to 2 metres in length, the males have only been seen to grow to about 2.4cm long. Males also don’t develop the blanket octopus’s iridescent “blanket” that makes the species so alluring. For the females that do develop it, the display can be shed to elude predators. The extreme difference between the sexes is thought to have developed because of the blanket octopus’s unique habit of carrying blue-bottle stingers for self-defence. Shackleton said she believes there have only been three sightings of the octopus in the area before hers. It generally spends its lifecycle in the open ocean so it’s even more unusual to see one on the reef. Shackleton said she feels lucky to have been in the water at the right time to capture vision of the spectacular species. This is not Shackleton’s first extraordinary sighting. She has also encountered a rare ornate eagle ray and a rare melanistic manta ray but says the blanket octopus “has got to be one of my all-time favourite reef experiences”. “Seeing one in real life is indescribable, I was so captivated by its movements, it was as if it was dancing through the water with a flowing cape. The vibrant colours are just so incredible, you can’t take your eyes off it. “I’ve truly never seen anything like it before and don’t think I ever will again in my life.”Sources inside Sydney’s Villawood detention centre say a Covid-19 outbreak inside the facility is rampant, with growing infection numbers across compounds. The Australian Border Force - having previously declined to answer questions on the number of cases - said late Thursday there were 18 confirmed infections. Sources inside the centre had previously put the figure at close to 70, out of a population of 450. Cases have been reported across at least four compounds inside Villawood, and at least 24 people have been moved into a previously disused compound as confirmed cases or close contacts. The number of infections is expected to grow further among a population with a significantly lower vaccination rate than the rest of the country. Across Australia’s immigration detention system, 59% of people detained are fully vaccinated, compared to 78% of the general community, and 92% of those aged over 16. One person held in Villawood told the Guardian that the border force and Serco, the security contractor that runs the centre, were “playing catch up with the virus”, and the centre should have been alert to the possibility of an outbreak. “There have been plenty of warnings that have been ignored.” The person in detention said the centre switched to rapid antigen tests for suspected cases too late to stop the spread of the virus. “Why did they not follow the state prisons which have been using the RAT tests for months now? And now that they finally do switch it also comes at a point when your average Australian will find it hard to locate those tests.” The person said medical appointments had been cancelled inside Villawood, and that the spread of the infection was likely far broader than the positive tests recorded. “Everyone is afraid to approach an officer if they are feeling off, because it’ll mean being sent to quarantine, where you might not have access to a power point to charge your phone that people use to stay in touch with loved ones.” Another source said the outbreak was “rampant” and that the centre “did not really know how many people have it”. The border force confirmed on Thursday there were 18 infections inside Villawood. “The priority for the ABF is the health and safety of detainees and staff in immigration detention facilities,” a spokesperson said. “All detainees continue to have ongoing access to the medical professionals located within facilities.” The spokesperson said the centre was following “standard departmental protocols”, including contact tracing, quarantining, testing and cleaning. “All detainees continue to have ongoing access to the medical professionals located within facilities.” ‘Disaster waiting to happen’ Ian Rintoul, a spokesperson for the Refugee Action Coalition, said “like other detention centres, Villawood has been a disaster waiting to happen”. “Despite previous Covid scares at Villawood the government has done nothing to safeguard the health and welfare of detainees. Vulnerable detainees should have been released long ago. “Government inaction and Covid protocol failures means that all of the 450 Villawood detainees are at high risk of infection. The staff shortages magnify the risk that the Villawood outbreak cannot be safely managed.” Rintoul said anybody at high risk inside Villawood should be immediately removed from the centre. “Many detainees have families that they could safely stay with.” In June last year, the Australian Human Rights Commission recommended the government “take urgent steps to significantly reduce the number of people in immigration detention facilities by releasing people into community-based alternatives”. The border force said its Covid-19 vaccine program for those in immigration detention started in August 2021 across all centres. Melbourne’s Park Hotel, where more than 30 refugees and asylum seekers remain in detention, was the site of a Covid outbreak in October and November. At one stage 22 people – almost half of those detained – tested positive. The tennis player Novak Djokovic was briefly detained in the hotel last week before his visa cancellation was overturned in the Federal Court. Before it was commandeered by the federal government as a detention centre, the hotel, then known as Rydges, was used for hotel quarantine of international arrivals and was the epicentre of Victoria’s second Covid wave. A Victorian government inquiry found “around 90 per cent of Covid-19 cases in Victoria since late May 2020 were attributable to the outbreak at Rydges”. Rydges was removed from the Victorian hotel quarantine program. The government inquiry found “insufficient regard was paid to infection prevention and control standards across the entire program and, particularly, to that location”. “There were consistent themes in the evidence and information provided to the Inquiry about concerns regarding matters including: access to fresh air; access to good quality food; the state of cleanliness of the facility.”Increasingly repressive and violent acts against civilian protests by autocratic leaders and military regimes around the world are signs of their desperation and weakening grip on power, Human Rights Watch says in its annual assessment of human rights across the globe. In its world report 2022, the human rights organisation said autocratic leaders faced a significant backlash in 2021, with millions of people risking their lives to take to the streets to challenge regimes’ authority and demand democracy. Human Rights Watch also said the emergence of opposition parties willing to put aside their political differences and form alliances to attempt to remove corrupt or repressive governments or leaders was another sign of a trend towards weakening autocratic rule. As examples of “unlikely” opposition coalitions, HRW pointed to the Czech Republic, where the prime minister, Andrej Babiš, was defeated, and Israel, where the premiership of Benjamin Netanyahu was brought to an end after 12 years in power in 2021. Broad alliances of opposition parties have also been formed to challenge Viktor Orbán in Hungary and Recep Tayyip Erdoğan in Turkey in future elections. In an essay introducing Human Rights Watch’s report, which analyses the situation in countries across the world, its director, Kenneth Roth, also argues that growing repression and “overt electoral charades” in countries such as Russia and Nicaragua should be seen as a sign of weakness, not strength. “There is a narrative that autocrats are prevailing and democracy is on the decline, yet if you look at the trends in human rights over the last 12 months it doesn’t look so rosy for the autocrats,” said Roth. “There has been an outpouring of public support for democracy with people taking to the streets in China, Uganda, Poland, Myanmar, often risking their lives to do so, and many other places where repressive regimes are struggling to maintain their control. “While the increasingly violent and regressive actions of repressive regimes across the world may look like them flexing their muscles, we increasingly see these as acts of desperation,” he said. While 2021 saw the seizure of power by armed groups in Myanmar and Afghanistan, Roth said there had been a failure to normalise their rule or subdue civilian populations. “While we see bloodshed on the streets, we also see millions refusing to accept the denial of their human rights and a failure of autocratic rulers to distract populations with policies attacking LGBTQ communities, abortion or women’s rights.” However, he said that democracy would fail to thrive without stronger leadership by democratic governments, which focused on short-term political gains during 2021 and failed to address the most urgent issues of the climate emergency, inequality, racial injustice and poverty. Human Rights Watch said that despite their alarming record on rights abuses, the US continued to provide arms to countries such as Egypt, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. It also pointed to continued moves by the EU to pursue investment deals with China, despite Beijing’s alleged use of ethnic Uyghurs as forced labour. “Promoting democracy means standing up for democratic institutions such as independent courts, free media, robust parliaments and vibrant civil societies even when that brings unwelcome scrutiny or challenges to executive policies,” Roth said.“For words are the birds of everything,” writes Ted Hughes (in Prometheus on His Crag), “So soon / Everything is on the wing and gone.” A derelict nest box rests on the trunk of a lime tree above the old railway line. The birds are gone; the leaves are gone; the spring and summer are gone; the rain, the snow, the sunshine are gone. It is the January of a new year, damp, cold and muddy. In this season of passing, some are already searching for signs of spring and wishing winter gone when it’s only just arrived. The seasons of spring and autumn used to be transformative. They marked the dawn and sunset of life in the temperate world. Now winter is fleeting; often a non-season. This one began as the warmest ever. Too warm, too wet, too cold, too much – moaning about the weather is a cultural obligation, but winter will soon be gone. We are a people wishing ourselves over the edge. There are words that have not yet flown but are so easily scattered: brambling, jackdaw, redwing, greenfinch, yew aril, hart’s-tongue, polypody, spurge laurel, catkin, vole. These are an everything seen within a few minutes under trees around the old railway track – which has gone. Like the ruins of a forest temple in a tangle of roots, the little nest box looks the same as the ivy branches that grip it to the tree bark. These are no longer separate things, all have weathered to become the same material, the same colour with the same beetle holes. How many generations fledged from here? What kinds of birds? Where did they go? There are marks around the entrance hole where birds have pecked to enlarge it, and much of the structure is missing. There is not much left but an impression of a nest box on a lime tree: a once-was, not a will-be. It is no longer a “nest box” so its word and bird have flown, leaving a kind of winter, some unremembered, barely noticeable thing that marks a somewhere else now, an afterlife. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe architecture practice run by Sir Norman Foster almost doubled its profits as it expanded in the Middle East and gained new business despite pandemic lockdowns. Total revenues fell by £33m to £200m in the year ending 30 April 2021, accounts for Foster + Partners, the practice’s main trading company, show. But profits before tax almost doubled to £36.2m during the year, compared with £19.8m in the previous year. At the start of the pandemic Foster + Partners braced for a severe financial hit. The company furloughed about 70 staff at the start of lockdown in March 2020 because they were unable to work from home. However, the accounts show the firm had “remarkable financial resilience” and said it had gained new projects throughout various global lockdowns. The company later said it had repaid in full about £500,000 in furlough money once it was clear there was no financial peril. The practice, one of the largest in the world with 1,200 employees, completed 13 projects during the financial year, including a brain research institute in Jerusalem, a library in the Sharjah emirate, and a new headquarters for golf’s PGA Tour in Florida. In the latest financial year the firm has had plans rejected for the Tulip, a controversial tower planned in central London, and a Manhattan penthouse apartment for the billionaire hedge fund manager Bill Ackman. The Middle East is the practice’s biggest region, where it has four branches. The accounts highlighted three joint ventures in the region working on the Sheikh Zayed National Museum in Abu Dhabi, Kuwait international airport, and a new city in Kuwait for 280,000 people named after the country’s emir, Sheikh Sabah al-Ahmad. The Kuwaiti city is one of several it is working on across the Middle East and China. Foster + Partners made a £8.8m payment to 180 of its senior employee “partners” on top of their salaries. However, total pay for the 10 directors fell from £20.3m to £12.3m. Pay for the highest-paid director, thought to be Lord Foster, fell from £2.3m to £1.4m. The bumper profits were higher than in 2019, before the pandemic struck. The company highlighted falling costs because of limits on business travel and “the enforced remote working regime”, which affected everyone except some model makers and printers. However, the firm indicated that it was keen to return to normal business travel, citing an “unquantifiable extent” of lost new business as well as educating younger colleagues in international architecture. “The practice will undeniably benefit from the resumption of travel,” it said. The company declined to comment further.When a Manhattan judge rejected Prince Andrew’s efforts to dismiss Virginia Giuffre’s sexual abuse lawsuit against him, it marked a victory for his longtime accuser. Judge Lewis Kaplan’s Wednesday ruling also means that the embattled royal will remain embroiled in lengthy – and embarrassing – legal proceedings for the foreseeable future. “This is a huge development because it clears probably the biggest legal hurdle Virginia Giuffre and her team had to get her case to a jury,” said Neama Rahmani, a former federal prosecutor and co-founder of West Coast Trial Lawyers. Giuffre, now 38, has long alleged that she was coerced into sex with the Duke of York at the age of 17 by two of his associates – the disgraced American financier Jeffrey Epstein and British socialite Ghislaine Maxwell. Andrew’s lawyers did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Kaplan’s decision. Epstein, a convicted sex offender, killed himself in a New York jail in summer 2019 pending trial on sex-trafficking charges. Maxwell was found guilty on 29 December of sex-trafficking and related charges for bringing teen girls to Epstein. Giuffre first alleged in legal papers filed in 2015 that she was forced to have sex with the prince in Epstein’s New York mansion, on his private island in the US Virgin Islands, and at Maxwell’s London home. Giuffre filed the civil suit against the prince in Manhattan federal court in August of last year, also accusing him of battery and intentionally inflicting emotional distress. Andrew denies the allegations. His legal team asked Kaplan to throw out Giuffre’s suit on several grounds. His lawyers contended that a 2009 settlement between Giuffre and Epstein shielded him from her lawsuit. They pointed to a clause that released “second parties and any other person or entity who could have been included as a potential defendant … from all, and all manner of, action and actions of Virginia [Giuffre], including state or federal, cause and causes of action.” Andrew was not named in this settlement. Andrew also argued that Giuffre’s claims were too vague, meaning that he wouldn’t be able to adequately defend himself against the allegations. Kaplan rejected the vagueness claim and said it would be premature for him to decide on what, exactly, the 2009 settlement meant for Andrew. “Judge Kaplan said it’s a question of fact, and questions of fact go to the jury,” Rahmani said. “If it were clear that the settlement agreement covered the prince, he could have dismissed the case, but he chose not to. He said the intent of the settlement agreement is something that juries would have to decide.” Rahmani pointed out that “the vast majority of civil lawsuits settle for a number of reasons”. Victims might not want to testify in public about sexual abuse. Defendants, meanwhile, do not want to face judgment should juries find in favor of accusers – nor the continued onslaught of bad press that can increase with a public trial. However, Rahmani believes this is the rare civil case that is more likely to go before a jury than settle. Giuffre previously settled “for what I would say is an insignificant amount – a nominal amount, pennies on the dollar” for a sexual abuse claim against mega-millionaire Epstein. And, unlike many others, Giuffre has openly discussed her trauma. She did not testify at Maxwell’s trial, so “this is her one chance to tell her story in a very public way”, Rahmani said. The prince might also be opposed to settlement for his own reasons. “Prince Andrew has denied that this ever happened, so if he enters into any settlement – even if there’s no admission of liability, even if he tries to keep it confidential, even if it’s not for legal reasons – for PR, reasons, I think this case is going to move forward,” Rahmani said. “There’s just a number of factors that make this a very unique civil case, which is why, I think, much, much, much more likely to go to trial than your other civil cases.” Andrew can fight Kaplan’s ruling, either by asking the judge to reconsider, or asking an appeals court to review the decision, though the odds are not in his favor. “An appeal will be very difficult,” said longtime defense attorney Julie Rendelman. “It was made very clear that the issues that were raised by Prince Andrew’s attorneys are something that are a question of fact, not a question of law and therefore, something that a jury needs to decide, not the judge.” “When you look at the decision that the judge wrote, it covers all the bases in terms of all the issues raised, and I think that particularly when it comes to a question of fact for a jury, an appeals court is hard pressed to step on that decision-making process.” While some deadlines are scheduled in the case – including, for example, a 28 July cutoff for both sides to submit a pre-trial proposal – they should be taken with a grain of salt. Depositions and production of evidence could spur still more depositions and production of evidence, spurring extensions of deadlines. Andrew contends that on the night Giuffre claims she was forced into sex with him in London, he had brought his daughter, Beatrice, to a late-afternoon children’s party at a Pizza Express in Woking. The prince insists that he was then at home with his children all night. Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlThe passage of a cold front is a common occurrence in the UK, often bringing a spell of wind and rain, with colder air following behind. Along the frontal boundary, warm air residing ahead of the front is forced to rise above the colder, denser incoming air. This is a form of convection, a process generating lively rainfall at the surface. Along stronger cold fronts, where temperature differences either side are larger, convection is stronger, generating heavier rainfall. This rain can organise into narrow bands stretching along the frontal boundary, appearing on weather radar as lines of intense rainfall – this is “line convection”. These features can bring a brief spell of torrential rainfall and squally winds that are often no more than 3 miles (5km) wide. Line convection is often broken up into strong line segments, which are discrete lines of intense precipitation and strong winds separated by calmer gaps. As a line segment passes overhead, temperatures can quickly drop, pressure can jump up and the wind can veer abruptly. In rare cases, tornadoes can form from complex wind patterns between line segments. One such case occurred in the village of Humberston in north-east Lincolnshire on 27 September 2021, causing damage to homes and vehicles.A surge in Covid infections on cruise ships is causing mayhem across the industry, leaving passengers stranded aboard ships, exacerbating staff shortages and prompting the CDC to warn US passengers against all cruise travel. The CDC director said this week that Covid cases have increased 30-fold in just two weeks. Every one of the nearly 100 cruise ships currently carrying passengers in US waters has reported enough Covid-19 cases to merit investigation by the CDC, according to the agency’s website. Over the holidays, passengers found themselves floating around on ships that couldn’t dock because foreign ports were turning them away or facing long, onboard quarantines before being allowed to come home, after testing positive for Covid. Dozens of cruises have been cancelled and some ports in the Caribbean and South America are turning ships away from making daily visits. “It wasn’t the cruise we signed up for,” said Janet Silver Ghent, a Palo Alto retiree and editor who was stuck onboard a South America cruise for eight days, when ports in Chile and Argentina refused to let passengers disembark because of Covid cases. On December 30, the CDC issued its highest travel warning, advising the public to avoid cruise ship travel even if vaccinated. The agency said, at the time, that the number of infections reported on cruise ships had jumped to 5,013 between 15-29 December – up from only 162 in the first two weeks of December. CDC director Dr Rochelle Walensky, speaking at a senate health hearing on Tuesday, said that the numbers have continued to skyrocket, though the agency did not respond to requests for updated case counts. “Just over the last two weeks with Omicron, we’ve seen a 30 fold increase in cases on ships,” Walensky said. The problems come just six months after the cruise industry’s big comeback, when companies resumed full operations after having voyages shut down for more than a year by the pandemic. Fortunately, unlike the outbreaks that rattled the global cruise industry early in the pandemic, there have been no initial reports of serious illness or death in the latest surge. Most cruise companies are requiring passengers to be fully vaccinated and tested before setting sail, likely helping to limit the severity of outbreaks. “Our case count has spiked, but the level of severity is significantly milder,” said Royal Caribbean Group’s chief medical officer Dr Calvin Johnson, in a statement last month. The company reported that, since cruising restarted in the US in June 2021, only 1,745 of its 1.1 million guests have tested positive – a positivity rate of 0.162%. Of those, it said, only 41 people needed hospitalization. But the case surge is nonetheless causing headaches for cruise operators and passengers. Florida maritime attorney James Walker said that thousands of cruise ship crew members have tested positive and that many are quarantining on a handful of out-of-service ships. “Given the number of crew members who are ill, there are significant staffing problems,” said Walker, who believes cruise lines should suspend their operations until after the Omicron surge. “For the people who pay to go on a cruise, the service isn’t there.” ‘We were willing to embrace the risks’ By the time the CDC issued its warning against cruise ship travel on 30 December, many holiday passengers were already aboard and seeing their dream cruises disrupted by Omicron. Some have opted to try and make the best of it. Five days after Utah resident Brett Williams and his wife set sail on what was supposed be an 11-day Caribbean cruise, he said 48 crew members and 51 passengers of the small 342-passenger sailing ship, the MSY Wind Surf, tested positive and had to be taken off the ship for quarantine in Barbados. Within a few days, he and his wife and many other passengers also tested positive and were told they couldn’t fly home until they each received a negative test result. Despite experiencing no symptoms, Brett Williams’ tests remained stubbornly positive. The psychologist and author made the best of what turned out to be 12 extra days stuck on the ship, eating complimentary deluxe room service meals, taking pictures of beautiful sunsets and working on his new book, a self help guide, ironically titled Unstuck. At one point, when all the other passengers had been sent home, he and his wife even got to enjoy the ship’s spa pool by themselves, where he joked he wanted to order up “a quarantini”. “Life has risks,” said Williams, who described the trip as “awesome” despite the disruptions. “We were willing to embrace the risks.” Ghent and her husband, Allen Podell, also managed to enjoy their South America trip even though their ship, the Viking Jupiter, spent so much time at sea, since they couldn’t dock, that the entertainers aboard used up all their routines in the first few days and had to resort to improvising entirely new material. Ghent said Viking’s testing routines were extremely strict, requiring all passengers to take a spit PCR test every day. “I spit so much, I never want to spit again,” she said. Passengers who were deemed to be exposed were taken off the ship for quarantine. These included actor Liev Schreiber, who proceeded to post viral videos from his quarantine hotel in Chile, tapping out beats on a Casio synthesiser and calling himself DJ Covid. Ghent’s husband, Podell,83, ate voluminous amounts of sushi and spent his time singing along with the guitarist in the Viking ship’s Explorer Lounge. While the boat was never able to dock in its final destination port, Buenos Aires, Argentina, Podell enjoyed belting out renditions of John Denver’s Take Me Home Country Roads and made up his own version of an Evita song: Don’t Make Me Cry, Argentina. Ghent and Podell eventually got off the ship in Uruguay, where they were supposed to spend one day but ended up spending five. The cruise line chartered a plane to get passengers back to Miami. From there, the couple missed their connecting flight to San Francisco and temporarily lost their baggage, but managed to keep their sense of humor all the same. “Nobody’s going to feel sorry for us for cruising the Atlantic,” said Podell. Officials in the cruise industry, which has lost a lot of money since the start of the pandemic, were also trying to take the setbacks in stride. “Omicron is having a big short-term impact on everyone,” said Richard Fain, CEO of Royal Caribbean in a statement, but argued that cruises are one of the safer places for people to vacation because everyone aboard is vaccinated. “Many observers see this as a major step towards Covid-19 becoming endemic rather than an epidemic.”When Dominic Cummings left Downing Street in November 2020, it was meant to be an amicable departure from Boris Johnson. But it soured within days, amid a briefing war. The prime minister’s former chief aide and his allies were described as presiding over a “macho culture” at No 10. Cummings is said to have reacted to the negative stories by warning Johnson: “I have never briefed against you: believe me, when I do, you’ll fucking know about it.” In that sense, Cummings has certainly been true to his word. Key advisers, bound usually by a residual loyalty, normally remain relatively quiet after they depart a prime minister’s side. But Cummings has always been different, and armed with his knowledge of a year and a half at the very top of government, he has been willing to fight back ever since. It was Cummings who prompted Johnson’s most serious crisis yet. Last week he revealed in a blog that, on 20 May 2020, “a senior No 10 official invited people to ‘socially distanced drinks’ in the garden”. That posting was, in part a response, to the Guardian publishing a picture of Johnson, Cummings and others chatting over cheese and wine in Downing Street on 15 May 2020. The photo in the Guardian had appeared a week before Christmas, following weeks of revelations across the media about lockdown-breaching parties at Downing Street. Cummings insisted this gathering was a work meeting and that somebody, possibly the prime minister himself, “brought a bottle of wine out to the table”. This rebuttal was published on 7 January, just as the political year had begun to restart. Three days later came another revelation. On Monday, ITV published the now infamous invitation from Johnson’s principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds, who emailed more than 100 staff inviting them to drinks in the Downing Street garden on 20 May 2020. Within about half an hour of ITV’s report Cummings tweeted to say Johnson himself was present, using the shopping trolley emoji he uses to describe his former boss.In evidence to MPs last May, he accused Johnson of being so indecisive he ends up “smashing from one side of the aisle to the other”. With other sources confirming Johnson’s presence at the gathering 18 months ago, the prime minister had little choice but to apologise in the Commons on Wednesday, although he insisted the event “could be said, technically, to fall within the guidance” of the time as it had taken place at work, even if it was the Downing Street garden. Not so said Cummings, tweeting his reply a few minutes after Johnson delivered his statement. In a potent mixture of upper and lower case, Cummings wrote: “The invite = obv totally SOCIAL NOT WORK. (UNlike all the mtngs in garden). No way ‘technically within rules’.” It was he added “bullshit cos altern[ative] is admit he broke rules + resign”. The timing of the 20 May party may also explain why Cummings was not immediately fired by Johnson when two days later it emerged that his then chief aide had travelled to Durham in March that year, despite having symptoms of coronavirus. Instead the prime minister forced him to explain himself in person – in the Downing Street garden. Few believe that the public briefing will stop here. “Cummings is the kind of person who, once he focuses on something keeps going and going until he feels he has won,” said one former political associate who worked with him on the Vote Leave campaign in 2016. “It’s what makes him difficult and what makes him brilliant.”An inquiry into Downing Street parties that could determine the fate of Boris Johnson’s premiership should be given greater independence from No 10, former civil servants and a union leader have warned. It comes amid concerns that the prime minister could veto the conclusions of an inquiry by Sue Gray if she recommends that he should be investigated under the ministerial code. Gray, a senior civil servant, was appointed last month to examine claims that Downing Street officials broke Covid rules by holding a series of parties and events during the pandemic. She replaced her line manager – the cabinet secretary, Simon Case – after it emerged that a Christmas quiz was alleged to have been held in his office. However, her inquiry has grown in gravity and potential impact amid calls for Johnson to step down following a public outcry over further party revelations. On Wednesday, Johnson gave a partial apology for attending a “bring your own booze” party in No 10’s garden on 20 May 2020. Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, accused Johnson of breaking the ministerial code by making misleading statements in a series of denials about parties at No 10. “That code says ministers who knowingly mislead parliament will be expected to offer their resignation,” Starmer told MPs. Afterwards, several Tory MPs privately said they would await the Gray findings and, if damning, call for their prime minister to quit. Gray, whose inquiry could conclude as early as next week, can recommend that Johnson has broken the ministerial code. The terms of reference for her inquiry state that “the conduct of ministers should follow the process set out in the ministerial code in the normal way”. However, Dave Penman, the head of the FDA union, which represents senior civil servants, said if Gray makes a recommendation for further inquiries under the ministerial code, Johnson still has the power to block it. “The prime minister himself gets to decide if he needs to be investigated under the ministerial code. No one else can make that decision and he has so far refused to give up this veto despite the recommendations from the committee for standards in public life to do so,” he said. Gray is running the inquiry from the Cabinet Office along with staff members from the propriety and ethics team. She previously headed the same team for six years, during which she ended the careers of three cabinet ministers and vetted the memoirs of ministers. Senior civil servants have expressed concern that the inquiry’s conclusions will be scrutinised by both Johnson and Case. Bob Kerslake, the former head of the civil service, said he had previously been happy for the inquiry to be run by Case but believed the latest revelations meant a retired judge should be asked to receive Gray’s findings. “Sue Gray is an immensely capable investigator but one has to recognise that two of the principal actors here – the PM and the cabinet secretary, effectively her bosses – are now deeply implicated in the inquiry. That is completely unprecedented. The findings could decide whether they stay in their jobs or not. “The latest revelations over the events of 20 May 2020 have raised real questions as to whether there should be another independent person involved – a retired judge, for example – who could then receive this report, rather than it being passed directly on to the prime minister and the cabinet secretary,” he said. Sir David Normington, who worked at the Home Office and oversaw public appointments, said Gray had been placed in a “very odd” position as the public waited for her verdict. “She’s in the middle of a political maelstrom at the moment, trying to establish the facts, and there’ll be a lot of pressure on her to conclude this investigation as quickly as possible,” he said. “She will be very aware that she has the reputations and possibly the careers of senior civil servants and possibly of the prime minister in her hands. That is a very difficult position to be in, however fair and fearless and rigorous you are.” A Cabinet Office spokesperson said they would not speculate on the inquiry.Water companies in England should each designate a stretch of river as bathing water by 2025 to drive the cleanup of a chemical cocktail of sewage, agricultural waste and plastic pollution that is suffocating biodiversity and risking public health, MPs have said. In a report published on Thursday, MPs on the environmental audit committee said they wanted more assertive regulation and enforcement from Ofwat and the Environment Agency to restore rivers to good ecological health, protect biodiversity and adapt to a changing climate. They also called for Ofwat to act to limit bonuses paid to water company bosses who continue to oversee the dumping of raw sewage into England’s rivers. The MPs condemned Liv Garfield, the chief executive of Severn Trent Water, as “disingenuous” for suggesting in evidence that discharges of raw sewage from storm overflows into rivers were “pretty much already rainwater”. “As water companies do not routinely test the quality of the discharges from storm overflows, they are in no position to make this claim. Discharges from overflows can be highly contaminated with raw sewage and other pollutants,” the report found. “To claim otherwise shows a disregard for the public’s concern about water quality in rivers.” “Rivers in England are in a mess,” the MPs said. “A chemical cocktail of sewage, agricultural waste, and plastic is polluting the waters of many of the country’s rivers. “Water companies appear to be dumping untreated or partially treated sewage in rivers on a regular basis, often breaching the terms of permits that on paper only allow them to do this in exceptional circumstances.” The impact on the ecological health of rivers has been dire; only 14% of English rivers meet good ecological standards and no river is deemed to be of good chemical status. In 39 of 42 main salmon rivers in England, the populations are categorised as being at risk or probably at risk, the report said. MPs said the government should actively encourage the designation of at least one widely used stretch of river for bathing within each water company area by 2025 at the latest – something that places a legal obligation on water companies to improve water quality and has triggered huge improvements in coastal water quality. Only one river in the UK – the River Wharfe in Ilkley – currently has an area designated as bathing water. The report said sewage discharges were only one part of the pollution spilling into rivers. Agricultural runoff containing fertiliser and farm slurry was a major pollutant, as was runoff from towns, cities and transport. Poor water quality in the River Wye has been linked to agricultural pollution from poultry farming, which has increased unchecked since 2000, with an estimated 20m farmed birds currently on premises in the Wye catchment. The MPs condemned outdated, underfunded and inadequate monitoring of river water quality, with budget cuts to the Environment Agency hampering the ability to monitor water quality in rivers and detect permit breaches or pollution incidents from the water industry and farming. The Guardian revealed this week that the agency had instructed staff to “shut down” and ignore reports of low-impact pollution events because it did not have enough money to investigate them. They called for an urgent review of the way in which water companies are allowed to self-report pollution, as MPs said they were alarmed at the extent of sewage discharge, large spills by water companies, and misreporting. Citizen monitoring of water companies’ data showed that the true number of sewer overflow discharges may be much higher than those reported to the Environment Agency. The MPs’ report said water companies must be more transparent at releasing easily accessible information on sewage discharges as close to the time they happen as possible. Many of the pollutants discharged into rivers were simply not monitored, MPs said. Plastic pollution was now “ubiquitous” in English rivers and freshwaters, with single use and “unflushable” plastic products left to pollute riverbanks and create wet-wipe “reefs”. In some sections of the River Irwell in the north-west, there were 500,000 fragments of plastic for every 1 sq metre of riverbed – “many, many more times [that of] the number of insects”, the report said. However, there was no monitoring by regulators of plastics, or other substances including metals, pesticides, pharmaceuticals and industrial chemicals. Philip Dunne, the Conservative chair of the environmental audit committee, said: “Rivers are the arteries of nature and must be protected. Our inquiry has uncovered multiple failures in the monitoring, governance and enforcement on water quality. For too long, the government, regulators and the water industry have allowed a Victorian sewerage system to buckle under increasing pressure. “Today, we are calling for these relevant bodies to come together and develop a system fit for the future.” A spokesperson for Severn Trent said: “Storm overflows are designed to redirect flow, which is predominantly rainwater, from highway drains, roofs or driveways, to nearby watercourses to protect communities and homes from flooding. Based on the formula in current common usage by the Environment Agency and the flow assessments we carry out on our network, we believe an average of around 90% of the discharge from Severn Trent overflows is rainwater.”Internet grooming of children has surged during lockdown, according to new research that found a threefold increase in online sexual abuse imagery featuring seven to 10-year-olds. The Internet Watch Foundation reported its worst year on record for child sexual abuse online in 2021 as it confirmed 252,000 URLs containing images or videos of children being sexually abused, compared with 153,000 in the previous year. The UK-based charity said it had seen a large increase in self-generated material – where children are manipulated into recording their own abuse before it is shared online – with the fastest growing increase in such material occurring among seven to 10-year-olds. The IWF said the rise in cases could be linked to Covid lockdowns which required people to stay indoors and led to millions spending more time online. It said lockdowns led to younger and younger children being targeted on an “industrial scale” by internet groomers. “Child safety experts say younger children have been relying more and more on the internet during the pandemic, and that spending longer online may be leaving them more vulnerable to communities of criminals who are looking to find and manipulate children into recording their own sexual abuse on camera. The footage is then shared among other criminals on the open internet,” said the IWF report. In 2021, the IWF reported 182,000 instances of self-generated material. Of these confirmed cases 27,000 were seven to 10-year-olds, which is more than treble the number for 2020. Once the IWF confirms that reports of abuse – largely from members of the public, the police, tech firms or IWF analysts themselves – are genuine, they are reported to authorities in countries where the servers hosting the content are based. The IWF said the biggest age group for self-generated sexual abuse material remained 11- to 13-year-olds, with 148,000 reports made to the organisation last year. “Children are being targeted, approached, groomed and abused by criminals on an industrial scale,” said Susie Hargreaves, IWF chief executive. “So often, this sexual abuse is happening in children’s bedrooms in family homes, with parents being wholly unaware of what is being done to their children by strangers with an internet connection.” On Thursday the House of Commons will debate a report by a joint committee of MPs and peers into the draft online safety bill, which imposes a duty of care on tech firms to protect children from harmful content, as well as preventing the proliferation of illegal content and activity such as child pornography. Responding to the IWF figures, the head of child safety online policy at the NSPCC, Andy Burrows, said it was “crucial” that the bill is strengthened to prevent online grooming of children. The figures were released as the UK government launched a new online safety campaign, Stop Abuse Together, to help parents and carers spot signs of abuse. The safeguarding minister, Rachel Maclean, said: “Keeping children safe is one of this government’s highest priorities and we are committed to doing all we can to combat the increased identification of child sexual abuse online.”Who on earth wants fish tank wastewater, chicken poo, tumble-dryer lint, loo roll tubes, “a plaster mould of a Komodo dragon’s foot” or half a broken toilet? No one, you might think, but the Buy Nothing community begs to differ: these are all real “gifts” snapped up by more than 5 million members worldwide, who give away their unwanted items in the local community. It’s living proof that “one person’s trash is another’s treasure”, as Alisa Miller, the administrator of the Blackheath/Charlton/Lewisham group puts it. Miller offered her daughter’s broken toy birdcage with little hope anyone would want it; it was snapped up by a local flower-arranging enthusiast, and filled with succulents and trailing plants. Her co-administrator’s son is the current custodian of a toy helicopter that has been played with by five Buy Nothing families to date. Members ask for what they want and usually get it: anything from household appliances, furniture and gardening tools to clothes and baby gear. There is nothing unique or original about giving and getting stuff for free. It’s a practice as old as humanity. The juggernaut giveaway network Freecycle was founded in 2003 – but what distinguishes the Buy Nothing project from Freecycle, Freegle, Olio and their ilk is that the emphasis is less on stuff, per se, and more on community. In what Buy Nothing describes as its “hyperlocal gift economies”, users are encouraged to let items “simmer” rather than giving them away to the first person who asks, perhaps suggesting they share a joke or provide a story explaining why they would like the item. In addition to “gifts” and “asks”, users are encouraged to post “gratitude”, with a message or a picture showing what a gifted item has meant to them. That could all sound insufferably twee, but the thinking behind it is fairly radical. It’s a “social experiment”, explain the project’s founders, Rebecca Rockefeller and Liesl Clark, from their respective living rooms in Washington state, effecting a fundamental shift in our attitude to material goods by building a sense of community, and treating items as community-owned and shared. “If you come at it from an angle of joy and human connection,” says Rockefeller, “you’re more likely to inspire lasting change than when you come at it from telling people: ‘You have to do without this.’” Clark, 55, and Rockefeller, 52, bonded as “Freecycle renegades”, Rockefeller says. She was trying to give away things (twigs, nettles) that her local Freecycle moderator did not consider suitable gifts; both were looking for a deeper connection beyond an anonymous back-door drop or pickup. “We wanted more of that dialogue,” says Clark. Her attitude was shaped by her experiences as a film-maker, exploring mortuary caves on the Nepal-Tibet border with her husband and children. The objects they found there had been used, exchanged, appreciated and transformed over centuries. “It helped me understand a little more the practical side of reuse and how an entire culture could thrive without any stores.” “The stuff is one thing, but the stories that go along with it – the humour, the poignancy, the memories – those are the things we really want from each other,” agrees Rockefeller. Both, too, were shocked at the tides of plastic detritus that washed up on the beaches of their home on Bainbridge Island. “It led us naturally to ask what role do we play in this and how can we lessen our impact?” The pair started out with an in-person gift exchange in a local park at weekends; they launched the first Facebook-hosted group in 2013. I’m speaking to them surrounded by the debris of a minimal, but not particularly mindful Christmas: cardboard packaging, return labels and scraps of wrapping paper. It’s a time of year characterised for many of us by a sugar rush and guilt slump of conspicuous consumption. Buy Nothing offers members tools and approaches to counter that sickly consumption hangover, but “Buy Nothing” is the name, not the aim. There’s no expectation or even aspiration that users will somehow forge a fully cashless economy. Indeed, during the pandemic, Buy Nothing changed its rules to allow members to give gifts of cash. “Quite literally, that’s a lifesaving gift you can give another person in a lot of cases,” says Rockefeller. “This was never meant to be an exercise in purity: that doesn’t serve us well. What serves us well is flexibility. A banana, a chunk of concrete or $10 – those are all good gifts.” She speaks from personal experience: when the first Buy Nothing group was established, Rockefeller was an unemployed single mother. “I was having to go through the US social services system – it’s horrible and it’s intentionally meant to make you feel horrible about yourself.” Getting food and clothes for her children through Buy Nothing gave her financial breathing space. “I had money to go and buy a cup of coffee or a book, which would have been 100% unreachable for me.” Of equal importance, she says, was being able to gift bread she had made or foods she had foraged, which allowed her to “get some dignity back”. “The services we can provide are gifts in themselves,” adds Clark. “Gifts of time” (babysitting, gardening, lifts) and “gifts of self” (social meet-ups, offers to become a workout buddy) are a key element of the Buy Nothing experience. From that first Facebook group, the community has expanded to 7,000 Buy Nothing groups with, at the most recent count, 5.3 million users in 44 countries as diverse as Guatemala, Iceland, Oman, Vietnam and Zimbabwe. On a slow day, Clark tells me, it gains 1,500 members. The greatest concentrations of communities are in Seattle and New York. There is also a huge, dynamic Australian Buy Nothing network. According to Buy Nothing figures, the UK has 50 active groups and approximately 40,000 members. Although Buy Nothing is described by Clark as “an open-source model”, most local groups operate on Facebook, for which Buy Nothing provides guidance, training and ground rules. A healthy pattern of organic growth, with occasional viral spurts, accelerated during the pandemic. For Clark, physical isolation made people more aware of a deeper kind of isolation. “There’s this ethic of self-reliance, that you fill your house with all the things you need as a family – there you are against the world. But then the pandemic came along. We quickly came to realise how lonely we actually are as a result of not sharing. What we’ve observed is that if people couldn’t physically get together, they’ve been able to virtually connect through sharing items and services.” Inevitably, this kind of growth creates challenges. As groups “sprout” – the Buy Nothing term for when they reach the maximum recommended capacity of 1,000 members and split geographically – redrawn boundaries have at times perpetuated or reinforced historic racial and socio-economic barriers. These issues have on occasion been compounded by the Facebook group structure where considerable power lies in the hands of local administrators, deciding who can join and what they can post. Clark and Rockefeller have addressed Buy Nothing’s failings, including the “flaws and racism we as co-founders built into the original structure of this movement”, as they said in a June 2020 statement. An Equity Team now provides guidance to groups on how to develop an “actively anti-racist and anti-oppression policy”, including trying to use geographical group boundaries to create diverse sharing communities. Miller worked hard to avoid creating a silo of privilege in south-east London when creating the community in 2019. “This area has got huge wealth inequality. It couldn’t be more diverse, and we intentionally wanted to make sure that we straddled those areas; that was a critical goal.” The newly launched Buy Nothing app is designed to swerve the structural potential for inequity of the Facebook group model. Here, users choose their own geographical limits and create their own communities: “hyperlocal”, “neighbourhood+” or “surrounding areas”. “I’m really hoping our app makes this more accessible [to people] who have been unable for a variety of reasons to connect with it on other platforms, so we get a more diverse set of voices,” says Rockefeller. There are personal costs to growth, too. A network of nearly 13,000 volunteer administrators keeps Buy Nothing functioning, assisted by a core staff of a dozen, all working from their kitchen tables and living rooms. Clark and Rockefeller have always been unpaid volunteers. “I work weekends, in the holidays, in the hours when you’re supposed to be sleeping,” says Clark, who was able to make money from film-making initially. “There’s certainly some joy in it, but it’s become unsustainable.” Rockefeller has taken on part-time jobs over the years to support her full-time commitment to Buy Nothing. “My kids look at it as their sibling,” she says. “It’s not just me and Rebecca,” adds Clark. “The key volunteers are an incredible group of, basically, women, who are doing this unpaid labour and it’s not the model we want to promote for the world. We need to get a little more creative with this.” They hope that the app will also allow them to capture data on what Buy Nothing does to reduce waste and waste management costs, thereby potentially enabling it to raise funds from municipalities. “We’ve never been able to study how much waste is being diverted from landfill,” says Clark. “Imagine if any given community could access that information?” Moving from the germ of an idea to a global structure is challenging, but for Clark and Rockefeller, the impetus and the motivation is as strong as ever. I ask about their most memorable experiences with Buy Nothing. Clark describes how musical instruments were collected and delivered to victims of the 2018 fire in Paradise, California. As a community, they had enjoyed making music together. Their basic material needs were met by big charities, but they missed having this creative outlet. For Rockefeller, it’s a source of great pride that her brother-in-law’s community group suggested Buy Nothing as a first port of call when helping refugees from Afghanistan settle in their town. “We’re building this tool that I really believe will have the power to help us, as individuals, to participate in our collective survival,” she says. Over in south-east London, members of the Blackheath/Charlton/Lewisham group appreciate the new friendships and the sense of local connection. “It’s culturally so different from any kind of other free stuff group out there,” says Miller. “I love giving back to the community and turning to it when I’m in need of something” adds Elif Koç. “I can spend what I’ve saved for charity and other meaningful causes.” Their group has shared camping equipment and loaned books to children; it has supported a victim of domestic violence and a refugee in setting up home and providing clothing for their families. It does feel like a gentle revolution – one houseplant cutting or power tool at a time. As one member, Sarah Wilde, puts it: “I really like the opportunity to quietly rage against the machine.”The Home Office has told asylum seekers from some of the world’s biggest conflict zones that it is safe for them to return there, the Guardian has learned. A 36-year-old from Yemen and a 21-year-old from Afghanistan have both had their asylum claims rejected by government officials on the basis that they would not be at risk in their home countries. The disclosure follows the case of a 25-year-old Syrian asylum seeker who was told it would be safe for him to go back to Syria. The Home Office’s own guidance as well as that from UNHCR warns of the dangers of returning refugees to countries such as Syria, Afghanistan and Yemen. The Syrian man, who sought sanctuary in the UK in May 2020, was told by a Home Office official who rejected his asylum claim that it would be safe for him to return. He fled forced conscription into Bashar al-Assad’s army in 2017, saying that he would have been forced to kill other Syrians. He said that if he is forced back to Syria he will be targeted as a draft evader, arrested, detained and killed. While the Home Office has accepted he did flee forced conscription, the refusal letter states: “It is not accepted that you will face a risk of persecution or real risk of serious harm on return to the Syrian Arab Republic due to your imputed political opinion as a draft evader.” However, the day after the Guardian approached the Home Office for comment about the case, the man’s lawyers received a letter retracting the decision. “It has been concluded that the decision to refuse your client’s protection claim is not in accordance with the Home Office’s published country policy position and is therefore withdrawn with a view to granting asylum,” it said. The Guardian has further learned of an asylum seeker from Yemen who was told by the Home Office in a refusal of his asylum claim in June 2021 that he could return to his country because officials “do not accept that there are problems in Yemen”. The asylum seeker, 36, an accountant who is married and has two children, has various physical and mental health problems, but the refusal letter states that there is “a substantial public health programme in Yemen”. The health infrastructure in Yemen is severely battered and non-existent in some parts of the country. “I was so depressed and disappointed with the decision. All aspects of Yemen are a disaster,” the asylum seeker said. His lawyers have appealed against the decision but there are significant backlogs and the man has yet to be given a date for his appeal. In a third case a 21-year-old Afghan man who arrived in the UK as a 16-year-old boy after fleeing forced conscription by the Taliban at his madrassa has been informed by Home Office officials that they want to revoke the refugee status he was previously given and return him to Afghanistan because he has a cannabis-related conviction. The Home Office letter, dated 15 December 2021, states that the Taliban are now the de facto authorities in Afghanistan. It adds: “It is not considered that they [the Taliban] would still have an adverse interest in a low level person such as you.” UNHCR said that, while it cannot comment on individual cases, it calls on states to suspend forcible returns of asylum seekers “to countries that remain volatile, lack sufficient security or are unable to offer adequate human rights protection”. A spokesperson added: “Afghanistan, Yemen and Syria are among the countries which UNHCR recommends forcible returns should be avoided. While conflict has subsided in Afghanistan, a humanitarian emergency is ongoing, making forced return inappropriate. In both Yemen and Syria, the dire humanitarian context is compounded by conflict and insecurity.” Anita Vasisht, head of immigration at Wilsons solicitors, the firm representing the Syrian asylum seeker, said: “The hard and harsh fact is the Home Office did refuse the claim and that decision did cause distress to the client. The refusal decision forced us to lodge an appeal on the client’s behalf which meant the tribunal had to wastefully direct its resources to handling this appeal matter. This is yet another shocking example of terrible and unlawful decision-making on the part of the Home Office.” Jamie Bell of Duncan Lewis solicitors, who is representing the Afghan refugee, said: “In the context of the ever deteriorating security and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan, it is deeply concerning that the Home Office have seemingly indicated without foundation and in breach of their own policies that Afghanistan may be safe for those who have been previous victims of the Taliban.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “We do not routinely comment on individual cases. All asylum claims, including those from nationals of Yemen, Syria and Afghanistan, are considered on a case by case basis, based on the facts presented by the claimant. “That is the case regardless of the claimant’s country of origin and the prevailing situation there. We will not return anyone to countries where they have been found to be at risk of persecution or serious harm.” • This article was amended on 14 January 2022 to correct the spelling of Anita Vasisht’s name.Care homes are missing a third of the staff they need and more than one in four have closed their doors to new admissions in a deepening labour crisis that is “putting safety and dignity at risk”. With thousands of care workers off sick with Covid on top of a rising number of vacancies, the situation in social care has become “grim, difficult and relentless”, according to the National Care Forum (NCF), which ran a survey of its not-for-profit care-home members. Omicron absences are running at 14% on top of an 18% vacancy rate – a sharp increase on estimates before the pandemic – as beleaguered care workers quit jobs, often for better paying roles in retail or warehouses. The picture is even worse for domiciliary care, with two-thirds of providers forced to decline families’ new requests for help because they are short of carers. The executive director of the NCF, Vic Rayner, said the worsening situation showed the government’s approach to tackling the problem of staff shortages by giving social care “crumbs from the table” was negligent. We “have been highlighting the growing shortages in the workforce and the knock-on impact on those who remain working in the sector and those who use care and support services for many months”, she said. “How many times does this message need to be repeated for it to be heard?” The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) has provided councils with additional funds to pay bonuses to retain staff, and late last month it extended the visa programme for foreign workers to care workers, care assistants and home-care workers. Such measures, however, are yet to fill widening gaps in the workforce. The figures came as MPs and peers were told that staff shortages in social care had worsened the lives of people who live in care homes and increased the risk of undernourishment and dehydration. The director of the Relatives and Residents Association, Helen Wildbore, also told a hearing into restriction on care home visiting by parliament’s joint committee on human rights that “untold harm is being done to lives and to wellbeing”. She said care residents “are being left behind while the rest of the country gets back to normal … if this is what the government meant by that protective ring then it is suffocating”. She said staff shortages were “putting safety and dignity at risk”. The director of Age UK, Caroline Abrahams, said short-staffing meant it was harder for residents to get fed and watered. “It can make a huge difference to help people eat and drink and it can be very pleasurable, but you can’t do it if you’re a care provider and you haven’t got the staff,” she said. The NCF’s snapshot of staff shortages was taken from care providers who together look after 130,000 people. It suggests official figures on staff absences may be underestimates. Live figures on Monday from internal health system capacity data seen by the Guardian showed 122 operators had declared a red alert on staffing, with 13,500 care workers off with Covid in England. A DHSC spokesperson said: “Care staff are working incredibly hard, and to strengthen the workforce we have provided £462.5m for recruitment and retention, expanded the health and care visa scheme, and are running our Made with Care recruitment campaign.”Well, here’s a funny little curio to take your mind off everything for a bit. The House, produced by UK-based Nexus Studios and streamed by Netflix, is an adult stop-motion anthology special. Three stories of roughly half an hour each are set in the same house in different eras. The first two have a spooky twist, the third is a more straightforward if dystopian tale. In the interests of full disclosure, I am firmly in the camp of those who find stop-motion animation quite spooky enough without adding intentional frights. The slight herky-jerky nature of the movement is a constant reminder of the endless unseen positioning and repositioning that goes on. It speaks to my darkest terror – that we have no free will at all and are indeed just playthings to unseen gods, posing us here, there and everywhere for nothing more than their sport. We’re all just puppets, d’you see? Puppets with illusory notions of freedom and independence. Do you see yet? Do you see? I’m sorry. Where was I? Ninety-minute, three-part stop-motion special The House. OK. The first and by far the most successful of the trio is directed (using bulbous-headed felted figures that – even without my particular terrors – stand somewhere on the line between thoroughly charming and thoroughly disquieting) by Belgian auteurs Emma De Swaef and Marc James Roels and set roughly around the turn of the last century. An impoverished family is persuaded to move home by architect’s emissary Mr Thomas, who is voiced by master of oddity Mark Heap (and whose presence adds a further ineffably unsettling touch for all those who recognise the reedy tones that have never once portended good). They move from their little home to a much grander, specially designed, fully furnished affair built on a nearby hilltop, where every modern convenience is supplied – lights come on automatically as it gets dark, all meals are provided. You don’t have to have recently watched the BBC’s thriller The Girl Before to get a bad feeling about this, but it helps. Sure enough, it soon emerges that even in Edwardian-ish times there is no such thing a free breakfast, lunch or tea. The house will exact a price. The parents (voiced by Matthew Goode and Claudie Blakley) quickly become enslaved by its dark spirit (or that of its owner, whose shadowy face is occasionally superimposed over the whole – you know the drill). Their young daughter, Mabel (Mia Goth), remains unaffected, but the malevolent house transforms around her so she cannot reach her entranced parents in time to save them from the raging conflagration that finally consumes them. There is nothing narratively innovative here, but enchanted parents, the disbelieved or unheard child and the inability to reach safety – however many corridors you run down and corners you turn – are perennially effective nightmare tropes, and to have them rendered in this way adds a novelty that refreshes them. And the design, the overall aesthetic, is wonderful. It’s a toss-up between which of the remaining two is less rewarding. In the one directed by Niki Lindroth von Bahr, the house is being renovated in the present by an embattled developer (voiced by Jarvis Cocker). We first meet him while he is trying to attract further investment and to repel an invasion of “fur beetles” (this time the characters are anthropomorphised animals – the Developer, who is given no other name, is a rat). His troubles multiply when a pair of supposed potential buyers who come to the open house event refuse to leave. They are soon joined by a host of other friends and relatives. The final scenes reveal the Developer with his spirit well and truly broken. But the story is too underbaked to deliver any real horrors or work as a fable about violation, or capitalism or any of the other themes it seems at various moments to be nodding vaguely at. The last, directed by Paloma Baeza, finds Rosa (a cat-figure, this time voiced by Susan Wokoma) engaged in a futile battle to restore the house as the flood waters of the future inexorably rise around it. She has tenants, played by Helena Bonham Carter and Will Sharpe, but they pay her in fish and crystals - unacceptable currencies to the plumbers and electricians she would like to employ. One by one, her tenants leave to find a safer berth elsewhere and eventually she is persuaded to leave too. This final third is a very, very slight affair. If the content of the stories had matched the painstaking form, the anthology could have been rather a groundbreaking success. As it is, the architects need to go back to the drawing board.Visiting the International Fair of Dakar is like taking a stroll through the ruins of some ancient Toblerone-worshipping civilisation. A cluster of triangular pavilions rises from a podium, each clad in a rich pattern of seashells and pebbles. These are reached by triangular steps that lead past triangular plant pots to momentous triangular entranceways. All around, great hangar-like sheds extend into the distance, ventilated by triangular windows and topped with serrated triangular roofs. All that’s missing is triangular honey from triangular bees. Built on the outskirts of the Senegalese capital as a showcase for global trade in 1974, this astonishing city-sized hymn to the three-sided shape was designed by young French architects Jean Francois Lamoureux, Jean-Louis Marin and Fernand Bonamy. Their obsessive geometrical composition was an attempt to answer the call of Senegal’s first president, the poet Léopold Sédar Senghor, for a national style that he curiously termed “asymmetrical parallelism”. After the country gained independence from France in 1960, Senghor was determined to use the arts to forge a new national identity, liberated from western tradition and drawing from African civilisation, particularly Sudano-Sahelian traditions, “without wavering from the requirements of modernity”. Senghor never quite defined what this brave new style should look like, but he spoke vaguely of “a diversified repetition of rhythm in time and space”. Forceful, faceted forms and strong, rhythmic geometries became the vogue. Dakar is home to numerous structures that attempt to meet Senghor’s ambitions. The international fair complex is the most spectacular, its composition loosely nodding towards a nomadic desert settlement of tent-like forms, dotted with everything from animal horns and shells to clay pipes and gnarled volcanic rocks. It is in a sorry state, although a Getty-funded conservation project is currently under way, and it is still possible to see how it attempted to forge a bold new path, combining modern techniques with indigenous traditions, creating an expressive, sculptural language rooted in its context. Many such projects feature in the Atlantic coast volume of Sub-Saharan Africa, an immense new architectural guide that brings together a staggering collection of more than 850 buildings from 49 countries within 3,400 pages. Seven years in the making, the publication provides an illuminating cross-section of the continent, from the glittering skyscrapers of oil-rich Luanda in Angola to the mud mosques of Mali and the art deco buildings of Burundi. It boasts more than 350 authors, half with African roots (it’s also available in individual volumes, allowing you to spread out the load of the full 8kg set). Philipp Meuser and Adil Dalbai, co-editors of the guide, write of how, on the one hand, “glossy magazines featuring Africa normally show safari lodges with pseudo-ethnic architecture, or fancy resorts located on expanses of long sandy beaches” or, on the other, “reports on over-population and lack of education and healthcare”. But there is hardly any reporting on everyday architecture, offering a “real” picture of African cities. While by no means comprehensive, the guide aims to fill part of that void, combining descriptions of historic, vernacular and contemporary buildings, considering them against the background of race, gender and power, be it colonial, neocolonial or local. On a recent visit to Dakar, the book was an invaluable companion to help understand the jumbled urban fabric of the chaotic coastal capital. One curious confection looked like a fantastical postmodern interpretation of Sahelian mud architecture, with curved rocket-like obelisks projecting from its corners, painted a rich rusty red, and rain spouts echoing the overhanging wooden beams of vernacular mud construction. This is the Institute of Social Hygiene, which was actually designed by the architect Henry Adenot in the 1930s, when the French colonial authorities ditched their usual beaux arts style and attempted to adapt buildings to local contexts in the name of cultural integration. Any local inspiration was usually surface-deep: in this case, the ochre-coloured walls are made of reinforced concrete, but painted to look like sun-dried earth. In Senegal, French architects mainly drew inspiration from Sudanese and Moroccan styles – made popular by international expositions in Europe – ignoring the local architecture of the Wolof, Serer, or Fulani peoples. It is the postcolonial architecture of the 1970s and 80s that really stands out for its originality, much of it by Senegalese architects Cheikh Ngom and Pierre Goudiaby Atepa, as well as France’s Henri Chomette. They all developed a distinctive form of modernism in tune with President Senghor’s ideas of asymmetrical parallelism. Monolithic tapering pillars, often in rough-textured concrete, support powerful chiselled volumes, with an inventive use of pebbles, rocks and shells to add a tactile, rugged texture to the almost primitivist forms. Dakar’s Cheikh Anta Diop University is one of the best places to see this kind of work. One cluster of lecture theatres, designed by Chomette and Roland Depret in 1976, comprises five white, curved, windowless structures raised on textured brick plinths, arranged around a kind of village courtyard. As you get closer, you realise that the bobbly white surfaces are made from painted seashells, while the streaked brickwork is designed to evoke tree bark. You step up from the courtyard into the enigmatic white cocoons, which house steeply raked lecture halls sunk into the ground. The faculty of law and political science, by Cheikh Ngom, has an equally striking presence. Its knobbly red lava rock walls – covered with a sort of supersized volcanic pebbledash – are flanked by tapering buttress-like fins, rendered in textured sandy concrete, opening up to reveal a shady open-air lobby full of spaces to sit and chat out of the sun. The buildings of this era show a much more sensitive approach to the local climate than recent developments, with brise-soleil screens, deep-set windows and large overhangs to allow as much passive cooling as possible. It is notable that Dakar’s two recent trophy projects – the Chinese-built grand theatre and the Museum of Black Civilisations – share a could-be-anywhere aesthetic and have to be entirely air conditioned. Both are the doing of Abdoulaye Wade, Senegal’s president from 2000 to 2012, who had a penchant for oversized cultural baubles he could put his name on. The most gargantuan looms above the city on a hill to the west, in the form of the magnificently kitsch African Renaissance Monument. Featuring a ripped topless man and his copiously bosomed, scantily clad wife, complete with pointing baby held aloft, the 49-metre-tall bronze statue was made by North Korean sculptors at a cost of $30m (£22m). Taller than the Statue of Liberty, it has been widely ridiculed as a symbol of the vain profligacy of the former president, who claims intellectual property over the monument and still receives 35% of the income from ticket sales. Many Dakarois appear to share the view of the late Senegalese master sculptor Ousmane Sow, who lambasted the statue as “aesthetically childish and banal in the extreme”. Still, once you’ve climbed the 200 steps up to its base, it provides a great vantage point to admire the teeming city below. It’s easy to think Dakar’s architectural golden age is long gone, given the quality of what is now being built – and the fact that the only official architecture school closed in 1991. Many structures from the post-independence era have been demolished or mutilated beyond recognition. Chomette’s striking Hotel Independence, which once stood as a great vertical beehive facing on to the city’s central square, was recently stripped to the bone, its sculptural hooded window shades amputated and the remaining shell smothered in cheap grey cladding. But the guide offers a glimmer of hope from a new generation of young architects and engineers rediscovering vernacular techniques. I hadn’t given my hotel, the Djoloff, a moment’s thought until I found its extension listed in the guide as an example of the revival of compressed earth bricks. The seven-storey structure was built by Doudou Dème, who studied earth engineering in Grenoble before returning to Senegal to establish his company, Elementerre, in 2010. In a nation addicted to concrete, where cement bricks are cast on site for practically every kind of building, Dème and his peers face an uphill struggle. But the benefits of his earth bricks – which are low-carbon and highly insulating – are clear, especially as he combines them with organic typha insulation panels. Providing thermal comfort and regulating humidity, they make air conditioning obsolete. We may yet see a future of planet-friendly asymmetrical earthen parallelism.After two years, there is light at the end of the Covid-19 tunnel. Daily recorded cases of the Omicron variant are falling and it seems likely plan B restrictions will be eased in England at the end of the month. Nicola Sturgeon has relaxed the 500-person limit on mass gatherings in Scotland. The return of life to something approaching normal ought to be unalloyed good news for the government. After all, the pandemic has resulted in the economy shrinking by almost a tenth in 2020, sending public borrowing to a peacetime record. In fact, the waning of Covid-19 as an issue may make life more rather than less difficult for Boris Johnson, because it will allow people to focus on everything else that it going on. They will be free to contemplate a 50% increase in their energy bills in April, an increase in taxes, and prices rising faster than wages. Chuck in higher interest rates from the Bank of England and it is not hard to see why even Tory-supporting publications have been warning about a cost-of-living crisis. Warren Buffett, the veteran US investor, once said that it’s only when the tide goes out that you see who’s been swimming naked, and rarely has that maxim seemed more apt. Even though the economy will continue to grow this year, for many voters 2022 is going to feel more like a recession year than 2020 did. It is taking the government a long time to realise the political peril this represents, particularly at a time when public anger over the parties at Downing Street is palpable. Labour has been running hard with its “them and us” attack on the prime minister over adherence to lockdown rules, but it now has the opportunity to mount the same argument on the economy: the rich are benefiting from soaring house and share prices, while those struggling to get by will be clobbered by an increase in national insurance contributions and £600 a year on the average household’s fuel bills. At the height of the pandemic, it was hard for Labour to get a hearing on the economy. Nobody was really interested in what the main opposition party had to say during a health emergency; and, in any case, Labour was broadly supportive of the measures taken to prevent lockdowns leading to mass unemployment. That’s now changing. In part, that’s because money is no longer gushing out of the Treasury at the rate it was. Rishi Sunak announced £1bn extra for hospitality firms in December, but previously decided not to continue with the £20 a week uplift to universal credit announced at the start of the pandemic and insisted on a national insurance (NI) increase to pay for extra spending on the NHS and social care. Both those decisions – controversial at the time – look even more questionable in the light of the subsequent jump in global energy costs, a price shock reminiscent of the 1970s. But in part, too, the government’s delay in responding to demands for consumers to be shielded from looming price rises has allowed Labour to fill the vacuum. Its plan includes a temporary cut in VAT, consumers not being expected to pick up the tab for the costs of the more than 20 energy companies that have recently gone bust, and a windfall tax on North Sea oil and gas to help pay for an expanded and more generous warm home discount – the help with bills provided to those on low incomes. Under Labour’s proposals around one-third of UK households would see virtually no increase in their bills next year. There would be something off bills for everyone, with extra help for those who need it most. It is quite hard for the government to push back against Labour’s ideas. The prime minister himself said during the EU referendum campaign that one of the benefits of Brexit would be the freedom to set our own VAT rates, and the first Thatcher government imposed a North Sea windfall tax in 1980. Accusing Labour of being the party of tax and spend has its difficulties for the Conservatives, given that taxes are on course to be their highest since Clement Attlee was prime minister. Whether the energy crisis represents Keir Starmer’s breakthrough moment remains to be seen. The good news for the government is that unemployment is low and inflation is expected to fall back later in the year after peaking in the spring. The bad news is that the time-honoured Conservative way of ramping up the economy – a house-price boom – is not an option because the property market is already red hot. While the main focus of Labour’s attacks has been the prime minister, the shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, has also been accusing Sunak of going missing in action. Reeves clearly thinks the chancellor is looking vulnerable, which indeed he is. Two years of Covid have not fundamentally changed the basic rules of politics. Governments thrive when wages are rising faster than prices and living standards are going up. They struggle when the opposite is the case. Opinion polls suggest “red wall” voters are angered not just by Johnson’s flouting of lockdown rules but also by his failure to deliver on his levelling-up agenda. Given the squeeze on family budgets, there has rarely been a more opportune moment for Labour to propose an alternative to NI increases: wealth taxes on the rich. Larry Elliott is the Guardian’s economics editorOn 11 May 2021, I was sitting with a small group in a cafe in southern Tel Aviv, studying Arabic. Our teacher, a Palestinian citizen of Israel, had been telling us that he and his pregnant Jewish wife kept getting turned down by landlords who would not rent their property to a “mixed” couple. We were almost at the end of the three-hour class when air raid sirens sounded. A few days earlier, missiles had been launched from Gaza into Israel, but this was the first time they had hit Tel Aviv. Beyond the fear of an airstrike, I had a sad, heavy feeling. I had recently returned to live in Israel after 15 years studying and working abroad. I remembered a time, in the mid-1990s, when I had believed that Israel was going to be different, more just and less violent. That belief now felt like a distant memory. My faith in Israel’s future had been inspired by an experience I shared as a teenager with a group of extraordinary people. As we waited for the rocket fire to stop, I recalled one of those people in vivid detail, a person I have barely been able to talk about in my home country for more than 20 years. His name was Aseel Aslih. When I first met Aseel, in 1997, he was 14, a Palestinian citizen of Israel from Arraba in the Galilee and I was 13, a Jew from the Mediterranean city of Ashdod (formerly the Palestinian village Isdud). We had been chosen as Israeli delegates to a summer camp in the US for teenagers from conflict areas. A few months before camp we both attended a preparatory seminar for the Israeli delegation. We didn’t become friends straight away. I was skinny, wore denim overalls and mostly hung out with girls. Aseel was slightly taller than me, physically bigger and already had facial hair. I felt uncomfortable around boys, not sure if they were going to comment on the way I spoke, which at the time I thought was too feminine. But I warmed to Aseel. His presence was engaging. He had a habit of tilting his head slightly to the side, his cheeks rising as he smiled. In conversation, he lowered his voice and narrowed his eyes, demanding attention. Our delegation to the summer camp, which was called Seeds of Peace, had been selected by the Israeli ministry of education, which was looking for people with leadership skills and good English. While knowledge of a foreign language is often a product of privilege, neither Aseel nor I came from wealthy families. My father was a taxi driver and my mother worked for the Port Authority; Aseel’s father owned a small business and his mother was an educational counsellor. Our knack for languages and the gift of curiosity made us good candidates. Seeds of Peace was founded by two Americans, John Wallach and Bobbie Gottschalk, in 1993, the year that the Oslo peace accords were signed between the Israeli government and the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO). The purpose of Seeds of Peace was to create bonds between young members of communities in conflict, and lay the groundwork for future understanding. Located in a rural part of Maine, the summer camp offered traditional activities like sports, art projects and talent shows; it also facilitated group dialogue sessions, in which campers from the different delegations talked about their hopes, fears and traumas with kids from enemy countries. The year Aseel and I attended camp for the first time, 1997, there were 120 campers from Israel, Palestine, Jordan, Egypt, Tunisia, Morocco and Qatar, as well as the US. The camp was funded through a mix of corporate partnerships, individual donations and federal grants. It was the 90s: the cold war was officially over and the United States was the global leader, presenting itself to the Middle East as a hopeful messenger. We were young and we ate it up. To be put on a plane to go to summer camp – what could be more exciting? When we arrived, the counsellors hugged us as we got off the bus. Camp felt safe, warm and welcoming. The closely packed bunk beds put us within arms’ reach of each other, and meeting rooms nested in the pines invited us to engage in conversation. Even the lake was called Pleasant. But conflict emerged on day two, when each of the delegations stood in front of their flag and sang their national anthem. Aseel and a fellow Palestinian citizen of Israel refused to sing the Israeli anthem. As Aseel told a friend, he could not relate to an anthem that started with the sentence, “As long as in the heart within, the Jewish soul yearns … our hope is not yet lost.” I was astonished by Aseel’s boldness. Being queer, I was always trying not to call attention to the ways in which I was different. And here was this kid from my delegation, only a year older than me, who acted the way he felt, who set himself aside from the pack. Not without jealousy, I began to admire him. Not everything Aseel did was iconoclastic; he also had a fun-loving, silly side. In our first summer together, he co-wrote a song whose chorus was, “No food no food no food no food no food no food no food I hate waiting at the dining hall”. Aseel sang these lyrics with his co-writers at the camp’s talent show, exuding confidence. There was something about camp that made our young group shine. Being at Seeds of Peace felt like being part of history. Wallach told us every day that we were the future leaders of our peoples. I think Aseel and I shared the intoxicating excitement of seeing ourselves as agents of change. In fact, Aseel was already effecting change. His unwillingness to sing the Israeli anthem was only the first in a series of actions that defied the Israeli delegation leaders’ expectations. Every group included three to five government officials who accompanied the kids. The officials made sure the students were well schooled in the official version of historic events. Israeli delegation leaders had party-line answers about the 1948 war, Palestinian refugees, settlements. But Aseel knew Palestinian history and insisted on telling it. After our first summer at camp, a ministry of education official told Seeds of Peace that Aseel would not be permitted to return to camp with the Israeli delegation. So Seeds of Peace invited him in 1998 to participate as his own delegation. Aseel Aslih, a delegation of one. As a Jew whose family came from Algeria and Morocco, I had some idea of how hard it was to have an Arab identity in Israeli society. My grandmother Hajila went by her French name, Alice, while my father, Anjel Makhluf, went by the Jewish name Mordechai. It was easier that way. Aseel showed me, and the entire Israeli delegation, that it was possible to stand up for your identity. That year, I got a glimpse of the connections that were possible between Palestinians and Israelis. Our relationships would always be complicated, but we had discovered we had a lot in common, and we had a lot to say. When tragedy hit those friendships, there was no way to talk about it. For long years of my life, the animated and hopeful interactions of those teenage years were overtaken by silence. * * * In the next few years, Aseel and I returned to camp every summer. We became members of a group of young leaders in the organisation. There was Tareq from the Jordanian delegation, whose family were Palestinian refugees. Aseel and I both looked up to Tareq, who was a couple of years older than us and already very worldly. There was Alia from the Palestinian delegation, an instant friend who I could joke around with for hours. When the summer of 1997 ended, we returned to the Middle East. A triple suicide bombing in Jerusalem’s Ben Yehuda promenade had just killed four people. Israel was tense. Under the Oslo peace accords, Israel had withdrawn from Jericho, Gaza and most of Hebron. To some Israelis, these withdrawals were a betrayal of the country’s security interests; to others, they were a betrayal of a biblical pact with God. Religious and rightwing ideologues held mass protests against the Oslo accords. Labor prime minister Yitzhak Rabin, who had signed the Oslo accords, responded to the civil unrest and violence by severely limiting Palestinian movement from the West Bank and Gaza into Israel. This policy of restricting movement, which unfolded during the 90s, introduced new layers of permits and physical barriers. As children of the 80s, my generation of Israelis and Palestinians had been born into mostly segregated towns; the 90s made interaction between our communities even harder. To live in a Jewish town and have newly acquired Palestinian friends was highly unusual. Returning home was especially challenging for one 15-year-old Palestinian girl from our 1997 Israeli delegation, who sent the Seeds of Peace magazine a letter entitled Caught Between Worlds, in which she wrote, “as a Palestinian living in Israel … I find it interesting but also difficult to have [these] two different sides to myself. Can these two worlds live together? Am I strange?” Aseel, also a Palestinian citizen of Israel, responded with an open letter of his own: “I don’t agree that you are caught … We don’t have to be caught; we can lead these two worlds.” Even in the confusing home environments we returned to, Aseel was ready to show us the way. Even though I admired his courage, I was sometimes taken aback by what Aseel dared to say or do in public. In 1999, Seeds of Peace opened a centre in Jerusalem, and Aseel was asked to act as MC. In front of hundreds of people, Aseel performed a skit in which he “realised” that he wasn’t wearing Seeds of Peace’s signature green shirt and removed his clothes, only to reveal the green shirt and a pair of shorts underneath. Aseel was 6ft tall and athletic, his hairline already receding; he looked more like a man than a kid. But he was unafraid to make a fool of himself. I was cringing in the audience, embarrassed by what was, in retrospect, a hilarious performance. Seeds of Peace now had a place in Jerusalem, the Center for Coexistence, where Palestinians and Israelis could freely meet, and Aseel was the star of its opening night. Seeds of Peace’s regional staff organised activities outside Jerusalem. In order for the teenagers to get around, the American staff hired a driver – Sami Al Jundi, a Jerusalem native who was fluent in the city’s languages, culture, people and roads. A few weeks after my group returned from camp in 1997, Sami picked us up in a Ford Transit and took us across checkpoints and borders. Every month after that, the young camp alumni would come up with a plan or an activity and Sami took us there – whether it was in Nahariya by the Lebanese border, or in the West Bank’s Beit Sahour. The American organisation had connections that navigated government and military bureaucracies, and Sami knew how to safely get us to our new friends. Driving in Sami’s Transit, boundaries between Jewish and Arab spaces shrank. Back then, I assumed that these boundaries would further diminish over time, and eventually disappear. One weekend, when it was still possible for us to cross these borders, Sami and other staff brought friends to my house in Ashdod, including Tareq and others from Jordan. Aseel came down from the Galilee. The Jordanian guests and Aseel stayed the night. Aseel and I were the hosts in this country, so we gave the Jordanians the bedrooms. We shared my mother’s white couch. It was a long, deep couch; we could both fit if we lay head to toe. We fell asleep in front of the TV. At one point in the middle of the night, I woke up to the smell of Aseel’s feet. I got annoyed, and told myself that I would mention it in the morning. When morning came, Aseel donned the signature smile he had when he was about to say something controversial, and told me that the smell of my feet had woken him up. We laughed – and then we talked about South Park. * * * The decade that had started with peace treaties was spinning out of control. In 1995, prime minister Yitzhak Rabin had been murdered by a rightwing activist who wanted to disrupt the peace process. Seven years after the Oslo agreements, Labor’s new prime minister, Ehud Barak, decided that if he could not get a peace agreement signed within a year in office, no one could. His statement in July 2000 that there was “no partner” on the Palestinian side reaffirmed what anti-compromise activists in Israel had been saying all along: Jews must not trust Palestinians. A few months later, the right’s political veteran Ariel Sharon visited the al-Aqsa mosque compound in Jerusalem, which is also the holy grounds of the Jewish Temple Mount. Sharon knew that his presence there would stir Muslim leaders to calls to protect Jerusalem; his advisers later said in a documentary that they wanted to antagonise Palestinians and get media coverage in the run-up to the election. On 28 September 2000, the day of Sharon’s hour-long visit, scores of Palestinian protesters took to the streets and several threw stones at the politician’s entourage. Within 48 hours, Palestinian protests escalated into road blockades, arson and sporadic attacks on Jews. They were met with force by police. High-ranking officers called for the use of rubber bullets, live ammunition and snipers. This was an unprecedented escalation in use of force against citizens. One Palestinian protester was filmed by a news crew telling a military sniper, “Why are you shooting us? These are not the occupied territories. We are citizens!” His words reflected the shock of a people who saw their country’s security forces use live weapons against them. On 1 October 2000, three Palestinian citizens between the ages of 18 and 23 were shot dead. The following day, there was a rally outside Aseel’s home town, Arraba, in the Galilee. Aseel, who was 17 at the time, walked towards the protesters in his green Seeds of Peace shirt. His father, who was already there, said that Aseel stood at a distance from the crowd. He wasn’t carrying any kind of weapon. Suddenly, a police Jeep sped on to the scene. Four policemen jumped out. It was a common tactic at the time for police to make an example out of one protester in order to scare away the rest. Some of the policemen later testified that the fact Aseel was standing by himself made him look suspicious. I would guess that it also made him an easy target. The policemen ran towards Aseel. When he tried to run, they chased him and one of them hit him in the back with his gun. Then they shot Aseel in the neck. He fell, face down. As he lay bleeding, the police walked away. When his cousin rushed to his side, he heard Aseel say: “They killed me.” I was at home, standing next to the couch that Aseel and I had slept on, when Ned Lazarus, Seeds of Peace’s regional director, called. “Aseel is dead,” he said. “What?” I said. “No. You’re wrong.” I heard only muffled echoes of Ned’s words. The 17-year-old who defied authority, who wanted to lead both sides, who took his clothes off in front of hundreds of people to get a laugh, who was my friend. Gone. Thirteen Palestinian men were killed by police in October 2000. Twelve of them were Israeli citizens and one was a man from Gaza who came to Israel to work. There was one Jewish-Israeli victim, who was killed as he was driving under a bridge and Palestinian protesters threw a rock on to his car. These events marked the beginning of the second intifada, a violent period that lasted four and a half years and took the lives of roughly 3,000 Palestinians and 1,000 Israelis. To many in Israeli society, the events of October 2000 revealed that peace accords were an illusion: Palestinians had never wanted Jews around. The security offered by the state seemed fragile. Gun stores reported a spike in sales. On 7 October, an Israeli soldier from Tiberias was one of three kidnapped by the Lebanese organisation Hezbollah; Jewish people in his home town took to the streets, vandalised Arab-owned businesses and set fire to a mosque. In my Jewish high school, I felt like no one wanted to hear about the death of my Palestinian friend. Even people who loved me found it hard to talk about Aseel. I wanted so desperately to bring Aseel into the conversation that one time, when I was 17, I brought a newspaper with his photo in it to a pub and waited for someone to ask about it. One friend did. We had a short conversation that faded away quickly. The fact that Aseel was a Palestinian killed by a police officer made the act of talking openly about his death political. During those times, a conversation about Aseel’s loss and my grief felt taboo. At dinner with my family I brought up what happened to Aseel. My brother-in-law, who I love, asked: “What makes you think he was shot for no reason?” My brother-in-law’s family, like my mother’s, came from Algeria, which Jews fled during the Algerian war of independence in the middle of the 20th century. Our parents came to Israel because of its promise to be a safe haven for Jews. To acknowledge that a Palestinian had been illegally killed by a cop meant that the state was an unjust aggressor. It meant that we – my brother-in-law and I, our Jewish community in Israel – might not have right on our side. But Aseel was my friend, and my confusion quickly turned to anger. I banged my fist on the table and yelled at my brother-in-law for making assumptions about someone he had never met. I didn’t back down in the moment, but after that evening, I would talk about Aseel only around people with whom it felt safe to do so. I became more reserved, more careful. * * * While I was struggling to talk about the events of October 2000 in Jewish spaces, the victims’ families were protesting their sons’ deaths. Aseel’s father re-enacted for the TV news cameras how his son had been chased and shot, in a scene that I have rewatched on YouTube dozens of times. When I first watched this video, I imagined what it was like for Aseel in his final moments, how afraid he must have been. The older I got, the more I thought about what it was like for Aseel’s father to witness his son’s death, to go through the motions for the cameras. Israeli media got the message: here was an innocent victim. But it was a distorted one: it made out that Aseel the peace activist was the only innocent victim. Eventually, prime minister Barak appointed an official inquiry, the Or commission, to investigate the events surrounding the violent events of October 2000. During the hearings, discrepancies emerged between the police testifying in Aseel’s case. When commission members challenged one of the policemen who chased Aseel, he said: “The fact that [our] testimonies don’t match only proves that we didn’t coordinate our stories.” This cynical argument, as if contradictory testimonies were a sign of credibility, didn’t surprise me. I heard this cynicism every time I tried to bring up Aseel. “It’s a shame he died, but you don’t know what really happened.” More and more, when the topic of October 2000 came up, I planned what I was going to say and how I was going to say it. I imagined people saying to me: “Did you really know him as well as you think?” I thought about who would hear me and who would find out what I had said. I surrendered to the fear of what other people might say, and shut myself behind a wall of silence. In 2001, while the Or commission was in progress, I graduated from high school and was drafted into the military. After Aseel’s death, I could no longer believe in the wisdom and leadership of our generals, but still I could not imagine evading military service. It has been a deep part of Israeli culture my entire life, and the second intifada did not seem like a time to withdraw from service. In March 2002 alone, 135 Israelis were killed by suicide bombers. I joined the navy and, like most Jewish men, I served for three years, while my female friends served two. Many Palestinians found it offensive that their Israeli friends joined the military at all; soldiers can be tasked with carrying out state violence against Palestinians at checkpoints and in their own homes. Many friendships and connections disintegrated. The years of crossing borders in Sami Al Jundi’s van were long gone. Most of the American staff who had run the Jerusalem Seeds of Peace office, young professionals in their 20s and early 30s, left in the following years. The organisation talked about cancelling the activities that brought Palestinians and Israelis together. Sami, who had started as a driver and was now a staff member, was heartbroken. Before joining Seeds of Peace, he had been a prisoner in an Israel jail 30 minutes away from my home. In the 2011 memoir he co-wrote with Jen Marlowe, The Hour of Sunlight, Sami mentioned that at the age of 18, he and two of his friends assembled a bomb they intended to use against Israelis. The bomb blew up in Sami’s house and killed one of his friends. Sami was sent to prison for 10 years and got out in his late 20s. He dreamed of a different life for us. When Seeds of Peace considered closing the Jerusalem centre, Sami asked himself, “How would separating our community of peacemakers lead to achieving peace?” It was a rhetorical question to which he knew the answer. Eventually, Seeds of Peace shut down the centre whose opening Aseel hosted months before he was shot. The Center for Coexistence was no more. That same day, Seeds of Peace let Sami go. Even as Seeds of Peace changed, the relationships formed there continued to offer me insight into how people outside Israel experienced the events of October 2000. Tareq, our friend from camp who grew up in Jordan, was at boarding school in Europe when he found out Aseel had been killed. I saw him at a Seeds of Peace alumni event in 2005, but I could not get myself to bring up Aseel. This was a different type of silence. We were Aseel’s friends, but I was Israeli and Tareq was Palestinian-Jordanian. I did not know if he wanted to talk about Aseel with me. I did not dare ask. One of my other friends from camp, Alia, lived in the occupied West Bank. Israel’s changing policies made travel nearly impossible for her. After the second intifada, she had asked me to meet her in Jerusalem, wearing my soldier’s uniform. I knew it would make us both sad, but Alia was thoughtful about everything she did. I showed up in my khaki naval uniform, like she asked. It was early winter. The streets of the French Hill neighbourhood were filled with stark mountain light. Alia and I were talking about relatively normal stuff – what she was planning to do after university, what I was planning to do after the military. We approached the building that used to be the Seeds of Peace centre. The site was now a painful reminder of the past: before the intifada, before they shut down the centre, before Aseel was killed. The Or commission released its conclusions in 2003. The commission recommended disciplinary action against several high-ranking politicians and police officers for using live ammunition. However, the policemen who shot the victims fell under the jurisdiction of the department of internal police investigations. The police’s own investigation into October 2000 killings was less than rigorous. Eventually, in 2006, the head of the police’s internal investigations unit and the attorney general announced that none of the policemen involved in the October 2000 killings would be tried. For years, I knew that people around me didn’t want to know what happened to Aseel. Now I knew that the justice system didn’t, either. * * * I left Israel in my 20s. Aseel’s death and the intifada were devastating. I had experienced through Seeds of Peace how big the world was, and I wanted to be part of it. But even as a neuroscience undergraduate in the US, I could not leave behind my roots: my topic of study was the effects of dialogue on Palestinians and Israelis. I dedicated my final thesis to Aseel. After school, I became a documentary film-maker and began making films about technology in London, Hong Kong and New York. I made a feature film about an American technologist who was fed up with humans and tried to build the first truly intelligent AI. When Machine of Human Dreams came out in 2016, I thought about Aseel, who – like me – spent hours of his youth in front of computers, exploring the internet. Had Aseel been alive, I wondered, would he have watched my film? Would he have liked it? Would we have still been friends? In 2019, I moved back to Israel. Now, I am 37 and living in Tel Aviv. A few months ago, I attended a protest rally against evictions of Palestinian families from Jerusalem’s Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood. We were standing in a drum circle with children dancing in the middle – not exactly a violent mob. Suddenly policemen in riot gear with guns appeared, and walked through our group, staring with hostile expressions as they passed close to us. I was afraid. I thought they might do to one of us what they did to Aseel. I wondered, does my face look more Jewish or more Arab to them? And if I am thinking about that, then how many others have avoided protesting alongside Palestinians for fear of getting caught up in violence? In the two decades since October 2000, the cycle of land grabs, protest, violence and trauma has only worsened. I realised that in order to live in Israeli society again, I needed to talk about Aseel, our friendship and the painful silence surrounding his death. I contacted old friends with the idea of making a documentary. Almost none of my Palestinian friends had any interest in speaking on camera. One friend told me that, even if he trusted me with his story, his reputation could be damaged by being in an Israeli director’s film. Someone would inevitably call him out on social media as a normaliser of the occupation, of state violence, of the expansion of settlements. I realised that Palestinians had their own silences. In my film-making, and by picking up Arabic again, I am trying to find a voice to speak to Palestinians. Silence has fallen in my relationship with Tareq. We haven’t spoken since the Seeds of Peace alumni event more than 15 years ago. He is now a businessperson in the United Arab Emirates. Although I’ve imagined talking to Tareq about Aseel many times, I have yet to come up with a way to start that conversation. There is one person who breaks her silence in this story. Several years after we met for a walk in Jerusalem, Alia told me that she had asked me to wear my uniform that day so that she could see me as a soldier and finally let go of our friendship. Her plan did not have the intended effect: after that day in Jerusalem we had years of off-again, on-again communication, but we are now closer than ever. We talk every week. She married a man. I married one, too. In 2021, she managed to get a travel permit from Israeli authorities and we went to Jerusalem with her children. Looking at them, I was overwhelmed with the joy of seeing a loved one’s offspring; the ways in which they are similar to her, the ways in which they are new. But none of us has any idea when they’ll be able to travel again. This is not the dream that Aseel and I had shared. It is a violent reality in an unjust place, with brief moments of grace. Some names have been changed • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.The police and crime bill is a huge piece of legislation covering many aspects of the criminal justice system. One of its most controversial sections would have a big impact on the right to protest What powers to control protest do the police currently have? In general if the police want to place restrictions on a protest, they have to show it may result in “serious public disorder, serious damage to property or serious disruption to the life of the community”. They can also impose specific measures on the routes of marches. When it comes to major events, such details are typically thrashed out with the organisers weeks in advance and they can try to obtain injunctions from the high court. How would the bill change that? Among the most controversial elements are new powers for the home secretary to ban marches and demonstrations because they believe they might be “seriously disruptive”, including being too noisy. There are also plans for a new criminal offence of obstructing roads, railways, airports, oil refineries and printing presses, carrying a maximum penalty of 12 months in prison. Protesters who attach themselves to another person or object face a potential 51 weeks in prison, and “serious disruption prevention orders” would allow authorities to ban named individuals – including those without any convictions – from participating in demonstrations or even using the internet to encourage others to do so. Police would have more control over where and when demonstrations took place, and extended stop and search powers would allow officers to target people and vehicles if they suspect they might be carrying anything that could be used in protests. A new offence of damage to memorials or statues could lead to up to 10 years in prison. Why is the government trying to introduce the measures? Critics have described the bill as an unprecedented power grab by the state, which would make many forms of protest difficult or impossible. In policy papers, the government is explicit that the new measures are a response to Extinction Rebellion’s hugely disruptive protest campaigns in London in 2019, as well as Black Lives Matter protests the following year. Late-stage amendments tabled by the government in November were widely understood to be intended as a legal crackdown on Insulate Britain’s actions. The home secretary, Priti Patel, has insisted peaceful protest remains a “cornerstone of democracy,” but argues there has been a “significant change in protest tactics … with protesters exploiting gaps in the law which have led to disproportionate amounts of disruption”. The Home Office says the new measures will help plug those gaps allowing police to deal more effectively with demonstrators set on causing serious disruption and inconvenience to the public. Who is opposed to the new powers around protests? As well as protest and civil liberty groups, 350 charities have signed a letter and more than 800,000 people have signed a petition calling for the bill to be scrapped. In addition 700 academics have come out against the proposals and parliament’s joint committee on human rights said the proposals are “oppressive and wrong”. Two former home secretaries have also criticised the plans with David Blunkett saying the measures risks making the UK “more like Putin’s Russia”, and would “leave a bad taste in the mouths of British people who value tolerance, democracy and open debate”. Are there other measures in the bill that are causing concern? In short, yes. Critics say among the issues of most concern are new powers of stop and search that are likely to hit minority communities hardest, and the provision that turns trespass from a civil into a criminal offence, will allow police to arrest people who are Gypsies, Roma and Travellers and confiscate their homes, if they stop in places that have not been designated for them.Climate activist groups are urging the Labour party to oppose a policing bill they say will undermine the right to protest at a critical moment in the fight to avoid climate breakdown. Youth campaigners have joined other environment and climate justice groups, from Greenpeace to Extinction Rebellion, to call on the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, to whip his MPs and peers to vote against the police and crime bill, which they say is a “devastating attack on our democratic right to be heard on the issues that matter most to us”. Fatima Ibrahim, from the youth climate movement Green New Deal Rising, said young people worried about the climate crisis “desperately need to be able to protest … to hold our leaders to account. Instead, this bill aims to put limits on public campaigning, pulling power away from people and further concentrating in the hands of a few.” Freya Tischkowitz, 18, one of the organisers of the UK school strike movement, in which hundreds of thousands of young climate protesters took to the streets before the Covid pandemic, described the bill as “absolutely terrifying”. “The absurdity of this situation never fails to hit me – how, instead of deciding to listen to what we and the scientists are saying about how we need to radically change course to avert climate catastrophe, the British government decides the best thing to do is to lock us all up to avoid us ruining its image as a ‘global climate leader’.” Lords began voting on amendments to some of the most controversial aspects of the bill on Monday, with more debate on Wednesday. Next Monday, peers will vote on last-minute government amendments that human rights activists have described as “a dangerous power grab”. With the amendments likely to fail if the lords vote them down, the stage is set for a potential showdown with the government – if Labour also opposes them. Meanwhile, activist pressure against the bill has been building. The Kill the Bill coalition, which is supported by activist groups, trade unions and civil rights organisations, has called a “national day of action” on Saturday, with protests expected in London and elsewhere. On Monday, when the crucial votes take place on government amendments, the comedian Mark Thomas and others have called for a “really annoying demonstration”, poking fun at measures that would introduce 10-year sentences for causing “serious annoyance” to the public. “As the House of Lords debates the bill, bring banjos, Piers Morgan masks, crying children, vuvuzelas, cancelled buses and slow-walking tourists,” the call to protest said. “Anything that is annoying and/or loud!” The bill has been widely opposed by human rights activists, racial justice groups, former home secretaries and parliament’s joint committee on human rights, which said the proposals were “oppressive and wrong”. Critics say it is an unprecedented power grab by the state and a reaction, in part, to increasing civil disobedience by climate groups such as Extinction Rebellion and Insulate Britain. In the bill’s current form experts say there are a raft of measures that would make many forms of protest difficult or impossible. They include: • New powers for the home secretary to ban marches and demonstrations because the authorities believe they may be “seriously disruptive”, including being too noisy. • A new criminal offence of obstructing key national infrastructure, such as roads, railways, seaports, airports, oil refineries and printing presses, carrying a maximum penalty of 12 months in prison. • Sentences of up to 51-weeks for protesters who attach themselves, or lock on to, another person or to an object. • “Serious disruption prevention orders” that would allow authorities to ban named individuals, including those without any convictions, from participating in demonstrations or even using the internet to encourage others to do so. • New police stop-and-search powers allowing officers tostop people or vehicles if they suspect they may be carrying any article that could be used in protests. • A new offence of damage to memorials or statues that could lead to up to 10 years in prison. John Sauven, executive director at Greenpeace, said: “As it stands, this bill gives the government unprecedented sweeping powers to restrict everyone’s right to stand up for what they believe in. If ministers can dictate where and when you can assemble, who’s allowed to attend and how much noise they can make, your right to protest becomes a sham … We might as well have the home secretary write the placards herself.” A joint petition opposing the bill organised by a coalition of charities has been signed by more than 750,000 people. But activists say Labour has the chance to vote down some of the most controversial aspects of the bill, contained in the amendments, when the legislation comes before the Lords this month. That is because, unlike the rest of the legislation, where peers can merely send amendments back to the Commons to be reconsidered, the amendments were introduced in the Lords, so they will “fall” if peers vote against them. Sauven said: “The opposition now has the perfect opportunity to block the worst parts of it in the Lords. The Labour leadership should seize this chance and whip their peers to vote against it.” Ibrahim agreed that opposition parties must unite to challenge the bill. “All opposition parties, and especially the Labour party, should be speaking out strongly against this bill, whipping representatives in both houses to vote against it now.” Zoë Blackler, from Extinction Rebellion, which has staged a series of high-profile disruptive civil disobedience actions in the past two and a half years, said its protests would continue, whatever new measures the government introduced. She said Labour had a choice to make. “How Labour votes on this bill will be a test of Starmer’s leadership. He can look away and enable Johnson and Patel’s shameless power grab. Or he can stand firm against an incompetent government trying to silence its critics.” The Labour party and the Home Office did not respond to requests for comment.An extremely rare, carved wooden figure from the early Roman era has been unearthed in a waterlogged ditch in Buckinghamshire, the latest extraordinary find in the UK’s biggest ever archaeological dig along the 150-mile HS2 rail route. The 67cm-tall figure is carved from a single piece of wood. Archaeologists said its preservation was “incredible” given its age and material, but the lack of oxygen in the ditch helped prevent rotting over many centuries. “This is a truly remarkable find which brings us face to face with our past. The quality of the carving is exquisite and the figure is all the more exciting because organic objects from this period rarely survive,” said Jim Williams, a senior science adviser for Historic England. The figure, found in a field near Twyford, is wearing a knee-length tunic that seems to be gathered at the waist. It may be wearing a hat, or have styled hair, and has well-defined legs, although the feet and the arms below the elbows have degraded. More than 1,000 archaeologists have been working on at least 60 separate sites along the HS2 phase one route between London and Birmingham since autumn 2018. Experts have said the project is a once-in-a-generation opportunity to shed light on 10,000 years of history. The route was initially mapped by laser scanning and geophysical surveys before digs began. Archaeological investigation is a legally binding condition of the HS2 project, and is funded as part of the overall budget, estimated in 2019 at £45bn for phase one. Among the finds ranging from the iron age to the Victorian era is the discovery revealed earlier this week of a vast Roman settlement in Northamptonshire, 16th-century gardens in Warwickshire, the world’s oldest railway roundhouse in Birmingham, a trio of Roman statues at an abandoned medieval church in Buckinghamshire, and tens of thousands of skeletons at various burial grounds. “The scale of the HS2 project is unprecedented, so it’s not surprising that spectacular discoveries have been made,” said Mike Pitts, editor of British Archaeology. “It’s the fruits of Britain’s thousands of years of continuous occupation and our skilled archaeological workforce.” Alice Roberts, presenter of the BBC programme Digging for Britain, said the “extraordinary finds” along the HS2 route showed how rich the archaeological landscape of the country was. “This is the biggest archaeological investigation we’ve ever seen in Britain and you can’t overstate the importance of it,” she said. Objects that have been unearthed will be preserved and many will eventually be displayed in museums. But larger finds, such as the 10 metre-wide Roman road in Northamptonshire, will be bulldozed to make way for HS2. Helen Wass, HS2’s head of heritage, said: “Archaeology is a double-edged sword. We wouldn’t be doing it if construction wasn’t happening. You can’t have one without the other. We make sure that if construction happens, we record our heritage to the best of our ability.” The cost of the HS2 archaeological work is built into the project’s overall budget, but Wass declined to say how much it had cost so far. Fieldwork on phase one is expected to be completed by the end of 2022, but post-excavation analysis will take several more years, she said. The carved wooden figure was “a fantastic find”, said Pitt. “It’s really rare to get Roman carved woodwork in Britain. Even in its fractured, weathered state, it has something in the pose of the figure and in the dress that says this is probably Roman.” The figure will undergo analysis and conservation at York Archaeology. A fragment that was found broken off in the ditch will be radiocarbon-dated to establish an accurate date for the wood.Novak Djokovic was included in the Australian Open draw as his wait to see if his visa would be cancelled for a second time stretched into yet another day. As of Thursday evening Djokovic was still in line to compete for a men’s record 21st grand slam title, and was drawn to face his compatriot Miomir Kecmanovic. However, the draw was made against the backdrop of continued deliberations by Alex Hawke, the Australian immigration minister, over whether to use his personal powers to cancel Djokovic’s visa and deport him. According to the federal government, Djokovic arrived in Melbourne without an acceptable medical exemption for Covid vaccination. The Australian Open draw ceremony was attended by the embattled Tennis Australia chief executive, Craig Tiley, who refused to take questions from a journalist afterwards. It was also the source of significant speculation as the ceremony, initially scheduled for 3pm in Melbourne, was postponed at the very last moment for more than an hour. The abrupt postponement triggered speculation about Djokovic’s status, particularly as Scott Morrison, the prime minister, was scheduled to give an announcement 45 minutes later. Morrison’s address was rather about Australia’s Covid rules, but during it he reiterated that Hawke has the power to cancel visas. “Where fully vaccinated eligible visa holders could travel to Australia without needing to apply for a travel exemption and enter those states, allowing them to enter quarantine-free, the individual has to show they are double vaccinated or must provide acceptable proof that they can’t be vaccinated for medical reasons,” Morrison said. “That’s the policy, which hasn’t changed. That is the policy and we would expect authorities to be implementing the policy of the government when it comes to those matters.” A Tennis Australia official later said that the draw ceremony’s postponement was due to “another person” and cited a “testing issue” without elaborating. Despite being overshadowed by Djokovic’s visa situation, the draws were eventually conducted smoothly. Emma Raducanu will make her Australian Open debut in a showcase match between US Open champions as she faces Sloane Stephens, who won at Flushing Meadows in 2017. Stephens, who married the former Sunderland footballer Jozy Altidore on New Year’s Day, has fallen in the rankings since her major success and is ranked 68th. Heather Watson, the only other British player in the women’s draw, faces the unseeded Egyptian Mayar Sherif. The women’s draw also placed the two most successful women’s players in recent years on a potential collision course, with Ash Barty, the world No 1, projected to face Naomi Osaka, the defending champion, in the fourth round. Osaka, who is seeded 16th because of her sparse schedule over the past 18 months, faces a tough draw that could include the in-form Amanda Anisimova or Belinda Bencic in the third round. Barty and Osaka have not faced each other since 2019 despite the widespread hope that they will eventually form an era-defining rivalry. Should he be free to compete, Djokovic has a helpful draw as he looks to play himself into form, with the clay court specialist Cristian Garín the highest ranked player in his section. Djokovic continued his preparations for the tournament on Thursday by training with Federico Coria, the world No 64, on Rod Laver Arena. After starting with some groundstroke drills, Djokovic and Coria finished their session by playing points together. Elsewhere Andy Murray faces a rematch of Wednesday’s gruelling win over Nikoloz Basilashvili in Sydney as the pair meet again in the first round. Rafael Nadal’s return to regular competition after a chronic foot injury continues as he faces Marcos Giron. Cameron Norrie, the 12th seed, faces a tough first round against the youngster Sebastian Korda, while Dan Evans will start against David Goffin of Belgium. Meanwhile, the Sydney Morning Herald reported that Bernard Tomic has tested positive for Covid after he correctly predicted his symptoms during his qualifying match on Tuesday. Tomic had taken to the court in his first qualifying round against Roman Safiullin while feeling sick. During the match, he told the umpire that he believed he had early Covid symptoms despite a negative rapid flow test. “For sure in the next two days I will test positive, I’m telling you,” Tomic said. “I will buy you dinner if I don’t test positive in three days. Otherwise you buy me dinner.” During the match, Tomic decried the lack of regular testing for players at the Australian Open. While they are required to do rapid flow tests each day in their hotel rooms, PCR tests are required only on their first and sixth days in Melbourne. After isolating in his room following his match, Tomic’s PCR test came back positive.Australia’s “backwards” positions on global heating and asylum seekers are becoming increasingly unacceptable to the world, a leading human rights group says. Human Rights Watch launched its annual world report on Thursday, again finding “serious human rights issues” in Australia, despite its overall record as a strong, multicultural democracy. For the first time, Human Rights Watch focused on climate, an area where Australia was found particularly wanting. The report criticised Australia’s per capita emissions, among the worst in the globe, its huge exports of fossil fuels, and the tax breaks afforded to fossil fuel companies, which have increased 48% since the Paris agreement in 2015. The report yet again slammed Australia’s treatment of asylum seekers and refugees, including those transferred to Australia and detained in hotel rooms for extended periods, where “access to sunlight, space to exercise, and fresh air is limited”. The plight of asylum seekers was given recent global exposure by the short-term detention of tennis star Novak Djokovic. Australia’s rates of Indigenous incarceration – accounting for 30% of all adult prisoners, despite making up just 3% of the general population – and the at least 11 deaths in custody last year were also condemned. The report included the shocking statistic that Indigenous children are 17 times more likely to be imprisoned than non-Indigenous children, and criticised Australia for ignoring calls by 31 United Nations member states to raise the age of criminal responsibility to the internationally recommended minimum of 14. The tough travel restrictions introduced during the pandemic were also highlighted. The report said the decision to deny Australians from returning home was a “punitive approach to travel that left tens of thousands of Australian families separated from their loved ones”. Human Rights Watch highlighted the inconsistent approaches taken to Australians living in India after the wave in May last year, compared to those living in the US and the UK after similar spikes. “Strict and inflexible domestic travel restrictions inside Australia left families separated and others unable to return home, with individuals refused permission to travel across state borders for compassionate reasons or medical treatment, despite willingness to abide by quarantine restrictions,” the report said. Human Rights Watch Australia researcher, Sophie McNeill, said the world increasingly struggled to comprehend why Australia took such “backwards” stances on issues like climate and asylum seekers. “Increasingly, the rest of the world and Australians are just saying ‘this is unacceptable, we can’t continue like this’,” McNeill told Guardian Australia. “We’re now seeing that with Australia’s climate policy, you’re increasingly getting that realisation around the world how backwards Australia is on this. The Djokovic issue has also reminded us that we’re also this way on asylum seekers.” Human Rights Watch’s report said universities in Australia were failing to protect the academic freedom of students who spoke out about China and academics who criticised the Communist party. This, the report said, left them “vulnerable to harassment and intimidation by Chinese government supporters”. “Chinese pro-democracy students in Australia alter their behaviour and self-censor to avoid threats and harassment from fellow classmates and being ‘reported on’ by them to authorities back home,” the report said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The report also cited the work of the disability royal commission and its criticisms of the slow Covid vaccine rollout for people with disabilities. It similarly cited the aged care royal commission, saying the pandemic had highlighted “systemic understaffing and gaps in regulation”. “Many aged care facilities use dangerous drugs, often without informed consent, to control the behaviour of older people with dementia,” the report said. “The government has not banned the practice and has not conducted sufficient monitoring of facilities’ compliance with existing regulations.”First Dates 10pm, Channel 4 French fox Fred Sirieix and his romance-enabling team reopen the restaurant doors to tonight’s hopeful diners: self-confessed “princess” Fiona meets recruitment consultant Rakim; ex-soldier Tristan looks to end his four-year singledom with beach-loving Ema; unlucky-in-love Lewis overcomes his narcolepsy fears over dinner with DJ Thom; and lager-loving Jess meets fellow northerner Ryan. Will anyone find more than just a good meal? Hollie Richardson Dragons’ Den 8pm, BBC One There’s a definite sustainability theme to tonight’s show, from an environmentally friendly, carbon-neutral painting and decorating kit to some interesting looking biodegradable beauty products – but might the latter have an image problem? Elsewhere, there’s a mum with a solution for sleepless nights, and an animal lover with an eco-solution to “puppy pollution”. Ali Catterall And Just Like That … 8pm, Sky Comedy We’ve already reached the halfway point in the 10-part reboot, which sees Carrie navigating single life in her 50s following Big’s shock death, and Miranda discovering her queer self. While details are being kept under wraps, Twitter will surely have another meltdown over what tonight’s double bill brings. HR The Apprentice 9pm, BBC One The best and most ludicrous episodes of this seemingly immortal business contest are the ones in which the teams have to utilise their creativity. So this can’t really fail: not only do the apprentices have to design an electric toothbrush for kids but also an app to encourage them to use it. Cue excruciatingly ill-conceived comms gimmickry. Phil Harrison Martin Clunes: Islands of the Pacific 9pm, ITV Because we need more bored celebrities showing us how great life is on their adventures around the world, here’s Martin Clunes’s expedition across the Pacific. First up, the actor flies into French Polynesia’s biggest island, Tahiti, where he visits a wine estate. HR Screw 9pm, Channel 4 In the second episode of Rob Williams’s prison drama (with dashes of dark comedy), suspicious supervising officer Leigh Henry (Nina Sosanya) needs to show her birth certificate to secure a promotion – so what’s the problem? Meanwhile, newbie Rose (Jamie-Lee O’Donnell) has a tense encounter with a prisoner. HR Live sport International Test Cricket: Australia v England Thu, 1.30am, BT Sport 1. The first day of the fifth and final Test, taking place at Blundstone Arena in Hobart.The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, has suggested Novak Djokovic will not be allowed to stay in the country and contest the Australian Open unless he can substantiate a medical exemption allowing him to be unvaccinated against Covid. Speaking before any formal decision by the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, Morrison on Thursday refused to comment directly on Djokovic’s case, but said he expected authorities “to implement the policy of the government” to only allow fully vaccinated people or those with medical exemptions into Australia. Djokovic received a visa on 18 November and arrived in Melbourne on 5 January with an exemption approved by Tennis Australia’s chief medical officer and a Victorian government independent expert panel. However, Djokovic was detained and his visa cancelled on the basis that a recent Covid infection by itself was not sufficient for an exemption from Australia’s strict vaccination requirements. Although Djokovic won a court battle on Monday to restore the visa, he faces a nervous wait as Hawke decides whether to exercise a separate power to again cancel it. On Thursday, Morrison referred to a statement from Hawke on Wednesday that the immigration minister was still considering whether to cancel Djokovic’s visa. But the prime minister also said that people coming to Australia – such as working holiday-makers – must be double vaccinated to enter the country. Asked whether non-citizen non-residents who are not double vaccinated were a risk to public health, Morrison skirted around Djokovic’s case by referring to “other matters being considered at the moment”. “All I will simply say is the reason we have had since 15 December, where fully vaccinated eligible visa holders could travel to Australia without needing to apply for a travel exemption … that individual has to show they are double vaccinated or must provide acceptable proof that they can’t be vaccinated for medical reasons,” he said. “That’s the policy, that policy hasn’t changed … of course we would expect authorities to be implementing the policy of the government when it comes to those matters.” Morrison noted that non-citizen non-residents could have acquired a visa but that did not guarantee that they fulfilled conditions to enter the country. “They may have acquired a visa recently, they may have acquired a visa some time ago and be returning, when some of these issues weren’t extant at that time,” he said. “That’s why it’s important to distinguish between the visa and the condition to enter the border. They’re not one and the same thing and they’re often conflated and shouldn’t be. “If you’re not a citizen or resident, then the health rules we have in place to protect our borders [apply] – and our border protection policies have been central to the government’s achievements when it comes [to Covid] and Australia’s achievements generally in having one of the lowest death rates.” On Wednesday, Djokovic conceded his agent made an “administrative mistake” when declaring he had not travelled in the two weeks before his flight to Australia and acknowledged an “error of judgment” by not isolating in Belgrade after he tested positive for Covid on 16 December.Have you ever wanted to revisit your first love? A better question: who hasn’t? Blue Jay explores this desire so precisely that it may as well be a time travel movie. It stars Mark Duplass and Sarah Paulson as Jim and Amanda, high school sweethearts who bump into each other a couple decades down the line in the town where they grew up. Neither lives there any more, but they have both returned home at key moments. Jim’s mother has died; Amanda’s sister is giving birth. When they lock eyes at the grocery store, an old flame is rekindled, and it still burns brightly. At this point, many film-makers would have Jim and Amanda embark on a secret affair that disrupts their lives and wreaks havoc on their relationships, but Blue Jay is after something far less grand. Jim and Amanda go for coffee, and at the end of it, neither wants the conversation to end. They return to Jim’s childhood home, where, thanks to his mother’s hoarding tendencies, Jim’s teenage life remains trapped in amber. They look at old photos, chat openly about the past, and in an extended flight of nostalgia, play house for the evening, pretending that they stayed together after high school and are now a boring, married couple. Heavily improvised and filmed in lush black-and-white, Blue Jay is emotionally raw, giddily entertaining and draws exquisite tension from the possibility that if these two lonely souls stroll too far down memory lane, they may never find their way back. Confidently directed by Alex Lehmann, Blue Jay presents the kind of romance that was once a staple of Hollywood and has now gone woefully out of fashion. There was a time when film romance was fundamental to the industry. It was the way stars were built. Watching Ingrid Bergman fall in love with Humphrey Bogart during the flashbacks of Casablanca turned them both into major film stars. Bergman looked at him the way we all wish someone would look at us, and her gaze legitimized Bogart as a romantic hero. This doesn’t happen in cinema much any more. Hollywood has lost interest in romance and, either as a symptom or a cause, has failed to produce a dependable crop of movie stars for some time. If you look at their careers, you won’t mistake Duplass or Paulson for major film stars, but they feel like them in Blue Jay. Jim, a typical Duplass creation, is a strange, sensitive guy prone to fits of crying. “My face leaks,” he jokes awkwardly, the first time it happens. Paulson, adorable in her knit stocking cap, seems to have her life a little more together. She is married with two grown stepkids; Jim is an unemployed bachelor. Under normal circumstances, you wouldn’t expect she would have anything to do with him, but when she looks at him, the stars fill her eyes. You see it the first time she notices him in that grocery store. Her vulnerability makes her beautiful, while her attraction to him makes us hold him in higher esteem. You know, the way cinema worked for a hundred years before the teenagers took over. Still, what makes Blue Jay so poignant is how it creates a space for the purity of first love to be fully felt by processing it through the weariness of middle age. In the film’s best scene, Jim and Amanda sit at opposite ends of his childhood bed, where they presumably shared more than one special evening. They listen to a cassette tape they made as kids, in which they improvise gangsta rap. The glances they share could inspire a volume of poems. They rejoice, they regret, they rekindle, all in the same breath. It’s a rich moment of cinema that shows without telling, and implies without explaining. On that score, Blue Jay sputters a bit towards the end – it eventually points to a single cause for their post-high school rupture, when it should have left the past ambiguous – for most of its runtime it is an irresistible cocktail that gives you the buzz of young love with none of the hangover. By the end, your face will be leaking. Blue Jay is currently streaming on Netflix in the US and UKTop story: Fears PM could veto Sue Gray inquiry conclusions Hello, Warren Murray here, thank you all for coming. I am pretty sure this is a work thing, but in any event I am only staying briefly. Boris Johnson’s prime ministership hangs in the balance with Conservative MPs openly calling for his resignation after he admitted attending a garden party in lockdown, claiming he thought it was a “work event”. Johnson delivered a carefully worded apology about the alcohol-fuelled gathering of up to 40 officials in May 2020, which was described in an email invitation as “socially distanced drinks” in the warm weather. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, has called for Johnson to “do the decent thing and resign”, castigating the prime minister as “a man without shame” and someone the British public widely viewed as a liar. After Johnson’s statement, one of the Conservatives’ most senior backbenchers, William Wragg, and Douglas Ross, the leader of the party in Scotland, publicly called for the PM to resign. Two possible challengers for the prime minister – the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and the foreign secretary, Liz Truss – held back for much of the day before tweeting their support for the apology. Some MPs said the prime minister appeared less contrite in private conversations than in his apology. One Tory adviser predicted the prime minister had 72 hours to turn things around. The inquiry that is being held into the Downing Street parties should be given greater independence from No 10, former civil servants and a union leader have warned this morning, amid concerns the prime minister could veto the findings of Sue Gray if she recommends he be investigated under the ministerial code. “The prime minister himself gets to decide if he needs to be investigated under the ministerial code,” said Dave Penman, the head of the FDA union for senior civil servants. * * * Djokovic into Australian Open – Novak Djokovic has just now been included in the draw for the Australian Open, which starts on Monday. Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, has said this morning that a decision has not been made on whether he will overturn the player’s visa. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, stressed a short time ago that people entering the country must be double vaccinated, and that authorities must implement Covid entry rules – remarks that placed Djokovic’s effort to play in the Australian Open in fresh doubt. * * * Outcry over anti-protest powers – Activist groups are urging Labour to oppose a policing bill they say will undermine the right to protest at a critical moment in the climate crisis. The bill includes powers for the home secretary to ban marches and demonstrations that might be “seriously disruptive” or too noisy; a criminal offence of obstructing infrastructure such as roads, railways, airports, oil refineries and printing presses; jail sentences for attaching or locking on to someone or something; bans on named individuals from demonstrating or going on the internet to encourage others; police stop-and-search powers to look for protest-related items; and up to 10 years’ prison for damaging memorials or statues. The bill is going through the Lords this week and next. * * * Prince Andrew faces trial prospect – Prince Andrew is facing a lengthy and embarrassing legal ordeal with the lawsuit brought by Virginia Giuffre in Manhattan likely to go to trial by jury, US legal experts say. It comes after a New York judge refused to throw out a civil case over allegations that Andrew sexually assaulted Giuffre when she was 17 years old. The Duke of York has been forced to scale back his royal duties in the wake of the allegations, which he strenuously denies. * * * Watch out, tyrants told – Human Rights Watch has released its World Report 2022 in which it argues increased repression and violence by autocrats and military regimes are signs of their desperation and weakening grip on power. It says opposition parties are forming alliances to challenge the corrupt or repressive for power. HRW points to the Czech Republic, where the PM, Andrej Babiš, was defeated, and Israel, where Benjamin Netanyahu lost the prime ministership after 12 years in power. Electoral alliances are also lining up against Viktor Orbán in Hungary and Recep Tayyip Erdoğan in Turkey. The HRW director, Kenneth Roth, argues that repression and “overt electoral charades” in countries such as Russia and Nicaragua should be seen as a sign of weakness, not strength. “There is a narrative that autocrats are prevailing and democracy is on the decline, yet if you look at the trends in human rights over the last 12 months it doesn’t look so rosy for the autocrats.” * * * Omicron crisis in care staffing – Care homes are missing a third of the staff they need and more than one in four have closed their doors to new admissions in a deepening labour crisis that is “putting safety and dignity at risk”, according to the National Care Forum (NCF). It says Omicron absences are running at 14% on top of an 18% job vacancy rate. Nursing and midwifery leaders have urged Sajid Javid to delay the introduction of compulsory Covid jabs for NHS staff. Health service trusts in England are preparing to start sending out dismissal letters from 3 February to workers who have not had their first dose. A health department spokesperson defended the policy: “This is about patient safety, and ensuring people in hospital or care have as much protection as possible.” * * * ‘Clean rivers with bathing edict’ – Water companies in England should each have to designate a stretch of river as bathing water by 2025 to drive the cleanup of sewage, agricultural waste and plastic pollution, MPs have said. Only one river in the UK – the River Wharfe in Ilkley – currently has an area designated as bathing water, and only 14% of English rivers meet good ecological standards. No river is deemed to be of good chemical status. A bathing designation places a legal obligation on water companies to improve water quality and has triggered huge improvements in coastal water quality. Today in Focus podcast: Is Johnson’s apology enough? Boris Johnson faced anger and derision as he admitted attending a drinks party during the first lockdown but claimed that he believed it to be a work event that did not break the rules. Lunchtime read: ‘Banana, concrete – good gifts!’ There are 7,000 Buy Nothing groups with more than 5 million members worldwide. But their appeal goes beyond the chance to swap everything from nettles to power tools. Sport Antonio Conte defended his decision to rest Hugo Lloris and start Pierluigi Gollini in goal after Tottenham’s hopes of reaching the Carabao Cup final were dashed by defeat to Chelsea. Joe Root has thrown his support behind Chris Silverwood, insisting the embattled head coach should keep his job as hobbling England prepare for “one last push” to end their failed Ashes campaign with a win in Hobart. The British Olympic Association will offer temporary phones to Team GB athletes and staff at next month’s Winter Olympics in Beijing after fears they could be spied on by the Chinese government. Crowds at the Australian Open will be capped at 50% after a surge in Covid cases in Melbourne prompted a last-minute change of ticketing policy. And English clubs due to play in France this weekend have given conflicting messages over fulfilling their fixtures but European rugby chiefs were on Wednesday night cautiously optimistic the matches will go ahead as planned. Business The end of the era of cheap money has sent Asian stock markets down overnight as investors digested the latest inflation surge in the US. With the Federal Reserve now certain to hike interest rates, central banks all over the world are likely to follow the Bank of England’s early example and put up borrowing costs, ending years of ultra-low rates. The FTSE100 is set to open flat so far, while the pound is on $1.371 and €1.198. The papers With Boris Johnson on shakier ground than ever, we have another standalone roundup of the papers – a summary follows. The Mirror’s banner headline is “Disgrace”, set below a picture of Johnson giving his humiliating apology to the Commons. The Guardian’s main headline is “PM’s future on knife-edge after No 10 party apology”. The Times also has a picture of a grim-faced Johnson and the headline “Defiant PM refuses to quit as polls slip further”. The FT has “Johnson faces Tory calls to quit after attending lockdown party” and the i says “Tories call on ⁦Boris Johnson to resign”. The Scotsman focuses on Tory leader Douglas Ross calling for the PM to quit: “Scots Tories lead rebellion despite ⁦Johnson’s apology”. The Daily Record’s splash is a bit more direct – “Cock and Bull Tory” – and nor does the National hold back, screaming “Liar”. The Telegraph takes a softer line: “Sunak leaves Johnson in limbo”, focusing on the chancellor’s half-hearted backing for the embattled PM. The Mail and Express have both decided it is time to circle the wagons around the PM. “Operation Save Boris” says the Mail, reporting that “cabinet rallies round” but “ambitious Rishi’s lukewarm support” spells trouble ahead. The Express says “I’m sorry … but now prove you can deliver for Britain”. The Star’s splash headline says “Rules are only for little people!” and the Metro has “Sorry … not sorry”. The Sun leads with the Prince Andrew sexual abuse allegations: “Damned old Duke of York”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendTwo councils in Sydney are considering permanently banning hydrofoil surfing at their beaches due to concerns over safety. Randwick and Waverley councils, both in Sydney’s east, cover some of Sydney’s most high profile beaches, including Clovelly, Coogee, Maroubra, Bronte, Bondi and Tamarama. Hydrofoil boards began gaining traction in 2019, and are a unique take on surfing, with riders mounting a board that features a special fin mounted on a long strut below the board. Some are fitted with electric motors. The device allows surfers to catch waves even on flat water, with the fin lifting the board above the surface. Riders can reach speeds of up to 40km/h, and the boards have begun increasing in popularity, with riding groups popping up across the east coast. But the boards have been at the centre of ongoing debates over their safety and suitability for use at popular beaches, with Waverley Council already initiating an unofficial ban on the sport. For Andrew Crawford from H20 Foils, a hydrofoil and e-foil training, rental and purchase business, the concerns are not unfounded. “In reality, there’s an element of danger, the same as there is with a conventional surfboard,” he said. “There’s a danger of the boards and the fins making contacts with people’s heads. “Because there’s an extended mast, which is like a knife in the water, and the wing which is attached to the bottom of the mast, if it does come in contact with people, it could cause quite an injury. “From that perspective, I can see the council’s wariness.” But Crawford, who has been foiling for four years, said that the danger ultimately came down to rider training, and that with regulation, the sport can be made safe for beaches. “There’s quite a process in learning to ride them, especially from a safety perspective. That’s where the real danger can come from, if someone has no idea what to do. “It’s in the hands of the operator, the same as with cars on the road. If handled sensibly, I don’t see a major issue, as long as they keep well clear of designated swimming areas and other surfers. “And generally they do, because they are riding a different part of the swell, they’re looking for unbroken waves.” A spokesperson for Waverley council told Guardian Australia safety issues were their main concern, while adding that there have been no reported injuries from the boards yet. “For safety reasons, hydrofoil surfboards are not permitted at our beaches. This is due to the safety risks posed by their high speed [compared to that of a surfboard], the metal-like keel that raises the board out of the water and the usually crowded conditions in the water. “We do not have any reported instances of injuries involving these boards due to the low volume of foil boarders visiting our beaches and the proactive approach by the lifeguards. “Council is aware of injuries at other beaches/waterways caused by foil boards that have resulted in significant trauma to the casualty.” Randwick city council said they were working with Surfing NSW to gather feedback on a potential ban, and will be presenting a report on the matter in the next month. They said the proposed ban is being considered after members of the public raised safety concerns. “The proposal was prompted by ongoing safety concerns being raised by members of the public and Randwick Council beach lifeguards, in regards to foil boards being used on heavily populated beaches in the LGA. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “In addition to this, the NSW Local Government Coastal Safety Group also confirmed their collective concern about the safety of foil boards being used in areas with swimmers, bathers and beach users.” The Northern Beaches council said they were “monitoring” the situation, but said there were no bans in place at the moment. “The use of hydrofoil craft is becoming more popular and Northern Beaches council is monitoring the situation. There are currently no bans in place on the Northern Beaches. “Like the majority of hard bodied water craft they are not allowed in patrolled swimming zones and this is policed by council lifeguards.” The final decision on the potential ban in Waverley and Randwick is due later in 2022.I was chatting to some locals in a village somewhere over Christmas. They were bemoaning various decisions that had been made – to the detriment, in their view, of the community. There was planning stuff, blocked sewers, restrictions demanded by a preservation society, highways and so on. These people weren’t professional moaners, or even keen amateur moaners. They were just exasperated. I opened my mouth to impart some sage advice, but nothing came out, as it dawned me that I knew nothing of any use to them. I have no clear idea where the power lies. Is it the parish council, the county council, the regional government or central government? And where does the local member of parliament fit in to all this? As a voter in a democratic society, it is surely critical for me to know who is responsible for what, so I know who to blame or praise, who to vote in or out and who to try to influence. I really don’t. Perhaps it’s just me. I thought I understood the point of local democracy, but if no one can fathom its byzantine ins and outs there surely is no point. Take Manchester. I know that Andy Burnham is the mayor. But, in that case, I wondered, what is Bev Craig, the leader of Manchester city council, for? Oh, I see: Craig is the leader of just one of the 10 city councils that make up the Greater Manchester combined authority, a body that has an 11th member and chair, the mayor Andy Burnham. OK, got it, I think. But to whom would I would speak if I lived in the middle of Manchester and was displeased about, say, the state of Piccadilly Gardens? Is it Lucy Powell, the MP for the area? Or could it be one of the three councillors for that ward, their council leader, Craig, or her sort-of leader, Burnham? This is nothing against these people, or Manchester generally; I’d have the same questions about anywhere. Please, someone, explain. Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnistThe Omicron variant has unleashed a tidal wave of Covid that is sweeping through countries at breakneck speed. In the UK, infections soared to unprecedented highs in recent weeks, but may finally have reached a peak. So what is in store on the other side of the wave? When will cases fall? Mass vaccination, boosters, and the spectacular infection rates seen in the Omicron wave are building high levels of population immunity that will drive infection rates down. The wave will peak at different times from place to place, with adherence to Plan B and shifts in people’s behaviour before and after Christmas all playing into the timing and speed at which infections fall. While the Office for National Statistics said infections were still rising in England last week, the wave may already have peaked in London. Will Omicron fizzle out? Not in the foreseeable future. The more likely scenario is that Omicron continues to circulate, with cases rising and falling in line with people’s mixing patterns and changes to measures that prevent transmission. When plan B is lifted and more people return to work, cases may well rise. But in the summer, as people spend more time outdoors, infections may fall again, then rise next winter. It will all come down to human behaviour. People may feel safer and socialise more as cases come down, sending infections up again. The virus won’t be wiped out because waning immunity means there will be a constant supply of people who are newly susceptible to the infection. Will we see more hospitalisations? Before the Omicron wave hit, about 5% of the UK population had no immunity to Covid, either through vaccination or past infection. Most of the severe disease caused by Omicron has occurred in this group of people. On the other side of the Omicron wave, there will be hardly anyone who hasn’t got some immunity from infection or vaccination and this should help to keep hospital admissions down. But Omicron is still spreading fast, with nearly four million people infected in England alone last week. While infection rates appear to have stalled in the under-50s, they are rising in older, more vulnerable age groups. It still isn’t clear how severe Omicron can be in older people who had their boosters early and may now be seeing that immunity wane. If cases keep falling, then population immunity and the arrival of new antiviral drugs that aim to slash hospitalisation rates, will help the UK emerge from the crisis. “We can definitely start planning for the future in which we are treating Covid like other diseases, but we aren’t there yet,” said Prof Rowland Kao, an infectious disease epidemiologist at the University of Edinburgh. What about NHS Test and Trace? With Omicron spreading fast and causing less severe disease, some researchers believe it is time to rethink how Test and Trace is done. “I think we are already at the point where PCR testing is a waste of resources, and contact tracing is probably a waste of resources too,” said Tim Colbourn, professor of global health systems and epidemiology at UCL. One option is to rely more on lateral flow tests and for people to message their close contacts whenever they test positive. Other measures, such as pool testing samples from groups of people, and wastewater surveillance for the virus could flag new outbreaks, Prof Kao said, while some physical distancing and mask wearing in crowded places would continue to keep cases down. “We mustn’t forget that vulnerable groups will still likely remain more vulnerable,” Kao said. Will there be more variants? More Covid variants are inevitable and, like Omicron, they will have to evade immunity to some extent to spread widely. The key to reducing the risk of new variants is driving down case rates globally, but to date, vaccine hoarding and the widespread use of boosters in wealthier countries has left vast swathes of the world under-vaccinated. New variants may emerge from mutations in Omicron or other variants that are still in circulation. Will the virus get milder as it evolves? Not necessarily. The Alpha variant was more virulent than the original Covid virus that emerged from China, and the Delta variant was more virulent still. Omicron is somewhat milder, but there is no guarantee that future variants will be. The good news is that so far, even though several variants have developed resistance to antibodies, meaning they can spread among people who have immunity, so-called T cell defences have proved far more robust. The T cell defences are crucial for preventing hospitalisations and may continue to hold up well against future variants. Will new drugs help? That’s the hope. This year, doctors will have access to at least two new antiviral drugs, Pfizer’s paxlovid and Merck’s molnupiravir. Both are aimed at those most likely to become severely ill with Covid. If taken soon enough after infection, paxlovid and molnupiravir can reduce hospitalisations by 89% and 30% respectively. “At the beginning of the pandemic, Covid was by far the leading cause of death,” said Prof Colbourn. “This year we should be able to reduce the burden of Covid by 95% of what it was then, and it could fall out of the top 10 public health problems by May or June. The next test will be the next variant.”Sunlight slants through the woodsmoke. Inside a big, fairy-lit tipi, tables are decked with candles and fresh maple branches. I’m just starting a five-day car-free break in the Chilterns, an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) with easy access by train, Metropolitan Line tube, and two new bus routes that started in August 2021. My favourite car-free walk in the area is a circuit from Tring station up the Ridgeway to Ivinghoe Beacon and back via the Ashridge Estate. I’m hoping for woodland walks, country pubs and seasonal produce, so a gourmet lunch under the trees feels like a perfect beginning. Outdoor dining company Nomadic has been hosting elegant meals here in Shrubs Wood for three years, sourcing fruit, veg and herbs from its garden nearby. Today’s fungi-themed feast starts with a walk through the trees. Professional foragers Izzy (@rightsforweeds) and Ru (@londonwildfruits) lead us from glade to glade like woodland elves, pointing out edible and deadly toadstools with equal delight. They are particularly enthusiastic about a little row of hare’s-foot inkcaps, which range from a bullet-shaped bulb to a tall, upturned parasol, showing the “stages of mushroom morphology”. Lunch includes truffle-laced shiitake soup, hen of the woods on toast, roast halibut topped with ceps and chanterelles, and a pear and apple compote from the orchard. It’s clearly a winning formula: despite the eye-watering price tag of £99, everyone I talk to here to has been at least once before. Nomadic plans to kick off 2022’s feasts with some Valentine-themed meals in February and regular lunch dates from March, including events surrounded by April bluebells. Getting here without a car helps both atmosphere and appetite. Bus 105 from Amersham stops 20 minutes away, or Nomadic can recommend a taxi from Chalfont and Latimer, but I decide to walk three miles from Chorleywood station, along my first short stretch of the long-distance Chiltern Way, which rambles for more than 100 miles through the AONB. I follow the route into the woods along Old Shire Lane. Squirrels chase each other through the chestnut branches, dislodging twinkling showers of last night’s rain on to shiny conkers that line the path like cobblestones. A jay, pink with a flash of turquoise, lands nearby, red kites circle the sky and a tiny fieldmouse scurries into the long grass. Red kites, with their forked tails and 1.5-metre wingspans, were reintroduced in the Chilterns in the early 1990s and there are now more than 1,000 breeding pairs. It’s a great walk until I leave the Chiltern Way and spend the last three minutes dodging into roadside holly bushes to avoid the vans on flooded Gorelands Lane. A welcome drink by the campfire, involving crème de châtaigne liqueur and marigold petals, goes straight to my head. The other guests are still toasting marshmallows and sipping pine needle tea round the bonfire as, four hours later, I shoulder my rucksack again and head round the corner to the Chilterns Open Air Museum (adult £7.50 online, coam.org.uk). This veteran collection of reconstructed local buildings has fruit-laden trees in the orchards, pumpkins and corn dollies in a mission room, and marrows for sale in the shop. But it’s not all thatched barns and cottages with patchwork bedspreads; there’s a tollhouse from High Wycombe and a prefab bungalow from Amersham, wartime Nissen huts and even an Edwardian cast-iron public loo. With Pinewood Studios nine miles away, the museum is a favourite film location. I’m staying in the village of Chalfont St Giles, another mile along the Chiltern Way. The cheerful White Hart Inn, near the Quaker hamlet of Jordans, is a modern pub that offers an age-old-coaching-inn vibe with real ales and weathered beams; bedrooms are in annexes off the grassy beer garden (doubles from about £60 room only or £75 B&amp;B, greenekinginns.co.uk). There are plenty of fancier places to stay in the Chilterns, but big, ready-to-ramble breakfasts and seriously comfortable beds make it a good walkers’ base. There’s food in the evenings too, with a classic pub-grub menu (£16.99 for three courses) and seasonal specials such as maple-and-rosemary-glazed plum pannacotta or an autumn spritz that mixes sloe gin, Aperol and prosecco. There’s a bus stop outside the pub, but my first day’s walking is a circuit from the door, partly along the River Misbourne, which spends a little too much time within earshot of the main road. This is one of several routes near chalk streams in the Chilterns. The most rewarding is the 10-mile Chess Valley walk from Rickmansworth to Chesham, passing close to Chenies Manor, with its brick chimneys and gables and borders of lavender and cranesbill (£6, cheniesmanorhouse.co.uk). The highlight of today’s walk is a visit to the old cottage where John Milton lived and finished Paradise Lost (£7, miltonscottage.org). The poet moved here from London in 1665, escaping the great plague; his friend Thomas Ellwood hired the cottage for him, calling it “that pretty box in Giles, Chalfonte”. The cottage garden, scented with pale-pink climbing roses and flowering marjoram, echoes Milton’s descriptions of Eden. There are dark bunches of grapes hanging from the century-old vine that wraps the brickwork (“the mantling vine / Lays forth her purple grape, and gently creeps / Luxuriant”) and red apples in the little orchard. It’s only after I’ve picked one (with permission) that I notice the statue of Eve nearby and a replica snake coiled round the tree trunk. Bekonscot model village in Beaconsfield, next morning, is just as I remember it from childhood: a John Major-esque 1930s landscape of cricket on the green, trawlers in the quay and morris dancers in the town square (adult £11.30, bekonscot.co.uk). The children’s author Enid Blyton lived nearby. Her house, Green Hedges, is long gone, but a model remains at Bekonscot with a little Noddy car outside. Beaconsfield is 20 minutes from my pub by bus and half an hour from London on the train. I meet friends at the station to hike in the hills under gold-tinted beech leaves and stop at the Royal Standard of England for a pint of Chiltern pale ale. Every log-fire-warmed corner of this ancient, rambling pub is crammed with decorative details: carved bears, unicorn tapestries, stained glass, tankards and toby jugs, even the curving side of an old ship. Next day I catch bus 104 again to High Wycombe, 10 miles west, for another day of hiking and sightseeing. I stop off on the way for a picnic from Beaconsfield’s Tuesday market. Four of the Chiltern Hundreds buses link the two towns. Wycombe Museum reminds visitors that this town was once the world’s chair-making capital (free, wycombemuseum.org.uk). Many of the area’s beechwoods were planted in the 18th century to grow timber for the furniture industry. Another 10 minutes on bus 40 brings me to West Wycombe, where eccentric, 18th-century aristocrat Sir Francis Dashwood convened his Hellfire Club in caves dug out underneath the Chiltern hills (adult £8.50, hellfirecaves.co.uk). I wander a quarter of a mile into subterranean depths, past fanciful dioramas, before setting off on an undulating circuit through woods and fields, past the hilltop Dashwood Mausoleum. Something about the Chilterns seems to inspire kids’ writers in particular. Alison Uttley wrote her Little Grey Rabbit books in Beaconsfield, and my last day is spent stalking Roald Dahl through the village of Great Missenden. I ride bus 105 past valley views to Amersham and then one stop on the train. This railway from London Marylebone is great for car-free access to the Chilterns. I’ve walked at least a dozen circuits from Wendover station, most recently in May this year at the height of a late, lush bluebell season. And I’ve caught the train to Aylesbury for the market, museum, Bowie memorial and bus to Waddesdon Manor, which also has a car-free Greenway from the last station on the line and a spectacular Christmas light trail until 23 January. There’s a colourful year-round Roald Dahl museum with Willy Wonka-style gates (£4.90/£7.40 child/adult, goodjourney.org.uk) on Great Missenden High Street with leaflets outside suggesting village and countryside trails through the woods. A half-timbered house and red petrol pumps over the road feature in his stories. I follow Church Lane over the A413 to search for Dahl’s grave in the ivy-covered churchyard and find it under a bench-ringed beech tree with concrete BFG footprints in the grass nearby. Heading back to the village through parkland, I enjoy views across a lake to Missenden Abbey, where figures in white are playing croquet on the lawn. Down the road, the Nag’s Head is covered in scarlet creeper. Inside, there are low beams, autumn roses on the tables, and seasonal fruit on the menu, from stone bass with late rhubarb to chocolate with poached apricots. The 15th-century pub is adding seven new bedrooms for next year. After butternut soup and cake with blackberry sorbet, I’m ready to set off again, past time-worn brick cottages with roses and honeysuckle straggling over the doorways. Reliance on cars is the most obvious downside of this rural idyll and I’m relieved to turn off a pavement-less road into trees again, where rustling leaves eventually overtake the noise of traffic. At teatime, I’m sitting in the middle of a wood by a campfire while a blackened kettle bubbles above the flames. It feels miles from anywhere, but is just 20 minutes’ walk from Chalfont &amp; Latimer station. David Willis teaches bushcraft, which he distinguishes from survival skills as being more about love of nature. Families and small groups spend hours with him in the woods, building dens, whittling spoons and rubbing sticks to make fire (£95pp, £150 family, davidwillis.info). He points out the different tactile qualities of the trees around us: claw-marked cherry trunks, muscular hornbeams, soft larch needles. There are badgers living nearby, and squirrels race past with sweet chestnuts. As I walk back towards the train, two roe deer stand transfixed in a sunset field of stubble and mewing buzzards wheel slowly over the woods. Bus travel was provided by Carousel. Accommodation was provided by the White Hart. More information at visitbuckinghamshire.org and visitchilterns.co.uk Nomadic’s next feasts take place in the afternoons and evenings 12-14 February with a Valentine’s theme, then amid bluebells 27 April-7 MayNow arguably more than ever, it’s hard to predict what will and won’t connect with cinemagoers over the next 12 months, a tumultuous time of uncertainty extending until an unknowable date. While the rough release schedule is more than certain to change (a number of January releases have already moved as a result of Omicron), what it does do is show us what the industry is banking on right now, outside of the bread-and-butter business of superheroes. Here’s a look at what you’ll be seeing the most of in 2022: Whodunnits It seems odd that a genre as reliably rewarding as the whodunnit was ever not in fashion but after star-packed murder mysteries dominated the multiplex throughout the 70s and 80s, the years since saw a retreat to the small screen. It took Kenneth Branagh’s lavish, if creatively redundant, remake of Murder on the Orient Express to remind studios of audience interest, making a shock $351m worldwide back in 2017. This year sees the belated follow-up, a redo of Death on the Nile with a slightly less impressively starry cast – Penélope Cruz, Johnny Depp, Judi Dench and Michelle Pfeiffer replaced with Gal Gadot, Armie Hammer, Russell Brand and Annette Bening – landing in February. Later this year will also see a Netflix sequel to Rian Johnson’s 2019 hit Knives Out, officially untitled as of now but tentatively called Knives Out 2 because probably, bringing back Daniel Craig and sending him to Greece to find a killer from a cast including Kathryn Hahn, Edward Norton, Janelle Monáe and Kate Hudson. The streamer paid over $450m for the rights to the franchise. Saoirse Ronan and Sam Rockwell will also hunt for a murderer in the West End in See How They Run, with a cast of suspects including Ruth Wilson, David Oyelowo and Adrien Brody. A high school reunion ends in murder in the comedy Reunion which stars Jillian Bell and Lil Rel Howery (a set-up that’s almost identical to Apple’s new series The Afterparty with Tiffany Haddish and Ilana Glazer) while Adam Sandler and Jennifer Aniston are currently filming Murder Mystery 2 for Netflix so that could also be a late addition. Slashers Another once-prolific genre that then fell out of favour, the slasher has seen a surprise resurgence in the past few years thanks to the box office success of Happy Death Day and the return of Halloween. Cheaply produced and based on an easily replicated formula, it’s also found its obvious place within the world of streaming with Netflix’s Fear Street trilogy and There’s Someone Inside Your House and Amazon’s I Know What You Did Last Summer remake. This month sees the inevitable return of Ghostface in Scream, a much-anticipated franchise-restarter bringing back the original Campbell-Cox-Arquette trio for more meta mayhem (if it makes as much as analysts predict it could lead to even more slashers in 2023). Next month, Leatherface follows suit in Texas Chainsaw Massacre, a tortured production sold to Netflix during the pandemic, another attempt to relaunch the grimy gore-heavy series, with Don’t Breathe’s Fede Alvarez involved as writer-producer and Eighth Grade’s Elsie Fisher starring. Michael Myers will also be making his “final” stab at killing Laurie Strode, AKA Jamie Lee Curtis, later in the year with Halloween Ends but the mammoth box office for his return might extend the originally envisioned trilogy. There’s also the intriguing prospect of an A24 slasher from Cat Person’s Kristen Roupenian called Bodies, Bodies, Bodies about a game that goes awry starring Maria Bakalova, Amandla Stenberg and Pete Davidson. Cerebral sci-fi While science-fiction that tackles something a little chewier than whether Godzilla or Kong can punch the hardest is never exactly not a thing, the next year provides a steadier stream than usual of options aiming more for mind over matter. After a premiere at Cannes last summer, Columbus director Kogonada’s After Yang will hit cinemas in March, a quiet drama with Colin Farrell and Jodie Turner-Smith about a family trying to save their live-in robot from extinction. David Cronenberg returns later this year with Crimes of the Future, a horror-tinged sci-fi tale set in a distant future where people explore “the limitless potential of transhumanism”, said people including Kristen Stewart and Viggo Mortensen. Cronenberg’s son Brandon will also follow his well-received Sundance hit Possessor with Infinity Pool, a thriller starring Alexander Skarsgård and Mia Goth as a rich couple who discover something unusual beyond the gates of their all-inclusive resort. Yorgos Lanthimos is also reuniting with The Favourite screenwriter Tony McNamara and star Emma Stone for Poor Things, a Victorian era Frankenstein-esque tale of a woman brought back to life by a scientist who replaces her brain with that of her unborn child. One of the most intriguing big bets comes from the Mad Max director George Miller and his epic romance Three Thousand Years of Longing about a lonely scholar whose encounter with a wish-granting djinn leads to unexpected consequences. And while plot details are yet to be revealed, Jordan Peele’s mysterious new film Nope, starring Daniel Kaluuya, has debuted a poster that hints at a sci-fi mind-trip. Fan favourite sequels A look ahead at any year in the past five decades would show an unhealthy smattering of 2s, 3s and colons but in 2022, there’s a more specific form of sequel that’s set to dominate. Long-awaited, fan-petitioned follow-ups will be cosying up against the more expected superhero fare, studios betting on nostalgia to drive audiences out to the big screen or to stream. The aforementioned Scream is the first big test, to see if a 90s-born franchise can still pack ’em in, weeks before Paramount also bets on Jackass Forever, the first entry from the team since 2010. The oft-delayed Top Gun: Maverick will also test if audiences still feel the need for both speed and Tom Cruise outside of the Mission: Impossible franchise (his only fruitful endeavour these days). Reese Witherspoon’s belated return as Elle Woods in Legally Blonde 3 is allegedly set for a summer release (although recent reports suggest that might not happen) with help from Mindy Kaling scripting. Halloween will see the return of sister witches Bette Midler, Sarah Jessica Parker and Kathy Najimy in Hocus Pocus 2, after much fan speculation, haunting a new generation on Disney+ while the platform will also see Amy Adams returning as a fish-out-of-water princess in Disenchanted. And finally, Kevin Smith will complete his cult comedy trilogy with Clerks III. Bruce Willis It might be a surprise to anyone who doesn’t spend hours scouring the very bottom rows of the streaming underworld but Bruce Willis is working harder than you, I or anyone we know. His admirably consistent brand of cheaply made action thrillers is ever-expanding (he was in nine films in 2021) and in 2022, he will star in another 10 VHS-era films tailored toward the most undemanding of viewers. In the next 12 months, he will be “seen” in Gasoline Alley with Luke Wilson, Fortress 2 with Shannen Doherty, A Day to Die with Frank Grillo, The Wrong Place with Ashley Greene, Vendetta with Mike Tyson, Corrective Measures with Michael Rooker, Die Like Lovers with Dominic Purcell, White Elephant with John Malkovich, Paradise City with John Travolta and Wire Room with Kevin Dillon.Barbara Walter does not expect to see a civil war in the US of the order of the conflict that tore the nation apart in the 1860s, but that’s chiefly because civil wars are fought differently these days. And it’s about the only comfort a concerned reader can take from this sobering account of how civil wars start and are conducted in our time. Walter is a professor of international relations at the University of California, San Diego, and a consultant to various government and international agencies. She has studied civil wars and insurgencies for three decades, and iIn this book she draws on her own work and that of other researchers to produce a typology of the descent into organised domestic violence. The key concept is that of “anocracy”, a transition stage of government between autocracy and democracy. The transition can be made in either direction, and it is during the transition that most civil wars erupt. Autocracies possess sufficient powers of repression to keep potential insurgents in check; democracies allow dissidents means to effect change without resorting to violence. But when autocracies weaken, repression can fail, and when democracies ossify, the release valves get stuck. A crucial development in the road to civil war is the emergence of factions. Walter observes that in the early 20th century, civil wars were fought along lines of class and ideology. Hence the Russian revolution of 1917 and the Chinese revolution that began a decade later. But after the second world war, as the old colonial empires broke down, civil wars increasingly reflected ethnic and religious factionalisation. By the late 20th century, such fault lines lay at the heart of most civil wars. A case study to which Walter returns repeatedly is the breakup of Yugoslavia. Held together by the iron fist of Tito, who ruthlessly suppressed displays of religion and ethnicity, the country fractured spectacularly on ethnic and religious lines after his death. In that conflict, the Serbian leader Slobodan Milošević proved an archetype of another concept that Walter employs, the “ethnic entrepreneur”. Milošević turned Tito’s policy on its head, deliberately fanning ethnic and religious flames. Walter punctuates her account with recollections by individuals she has interviewed. One informant told of living in Sarajevo before the breakup began and hardly noticing the religious and ethnic differences among her neighbours. But after Milošević and his imitators engaged the propaganda machinery, the social fabric was torn asunder. Walter’s source was at home with her young son in March 1992 when the lights went out. “And then suddenly you started to hear machine guns,” she said. The factions most disposed to violence are those Walter and others call “sons of the soil”. People with deep histories in a country, traditionally rural, they resent displacement by immigrants and urban elites. When their resentments are stoked by ethnic entrepreneurs, they are much more prone to violence than other groups. And the most important driver – the “accelerant” – of recent civil wars has been social media. “Social media is every ethnic entrepreneur’s dream,” writes Walter. She finds it not at all a coincidence that the world achieved peak democracy just before social media began to proliferate, and that democracy has been in retreat ever since. She notes that on the scale researchers in her field employ, the US in the last few years has slipped into the range of anocracy. The slide commenced in the 1990s with the emergence of partisan television networks; it continued with the efflorescence of Facebook, Twitter and weaponised talk radio. And then: “Into this political morass stepped the biggest ethnic entrepreneur of all: Donald Trump.” Walter’s recounting of Trump’s assaults on decency and democracy is familiar yet still chilling. The good news is that the bad news wasn’t worse. But we haven’t seen the end of it. “America was lucky that its first modern autocratic president was neither smart nor politically experienced. Other ambitious, more effective Republicans – Tom Cotton, Josh Hawley – have taken note and will seek to do better.” So what is a democrat to do? First, concentrate on improving the performance of government. The research of Walter and her colleagues shows that politics is more important than economics in starting or preventing civil wars. She suggests federalising election laws, curtailing partisan gerrymandering, curbing unaccountable campaign contributions and eliminating the electoral college. More vaguely, she recommends that government “renew its commitment to providing for its most vulnerable citizens”. And social media must be regulated. “The US government regulates all kinds of industries – from utilities and drug companies to food processing plants – to promote the common good,” Walter writes. “For the sake of democracy and social cohesion, social media platforms should be added to the list.” Will this be enough? Walter hopes so. But she expects the domestic terrorism that has been on the rise since the Oklahoma City bombing of 1995 will continue to get worse, that insurgents and militias – the civil warriors of the 21st century – will continue to proliferate, and that demagogues like Trump will continue to encourage them. Walter relates that amid the 2020 election campaign, she and her husband, who between them possess Swiss, Canadian, Hungarian and German passports, considered their exit strategy from the US should things get really bad. They even weighed up applying for Hungarian citizenship for their daughter. It didn’t come to that. But they renewed their passports just in case. • HW Brands is professor of history at the University of Texas, Austin. How Civil Wars Start: And How to Stop Them is published by Viking. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Police in the Brazilian Amazon state of Pará are investigating the killing of three members of the same family who were shot dead at the riverside home where they bred turtles. The deaths happened on the island of Cachoeira da Mucura, on the banks of the Xingu River, in São Félix do Xingu and regional media named the victims as José Gomes, his wife Márcia Nunes Lisboa and her teenage daughter, Joane Nunes Lisboa. Police confirmed to the Guardian that they do not yet know the motive for the killings. José Carlos Rodrigues, the civil police chief leading the investigation, told the Diário do Pará newspaper that the crimes had shocked the city. On social media, environmentalists and human rights activists mourned the loss of the family. “They worked for life in the river, for life on land and for life in general. And they were killed, their lives taken with gunshots,” wrote Marina Silva, a former environment minister, in a Twitter post. The bodies were found on Sunday outside the family home in the early stages of decomposition. “Those responsible for the crimes must be identified and held accountable quickly and effectively,” said Amnesty International Brazil in a public statement. “The Brazilian state has the obligation to act to contain the wave of violence and the cycle of impunity that are perpetuated in the Amazon region and throughout the national territory.” In videos shared on social media of the crime scene, one of the bodies floats in the river, another lies fallen by its banks and another lies collapsed and barefoot in a puddle. Gomes’ son discovered the bodies. Gomes and his family bred thousands of baby turtles, which they released into the river once a year, sometimes with help from neighbours or local people. In isolated indigenous and riverine communities of Brazil’s Amazon, eating turtles is common and replenishment projects like Gomes’ have been vital to maintaining the population. In a video from December, published on the Diário do Pará website, Gomes releases buckets of baby turtles into the river, explaining how the family has done this work for 20 years. “Today, we’re trying to repopulate these baby turtles in the river so that in the future our children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren can still catch these turtles,” he said. Brazil was ranked the fourth-deadliest country for land and environmental defenders in 2020, according to a report released by the NGO Global Witness last year. Nearly three quarters of 20 killings recorded happened in Brazil’s nine Amazon states. Such murders mostly go unpunished, perpetuating a cycle of violence and impunity. Pará, which has an area five times that of the UK, has been one of Brazil’s deadliest states for land defenders, with less than 5% of land-conflict killings going to court, according to Brazil’s Pastoral Land Commission, a land violence watchdog. While murders of land and environmental defenders in Brazil have fallen since a peak in 2017, when Global Witness recorded 57 killings, the country’s far-right president, Jair Bolsonaro, has overseen a dramatic increase in deforestation in the Amazon, according to government data. São Félix do Xingu consistently tops Brazil’s most deforested municipalities, according to government data.Overpriced panic buy, transformational stroke of genius or something in between? By late May, when Newcastle visit Turf Moor for their final Premier League game of the season, the answer should be apparent. The moment Yasir al-Rumayyan agreed to trigger the £25m release clause in Chris Wood’s contract at Burnley, Newcastle’s chairman emphasised that, right now, his club have a single priority. By paying top dollar for a 30-year-old striker who has scored three goals in 18 appearances this season and whose transfer was confirmed on Thursday morning, Rumayyan indicated that the Saudi Arabian-controlled club will press every available button and flick all possible switches to avert relegation. Short-term thinking is no longer taboo. Moreover, even if the price tag dictates it is extremely difficult to have envisaged another top-tier team activating Wood’s release clause, the New Zealand centre-forward could prove an excellent addition to Eddie Howe’s side. Wood’s perhaps surprisingly eclectic taste in music variously encompasses the Kings of Leon, Dean Martin and Frank Sinatra and Howe must trust his formidable aerial presence will bring similar breadth and diversity to a struggling, frequently one-dimensional, Newcastle XI. The manager, having tried to start addressing this problem by paying up to £15m to transplant the England attacking right-back Kieran Trippier from Atlético Madrid to Tyneside last week, needed a central striker to connect with Trippier’s crosses. That forward was supposed to be Callum Wilson, a generally impressive performer during a season in which Newcastle have won one game – against Burnley – but calf trouble will sideline Wilson for eight weeks. His injury placed Howe under immense pressure, forcing a reordering of recruitment priorities, with the need for central defenders suddenly deemed less important than acquiring Wood in time for Saturday’s potentially season-defining relegation six-pointer at home to Watford. Few pundits would claim Wood is quite Wilson’s equal but he has scored 10 or more goals in each of the past four seasons for Burnley, no mean achievement in a side frequently on the back foot. Equally importantly, his removal from the Turf Moor equation at a time when Maxwel Cornet, Sean Dyche’s most gifted attacker, is representing Ivory Coast at the Africa Cup of Nations could exert a disastrous effect on Burnley’s survival hopes. With three from Norwich, Newcastle, Burnley and Watford appearing Championship-bound it could in effect rescue Howe’s team. Much hinges on Dyche’s ability to reinvest the Wood millions swiftly and successfully but he will not be easy to replace and there are fears Cornet may suffer from no longer being able to play off the former Leeds target man. Small wonder Burnley’s manager is apparently incandescent at his No 9’s departure. Or that Norwich are not overly enthusiastic about allowing their midfielder Todd Cantwell to move to St James’ Park. Wood invariably operated as part of a front two for Dyche, typically being deployed alongside Cornet or Ashley Barnes, and with Howe keen on configuring Newcastle in a 4–4-2, a partnership with the more improvisational Allan Saint-Maximin may bring out the best in the recently disappointing Frenchman. If one of Wood’s key roles will be to polish off crosses – often from Trippier – his ability to hold up the ball, press from the front and bully defenders into submission can only strengthen a Newcastle side who have scored a modest 19 goals. “He is a very dangerous attacking threat, has a physicality and character that I really like, and he has vast experience in the Premier League,” Howe said. “He will be a great fit for us.” Wood described the move as “a very exciting opportunity” and said he was determined to “repay the faith” shown by Howe and the club. Once Wilson is back, it is not inconceivable he could play alongside Wood; after all, the former did well in a wide role during a brief flirtation with a split striker system featuring Miguel Almirón as a false nine under Steve Bruce’s management last season. Back then Mike Ashley owned Newcastle and the retail magnate actively pursued a policy of buying primarily players aged under 25 possessing strong resale potential. It is impossible to imagine Ashley sanctioning Wood’s signing, let alone that of the 31-year-old Trippier, but such failure to speculate to accumulate largely explains why the club were twice relegated on his watch. Even if Wood loses his starting place on Wilson’s return, he will be deemed money well spent if he helps Newcastle avoid the fate they suffered in 2009 and 2016. Should the worst happen, Trippier and Wood are players who would be expected to excel in the second tier, helping help secure promotion at the first attempt, but no one at St James’ Park wants to contemplate that possibility. When, last October, Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund purchased a majority 80% stake in a club co-owned with the minority shareholders Amanda Staveley and Reuben Brothers, it certainly did not envisage suffering the spectacular loss of face across the Middle East which would accompany relegation. At a juncture when Paris Saint-Germain and Manchester City are thriving under the control of Saudi’s Gulf neighbours in Qatar and Abu Dhabi respectively, such a calamity would not be remotely well received in Riyadh and Jeddah. Championship football was never supposed to be part of the geopolitical soft power playbook. Newcastle are planning to fly to Saudi Arabia for a warm-weather training camp after their game at Leeds on 22 January because they have a break until their next game at home to Everton on 8 February. Back at Turf Moor, Burnley’s staff and players reportedly feel let down, if not downright betrayed, by Wood’s defection to a direct rival capable of damaging their future livelihoods. Howe, Rumayyan and Staveley must hope he exhibits similar ruthlessness in front of goal.You may need a stiff drink to believe this. Last October, a new record was set: a cask of Macallan 1991 whisky sold for a cool $2.33m. At least this was an entire cask of premium liquor: earlier last year, a luxury case of 30-year-old Irish malt featuring a gold Fabergé egg was auctioned off for $2m, only slightly more than a single bottle of scotch at the end of 2019. Is whisky really worth 2m big ones? As any economist will tell you, the value of something is determined by how much someone is prepared to pay for it, and all that money sloshing around at the top has to go somewhere. The crises of our time have been kind to the uber-rich: while British workers have suffered a near unprecedented squeeze in their wages, the richest 1,000 people saw their fortunes double in the first seven years after the financial crash. Covid has proved little different: Britain produced a record number of new billionaires in the pandemic, while their US counterparts enjoyed almost a two-thirds jump in their wealth during the first 18 months of the crisis. At $4.8tn, the combined fortunes of US billionaires are almost equivalent to the size of the entire Japanese economy. It’s not just expensive bottles of whisky attracting the wallets of the thriving mega-rich. When the Chinese billionaire Cheung Chung-kiu snapped up a 62,000 sq ft mansion in Hyde Park for a cool $275m back in 2020, he understandably wanted to make sure it was just right, so last year he commenced a renovation estimated to cost nearly as much as the original asking price. Last year, 11 Picassos were auctioned off in Las Vegas for $100m, while a 1958 Ferrari found a new home in exchange for $6m. Perhaps such ludicrously expensive items will provoke baffled shrugs.Wealthy people splash their seemingly limitless fortunes on frivolous items with extortionate price tags – so what? Sure, it’s a symptom of the growth in wealth inequality since the 1980s, encouraged by the decline in progressive taxation, the deregulation of finance, the shattered power of trade unions, diluted antitrust legislation, and the rise of large quasi-monopolistic businesses such as Facebook and Amazon. No, a hyperactive work ethic and dazzling entrepreneurial acumen does not explain the explosion in billionaires’ wealth during the pandemic: no-strings government help for businesses and quantitative easing policies that drove up asset prices are more plausible explanations. And, yes, watching the wealth collectively produced by the hard graft of billions of people hoovered up by a select few is undoubtedly a moral affront. But does it matter? The simple answer is yes. Buying whisky for $2m doesn’t simply underline an inverse correlation between money and sense on the part of the super-rich: it represents the red lights flashing on the dashboard of an entire economic model. Gary Stevenson should know: formerly Citibank’s most profitable trader, he made millions betting against economic recovery after Lehman Brothers detonated in the heart of the financial sector. Among the bigwigs of big finance, the consensus was that near-zero interest rates were an extraordinary measure that would be soon reversed as the economy recovered. But Stevenson was a dissenter: he believed the continued parlous state of the economy would halt any interest rate hikes. The reason? Because when ordinary people receive money, they spend it, stimulating the economy, while the wealthy tend to save it. But our economic model promotes the concentration of wealth among a select few at the expense of everybody else’s living standards. If working-class people don’t have the money to spend, they won’t; and as they’re plunged into debt simply to cover their families’ cost of living, consumer demand is sucked out of an economy based upon it. In an amusing paradox, Stevenson’s belief that inequality was crippling the economy literally made him millions. As Stevenson emphasised, the super-rich tend not to invest all that hoovered up wealth into productive parts of the economy: they instead throw it at property or, yes, $2m bottles of whisky, driving up asset prices. “What you have to understand is that saving is not the same as investing,” the chartered accountant Richard Murphy says. “Investment is the creation of new capacity to undertake economic activity, which is almost universally funded by new bank loans. It’s very rarely funded by share capital, except generally with very small microbusinesses.” The entire economy has been designed to funnel wealth generated by the team effort of millions into the bank accounts of a tiny few, whose whims and hobby horses have no social value whatsoever. While many people have experienced bereavement, loneliness and insecurity during the pandemic, Covid-19 has proved just the latest lucrative boon for billionaires’ wealth portfolios. And that’s why an economic case – rather than simply a moral case – for a wealth tax desperately needs to be made. All that wealth could play a pivotal role in the post-Covid recovery. It could be put towards drastically expanding the capacity of the NHS, ventilating all schools and businesses, and funding the transition to a green economy. Instead, a tiny elite are clocking up many more billions just by sitting on their assets, frittering wealth away on $2m bottles of whisky featuring gold Fabergé eggs. It’s not simply immoral: it’s utterly irrational. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistThey were two good young batsmen knocking around the little New Zealand town of Masterton in the late 90s and back then no one was sure which was better. The first was Ross Taylor, the other was Jesse Ryder, five months younger, who lived in Carterton, 10 miles down the road. Ryder would open the batting and Taylor played in the middle order, No 4 or 5. They stayed that way as they rose through the age grades, for Central Districts, the national academy and under-19 teams, right on up into the Test team, where, in 2009, they set a record on sharing a 271-run partnership against India in Napier. Ryder went on to make 201, Taylor 151. Taylor has just finished his 112th and last Test; an innings victory over Bangladesh in Christchurch. Maybe you’ve seen the clips online, the honour guard as he came in to bat, the standing ovation as he walked off after being caught at square-leg for 28. Or the finish. Late on the third day, with Bangladesh nine wickets down in the second innings and still a hundred and plenty runs away from making New Zealand bat again, the crowd began to call out to the captain, Tom Latham, to bring Taylor on to bowl. Taylor hadn’t done that in a Test match in eight years, but he grinned and turned his arm over a couple of times in a mock warm-up. Then fate intervened. The umpires decided New Zealand needed to bring a spinner on because the light was fading. “I guess that left one decision,” Latham said. He gave the ball to Taylor. Ebadot Hossain was batting, and, by his own standards, he was in nick After a run of 10 consecutive noughts, Hossain had just hit the first four of his Test career, off Kyle Jamieson, which made this his highest score for Bangladesh. He blocked Taylor’s first ball, patted back his second, then had an almighty heave at his third, which he hit high into the leg-side. Latham took the catch. So Taylor’s last act in Test cricket was the match-winning wicket. “It couldn’t be scripted any better,” Latham said. It wasn’t the perfect finish. Taylor had passed that up six months earlier, when he hit the winning runs in New Zealand’s victory over India in the inaugural World Test Championship. But it was a good one, and fitting, because it ended with him grinning and being mobbed by his teammates. That’s better than most players get. Take Ryder. He played his last Test in December 2011. His numbers speak to his talent, 18 Tests, 1,269 runs at an average just under 41, and three centuries. He played his last international match three years later, an ODI victory against India in January 2014. That month he struck a century off 46 balls against West Indies. They called him up to the Test squad off the back of it, but dropped him again after he stayed out late drinking one evening. New Zealand still wanted him in their World Cup team in 2015, until he pulled out of an A tour to the UAE for personal reasons. Ryder had all the talent, just as much as Taylor ever did, but he never could find a way around his problems. Ryder was still playing first-class cricket for Central Districts in 2018. Then they cut him. After that he was working as a player-coach for Napier Technical Old Boys and led them to back-to-back national club titles, but the last time he was in the papers it was because he had been caught drunk-driving in March 2020. Taylor and Ryder set on similar paths. Taylor is half-Samoan. The reason he has gone by Ross all these years is because his first headmaster couldn’t get his tongue around his first name, Luteru. “I guess there weren’t too many Polynesian kids in Masterton in those days,” he said. “After a while they gave up and said: ‘Just call him Ross.’” Ryder is half-Māori. Both played their way up in the world after being talent spotted on the junior circuit, Taylor’s talents earned him a spot at Palmerston North Boys’ High School, and Ryder was sent to Napier Boys’ High School. But they ended up walking very different journeys. They say Taylor had the advantage of a stable family around him and Ryder didn’t. Taylor had a strength, certainly, that helped him through the hard moments he faced along the way. He stepped away from international cricket in 2013 after he was sacked from the captaincy in late-2012 by Mike Hesson, in a row that split New Zealand cricket right down the middle. Taylor was averaging 50 at the time and had just hit 142 and 74 to win a Test against Sri Lanka in Colombo. Hesson always insisted he had meant to replace Taylor only as captain of the white-ball side, but in the end, Brendon McCullum took over in all three formats. Taylor came back and ended up having his best year in Test cricket as a batsman to that point. If that decision was a turning point for the national team, who made two World Cup finals as well as winning that World Test Championship, in the years afterwards, it was partly because of the way Taylor was able to readjust. After that he came through injuries, eye surgery and a slump in form to finish as New Zealand’s all-time leading run-scorer. He earned his happy ending.Extreme Republicans loyal to Donald Trump and his “big lie” that the 2020 election was rigged have formed a nationwide alliance aiming to take control of the presidential election process in key battleground states that could determine the outcome of the 2024 presidential race. At least eight Republicans who are currently running to serve as chief election officials in crucial swing states have come together to form the coalition. The group shares conspiracy theories about unfounded election fraud and exchanges ideas on how radically to reconstruct election systems in ways that could overturn the legitimate results of the next presidential race. All of them backed Trump’s efforts to subvert the 2020 election and cling on to power against the will of American voters. Several of the alliance have been personally endorsed by Trump and have a credible shot at winning the post of secretary of state – the most powerful election officer in each state. The existence of the “coalition of America First secretary of state candidates” was disclosed by one of the members themselves, Jim Marchant who is running for secretary of state in Nevada. A former business owner and Nevada state assembly member, Marchant has ties with the QAnon conspiracy theory movement. Marchant ran for a US House seat in 2020 and lost. He challenged the result unsuccessfully in the courts, claiming he was a “victim of election fraud”, in a mirror-image of Trump’s many failed legal challenges to his defeat. In an interview with the Guardian, Marchant said that there were currently eight members of the coalition bidding for chief election official posts, with more likely to join soon. He said participants included Jody Hice in Georgia, Mark Finchem in Arizona and Kristina Karamo in Michigan – all three of whom have been endorsed by Trump. Marchant also named Rachel Hamm in California and David Winney in Colorado, and said that further members were likely to be recruited imminently in Wisconsin and Minnesota. Several in-person “summits” of the candidates had already been held, with the next planned in Wisconsin on 29 January and Nevada on 26 February. All the candidates named by Marchant have been prominent exponents of false claims that the 2020 election was fraudulent. Finchem attended the “Stop the Steal” rally in Washington on January 6 hours before the US Capitol was stormed. Hice is running for secretary of state in Georgia against the Republican incumbent, Brad Raffensperger, who famously rebuffed Trump’s demands in the 2020 count to “find 11,780 votes” that would tip the state to him. Marchant, Karamo and Finchem all spoke at a QAnon conference in Las Vegas in October. The disclosure that extremist Republicans dedicated to election subversion have formed a network was first revealed by Steve Bannon, Trump’s former chief strategist in the White House who is spearheading a “precinct-by-precinct” movement to inject far-right activists into local elected office. Marchant disclosed the alliance on Bannon’s War Room podcast. The revelation can only heighten jitters about the fragile state of American democracy. An NPR analysis of 2022 secretary of state races across the country found that at least 15 candidates have adopted Trump’s big lie. Jena Griswold, Colorado’s secretary of state and chair of the Democratic Association of Secretaries of State, told the Guardian that democracy would be on the ballot in this November’s midterm elections. “Extreme members of the GOP are taking a sledgehammer to our democratic system. The big lie coalition of candidates running for secretary of state has pushed election conspiracies, authored dangerous voter suppression legislation, or attended the January 6 insurrection,” Griswold said. The nature of the threat posed by the new coalition is illustrated by Marchant. In the course of the 2020 election, he declared that had he been secretary of state at that time he would have refused to certify Joe Biden’s victory in Nevada by 33,596 votes, even though the count was unanimously approved by the Nevada supreme court. Marchant was also an eager advocate of sending an alternate slate of Trump electors to Congress in blatant contravention of the official vote count. Asked by the Guardian whether he would be prepared to do the same again in 2024, by sending an alternate slate of electors from Nevada to Congress contrary to the actual election results, he said: “That is very possible, yes.” Marchant told the Guardian that were he to win election in November and become the top election official in his state, he would act swiftly to introduce voter suppression measures. That would include introducing voter ID – “a no-brainer”, he said. He would also eradicate mail-in ballots which have been extensively blamed by conspiracy theorists, without evidence, as a source of mass fraud in 2020, and open up election counts to “aggressive poll watching”. And he would scrap electronic voting machines – also targeted by big lie advocates – and replace them with paper counts. When asked for evidence that voting machines had been manipulated to benefit Biden over Trump, Marchant pointed to Mesa county, Colorado. He said that “a very brave clerk suspected a lot of stuff going on by people who could get to the machines” and found that “clear crimes” had been committed. In fact, the clerk, Tina Peters, was recently stripped of her election duties after she was found to have sneaked an unauthorized individual into a secure room where voting machines were stored in order to copy their hard drives. The stolen information was then presented at a conspiracy theory event organized by the MyPillow executive Mike Lindell, a major proponent of the big lie. The Guardian asked Marchant who was manipulating the voting machines. He replied: “I don’t know actually. I think it’s a global thing. The people in power want to maintain their power.” The near-universal dismissal of all court challenges to the 2020 election results, including his own case, was explained by Marchant as the work of corrupt judges. “A lot of judges were bought off too – they are part of this cabal,” he said. What would he say to the criticism that his actions and those of his fellow coalition members, like those of Trump himself, were the behavior of sore losers? “I disagree,” Marchant said. “We have a lot of evidence. It is out there. Shoot, you can find it.”That’s where we’ll wrap up this blog for the day. Here’s a recap of today’s main stories: The Novak Djokovic visa saga looks set to drag into another day, with the Australian Open draw delayed this afternoon, and Scott Morrison declining to comment on the case but making clear that he expects his government’s policies regarding vaccine exemptions to be followed. NSW records 92,264 Covid cases and 22 deaths; Victoria reports 37,169 cases and 25 deaths; Queensland records 14,914 cases and six deaths; Tasmania reports 1,100 cases; the ACT reports 1,020 cases, the NT 550 cases and Western Australia two cases. Scott Morrison announced further easing of restrictions on close contacts in some industries, in an attempt to keep businesses open. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, confirmed that his government will extend the ability for essential workers in the emergency services, education, critical utilities, custodial facilities and transport and freight sectors to forgo close contact isolation if they are asymptomatic. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, announced that from 1am Saturday all Queensland border requirements will be scrapped as the state heads towards 90% full vaccination. Australia Open ticket sales will be paused at 50% capacity. Thanks for reading. McGowan has continued, announcing an expansion to the proof of vaccination requirements. There are now a host of venues that will also require proof of vaccination for entry, including: All hospitality venues (road houses, service stations and takeaway are exempt) Gyms, fitness centres and health studios Visitors to public and private hospitals and aged care facilities Indoor entertainment venues Bottle shops Crown Perth complex Major stadiums Amusements parks and zoos Music festivals and large events with more than 500 people (unless exempt) Vaccination status can be provided through the Service WA app, or through physical certificate of vaccination. The Western Australian premier, Mark McGowan, is up now, and has announced the state is reporting two new locally acquired cases, and 14 travel-related cases. One of the new cases is a household contact of a previous case, and the other is a new case linked to the Hyatt Regency hotel cluster. Both of the new cases are in quarantine, with investigations ongoing into how one of the two cases from yesterday acquired the virus. Good evening, Mostafa Rachwani with you for a short while tonight. I’m off into the hot Melbourne night, but Mostafa Rachwani is here to keep you company. The Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, representing many mid-sized firms, offered a qualified support for the eased close-contact rules but said more needed to be done. ACCI executive Andrew McKellar said: Until supply constraints on rapid antigen tests are resolved, many employees caught up in isolation requirements will still be unable to return to work. It’s disappointing that National Cabinet did not extend the changes to other sectors. Thousands of businesses around the country have not been able to open or trade at full capacity since the onset of Omicron. It is likely we will need to revisit the scope of these measures over coming weeks. And, to echo those organisations noting the government has had months to sort out RATs, McKellar said: We have been calling for rapid antigen tests to be freely and widely available for Australians, small business and other industry settings since September last year. And there’s more to be done on the visa front, he said, also a refrain we’re likely to hear more of. Common sense changes to temporarily lift visa work right restrictions will allow thousands of visa holders to work additional hours and plug some of the staff shortages that continue to cripple businesses across the country. I’ve updated the summary post above, but realised we neglected to provide the South Australia and Tasmania Covid numbers earlier today. South Australia recorded 3,669 new cases, 225 hospitalisations and four more deaths –two men in their 80s and two women in their 70s. Tasmania recorded 1,100 new cases, 23 hospitalisations, and no new deaths. So Australia could be about to set a new record for the country’s hottest day. Onslow, in the WA Pilbara region, has hit 50.7C – the equal hottest day. And remember, it’s only just hit mid-afternoon in the west. Here’s our full story on the Morrison press conference and his general comments about non-citizens – like Novak Djokovic – who try to come to Australia without being fully vaccinated, via Paul Karp. It is never funny when someone tests positive to Covid. But it is close to funny when it is Australian tennis player Bernard Tomic, who on Tuesday made a bet with a chair umpire that he would buy him them dinner if he didn’t have Covid. Tomic made the fairly weird – but entirely correct – prediction during a first round loss in Australian Open qualifiers, complaining he should have been tested before taking to the court. Here’s the report on his positive test: And here is footage of Tomic making a bet with the chair umpire. A 10-pack of rapid antigen tests to anyone who can confirm whether the chair umpire will now buy Tomic dinner. The Council of Small Business Organisation Australia are among the business groups not satisfied by the PM’s media conference today. While the range of industries where staff can return to work with a RAT result has been significantly expanded, many have missed out, such as hospitality or hair care, the council’s chief executive, Alexi Boyd, said. “What we’ve been saying in the last few days is that every business and every small business is essential right now,” Boyd, who joined the consultations with governments in recent days, said. It was frustrating for the government “to turn around and say, at this stage, for small businesses that are going through so much, they are not essential”. Potentially hundreds of thousands of businesses employing many thousands of workers have been left out, she said, and there are many new rules to quickly understand. According to Boyd, many of those excluded actually make up the supply chain to industries that were included in the eased conditions over isolation. She said: It’s another set of circumstances that small businesses need to navigate and understand and unpack. What we need now is Safe Work Australia to make it abundantly clear what the consequences are for employers, and making sure that what they do meets the requirements of Safe Work. Here is a full story on the more than $60m spent by the federal government on RATs, via Anne Davies. We didn’t miss anything profound from the Australian Open draw re Djokovic, it seems: And Djokovic has been drawn in the first round of the Australian Open to face another Serbian player ... Well, although there has been much ado about nothing when it comes to Novak Djokovic today, despite the Australian Open draw being rescheduled and the prime minister, Scott Morrison, giving a press conference, here is some almost-sort-of-news: Labor reckons the tennis star shouldn’t have been let into the country. Human Rights Watch has just published its annual world report, which has, again, criticised Australia over “serious human rights issues”. The report was critical of Australia’s record on Indigenous incarceration, the travel restrictions associated with Covid, and the treatment of people with a disability and older Australians. For the first time, Human Rights Watch focused on climate, an area where Australia was found particularly wanting. The report criticised Australia’s per capita emissions, among the worst in the globe, its huge exports of fossil fuels, and the tax breaks afforded to fossil fuel companies, which have increased 48% since the Paris agreement in 2015. The report yet again slammed Australia’s treatment of asylum seekers and refugees, including those transferred to Australia and detained in hotel rooms for extended periods, where “access to sunlight, space to exercise, and fresh air is limited”. The plight of asylum seekers was given recent global exposure by the short-term detention of tennis star Novak Djokovic. Human Rights Watch Australia researcher, Sophie McNeill, said the world increasingly struggled to comprehend why Australia took such “backwards” stances on issues like climate and asylum seekers. She told Guardian Australia: Increasingly, the rest of the world and Australians are just saying ‘this is unacceptable, we can’t continue like this’. We’re now seeing that with Australia’s climate policy, you’re increasingly getting that realisation around the world how backwards Australia is on this. The Djokovic issue has also reminded us that we’re also this way on asylum seekers. We’ll have a full story on the report up soon. Supermarket chain Woolworths has joined its major competitor Coles in reimposing purchase limits. The company has limited purchases of toilet paper and painkillers to two per customer, both in stores and online. In addition, in Western Australian stores there is a limit of two packs of mince, sausages or chicken products “due to signs of excessive buying”. An existing limit of one pack of rapid antigen tests per customer remains in place. Coles has limits in place for meat and chicken products. Woolworths said demand for products was high and its supply chain was still suffering from high rates of staff absence due to the Omicron wave. Woolworths’ director of stores, Jeanette Fenske, said: We understand this is an anxious time for our customers across the country but we will remain open and operational as an essential service. We will continue to closely monitor product availability across our stores, with stock continuing to be sent to stores daily. Customers will notice some gaps on shelves but we’re doing all that we can to meet demand. We encourage everyone to be mindful of others in the community and to continue shopping in reasonable quantities. Circling back on something fairly important from that press conference: Morrison said that from 24 January concession card holders would be able to obtain free RATs from the pharmacy. People will able to access 10 tests in total over three months with a maximum of five a month. The tests will be jointly funded by the federal and state and territory governments, with Morrison saying supplies are limited. Morrison ends the press conference with: Thank you very much, everyone. One last thing, I hope you can indulge me in this. Happy anniversary, Jenny. Hope to see you soon. Morrison goes on: That relates to people who are coming to Australia. These are noncitizens, nonresidents, are visa holders and may have acquired a visa recently, they may have acquired a visa some time ago, and be returning, when some of these issues weren’t even standing at the time. It’s important to distinguish between the visa and the condition to enter the border. They aren’t ... the same thing. You can ... be a citizen or resident returning ... and what happens after that will depend on vaccination status and so on, if you are a citizen or resident, of course you could come back into your own country but you would have to quarantine in those circumstances. If you’re not a citizen or resident, the health rules we have in place to protect our borders and our border protection policies have been central to the government’s achievements ... and Australia’s achievements generally in having one of the lowest death rates, strongest economies and highest vaccination rates in the country. Morrison is asked a general question by our own Paul Karp in very hypothetical terms, whether someone who is a non-citizen and unvaccinated should be able to stay in Australia. Morrison says: Given the other matters considered at the moment, all I will simply say is the reason we have had since 15 December where fully vaccinated eligible visa holders could travel to Australia without needing to apply for a travel exemption and enter those states allowing them to enter quarantine free, the individual has to show they are double vaccinated or must provide acceptable proof that they can’t be vaccinated for medical reasons. That’s the policy which hasn’t changed. That is the policy and we would expect authorities to be implementing the policy of the government when it comes to those matters. Morrison has been asked a couple of times about whether the Australian Defence Force can help out in aged care and other workforces under the pump with Omicron. He says he wants to: ... dispel the notion the defence force can come in and replace workforces across the country. Whether it be aged care or healthcare or transport or in food production or anything like that. The defence force can provide very important support. The general is a case in point [referring to Lt Gen John Frewen]. Scott Morrison is finally asked about a decision on the visa for the Australian Open defending champion Novak Djokovic. He refers to the most recent statement from the immigration minister, Alex Hawke –which said the decision was still being considered – and says he will not comment further. Morrison and Kelly are asked about potential peak case loads. Morrison says that modelling work was presented today relating to NSW to get an understanding on how the return to school may impact the workforce. Kelly describes the NSW data as “levelling off” but says the current case numbers are “not the full picture” of the actual situation in the state, given the recent inclusion of RAT results. Paul Kelly says on the same question that “it’s very important to know we can’t protect everyone”. Morrison is asked about the record number of deaths being seen during the Omicron wave, despite it being considered milder than Delta. He says it’s simple maths: more infections means more deaths, even with a less serious variant: When it comes to fatality numbers, over 2,500, that is obviously devastating. But at the same time, when you compare with the rest of the world, Australia still has one of the lowest death rates of Covid of any country in the world. Scott Morrison is up for questions. First up he is asked about access to RATs. He says the federal government has been stockpiling these since August. Resources are being focused on the health and aged care workforce, he says. Frewen says 1,700 of the 2,519 aged care centres in the country have been visited by booster programs. Frewen says yesterday was a record day for boosters (254,000) and for jabs in the primary care network. Up steps the Covid taskforce commander, Lt Gen John Frewen. A fascinating little stat from Kelly: about half of all the infections we have had in Australia since the start of the pandemic have occurred this year (ie in the past fortnight). Morrison says: The goal is not to stop everyone in the country from getting Covid, the goal is to protect our hospitals and keep our society and economy functioning as we ride this latest wave of Omicron. He then hands over to the chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly. Morrison says that while he and the other states understand why Queensland and South Australia are delaying the start of the school year to cope with Omicron outbreaks: The first principle is that childcare and schools are essential and should be first to open and last to close wherever possible and face-to-face learning prioritised. Morrison says the changes to close contact rules, allowing people to return to work without isolating once they return a negative RAT result, has been extended to multiple industries, including transport, freight and logistics employees, food logistics, all healthcare and support, emergency services, including law enforcement, correctional services, energy resources and water, waste management, food, beverage and other critical good supplies (but not hospitality), telecommunications, data, broadcasting and media. He says it will also extend to education and childcare, but will speak further on this. The prime minister says the fact people can be infected multiple times with Omicron means it is “ridiculous” to want to be infected. Reports of the parties emerged in Queensland earlier this week. He says: All this nonsense about Covid parties, it is ridiculous. Reinfection can occur with Omicron. So if you think you can go out there and get the virus and get it over with, that is not how it works. That is not how the virus is writing the rules. He says there has already been good feedback on changes to close contact rules as they apply to essential workers: We are already getting feedback on those measures, particularly in the supermarket distribution systems are already having a positive impact. We need to go further ... Remember you are a close contact if you have somebody in your own accommodation setting that has the virus. That is when you are close contact. Morrison emphasises that the idea of people being a close contact once visiting exposure sites is a Delta problem, not an Omicron problem. The key point we wanted to stress today, and I want to stress today, is this is a constantly moving target. We know what we have to hit, keeping our hospitals going, keeping our health system strong and keeping as many people at work. The less restrictions you put on people to get them to work, the more pressure that could potentially put on your hospital system. And vice versa. He adds: This is a constant daily process of balancing the need to keep people at work and to protect our hospitals. And that is why it changes almost daily. Because this balance changes daily. Morrison also suggests NSW may be beyond its peak of Omicron cases. He has described the national cabinet meeting as “a very good discussion”. The prime minister is setting out some broad concepts about the current state of play. Morrison says: We have to be very clear about our objectives. What is it that all of these measures are designed to achieve that was set up very clearly in the national plan? The objective in this phase of dealing with the pandemic is to minimise serious illness, hospitalisations and fatalities. And to maintain restrictions to support that goal. The idea that our measures, as governments across the country, is to prevent everybody in the country from being infected with the virus, that is not the objective. That is not a realistic objective and not practical. Nowhere in the world are they trying to achieve that. That is not something that we are trying to achieve. What we’re trying to achieve is to ensure that we can keep hospitals under the least pressure that can possibly be put on them. That we can maintain the strength of our hospitals due to this pandemic and recognise that, of course, our hospitals and health systems are under significant strain at the present. That is unavoidable. He is joined by Prof Paul Kelly and Lt Gen John Frewen. Blimey. Our own Peter Hannam tells me the only hotter days on record are: 50.7 degrees at Oodnadatta, South Australia, on 2 January 1960, 50.3 degrees at the same place a day later, and 50.5 degrees at Mardie in WA on 19 February 1998. Through his private investment company, Consolidated Press Holdings, James Packer has welcomed a sweetened bid for Crown Resorts by US private equity group Blackstone. CPH owns 37% of Crown, representing a $3.1bn payday for the billionaire if the deal goes through. In a statement, CPH said: CPH is encouraged by today’s announcement and awaits further developments. CPH will review all documents released to the market by Crown Resorts relating to a binding control transaction prior to making a decision regarding its shareholding. The assets of Crown Resorts are world class and this is reflected in the significant interest in the company. You can read more about the takeover bid here: OK, so Scott Morrison at 3.45pm. Delayed Australian Open draw at 4.15pm. Reports now that the Australian Open draw will take place at 4.15pm. Exactly 30 minutes after the prime minister is due to speak. Sources inside Sydney’s Villawood detention centre say the Covid-19 outbreak at the facility is rampant, with nearly 70 infections – a tenfold increase in two days. Since Tuesday, when there were six cases, the Australian Border Force has refused to answer questions on how many Covid infections have been registered among the 450 people held within the nation’s largest immigration detention centre. But several people inside the centre have told Guardian Australia that they understand there are at least 68 confirmed positive cases – a number that is expected to grow further among a population with a significantly lower vaccination rate than the rest of the country. You can read more on this story here: We know there’s been a bit of extreme weather around Australia of late, not just the deluge that hit Queensland a few days back but also ex-tropical cyclone Tiffany now causing flooding in parts of the Northern Territory. If you happen to be in Sydney or coastal NSW, you’ll have needed a decent umbrella too. More than 40mm has fallen on the city so far today, and there’s an alert out from the Bureau of Meteorology for possible flooding on roads in coastal suburbs. The two-day totals are well over 80mm, making it the wettest couple of days since the floods in March. The La Nina weather pattern tilts the odds to favour a damp and relatively cool summer for eastern and southern Australia. The bureau doesn’t expect the Pacific to shrug its La Nina conditions until autumn. A warming climate also means the atmosphere can hold 7% more moisture per degree of heating, and of course, that’s what we [insert appropriate adjective] humans seem intent to do. Anyway, Tiffany may be an ex-TC, but it might not be done just yet. Some models predict big falls over inland and eastern Australia soon, and you have to hope they don’t land on saturated catchments, or we might get a bit more flooding. Meanwhile, temperatures as high as 49C were forecast for parts of the Pilbara today. Back on the cancellation of the Australian Open draw. Apparently only minutes before it was due to start a Tennis Australia staffer told reporters it was all going ahead as planned. And what do you know, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, is due to speak in Canberra at 3.45pm, after the national cabinet meeting. Confirmation that the draw for the Australian Open has been delayed until further notice. Curious ... the Australian Open draw, which was just about to be held, has reportedly been postponed. The Victorian Reason party MP Fiona Patten says the Victorian public service should trial a four-day working week. Police in Canberra have made a series of arrests after protesters allegedly tried to enter Parliament House, AAP reports: Four people have been arrested outside Parliament House in Canberra after attempting to enter the building and protest unlawfully, ACT policing says. Three men and one woman were arrested at the scene and all were transported to the ACT watch house. A police official said capsicum spray was used during the incident to control the group. Social media footage posted by an anti-mandatory vaccination group shows protesters engaging with a line of police outside Parliament House. The group has been involved in a number of protests this week including outside the prime minister’s official Canberra residence. We had reported earlier that police were gathering outside Parliament House because of a Sovereign Citizen protest. Hmmm, this is interesting. No mention of compensation today as part of the announcement that crowd sizes would be capped at 50% for the Australian Open. Can we expect meat supplies to be tight for a while? Yes, if the slaughter rate is any guide. Here’s the one for beef: With lamb supply also heavily affected by Covid disruptions: This thread is as good a way as any to pass the time while we wait on a decision regarding Novak Djokovic’s visa. It explains what could happen to the Australian Open draw (set to take place in an hour or so) if he is forced to withdraw from the tournament. More than $60m in contracts for rapid antigen tests will not actually add any more home tests to the national stockpile, AAP reports: Urgent government tenders worth more than $60m for rapid antigen tests won’t add any more to the national stockpile. The government placed five urgent tenders for the Covid-19 tests on Monday, citing “extreme urgency or events unforeseen”. While the tenders will see more than 70m rapid tests purchased, they will not be added to the more than 200m rapid tests the government said would arrive in the country in coming weeks. “This is not a tender for further RATs,” a federal health department spokesman told AAP. “As per the Covid procurement rules, these contracts were issued as ‘urgent and unavoidable’ following a limited tender process. “Each proposal was independently assessed against consistent criteria before the departmental delegate made the decision to procure the tests.” As Covid-19 cases surge across the country, there have been large shortages of rapid antigen tests, which has put pressure on PCR testing clinics. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, said the prime minister, Scott Morrison, should have listened to health experts and planned for the current virus outbreak. “The national plan made it clear that once we opened up there would be an increased number of infections and we needed to make sure we planned for it,” he told the ABC. Bodies such as the Australian Medical Association called for the government to acquire large numbers of rapid tests back in September. The prime minister is meeting with state and territory leaders for the latest national cabinet meeting on Thursday. National cabinet is set to agree upon a time frame for when concession card holders would be able to access free rapid antigen tests from pharmacies. Concession holders would be eligible for 10 free rapid tests during a three-month period, with arrangements already finalised with pharmacies. The Australian Council of Trade Unions again called for RATs to be free and easily accessible ahead of the meeting. It is a particularly warm day in Melbourne too, so I’d expect it’s fairly ripe out there. As if 2022 wasn’t offal enough... Queensland will reopen its border on Saturday, as the state recorded its deadliest day of the pandemic. Ben Smee reports: AAP reports that a peak body for aged care residents wants an ends to lockdowns in residential facilities: Aged care’s peak advocacy body has called for an end to locking down elderly residents as Covid spreads through residential facilities. The Council on the Ageing CEO, Ian Yates, says while locking down residential aged care facilities at the start of an outbreak is understandable, it can’t continue indefinitely. “We are seeing far too many residents being locked up for very long periods of time when they indeed are fully vaccinated [and] the staff are all vaccinated,” he told Sky News on Thursday. “We want to keep Omicron to the bare minimum, we are not going to keep it out of aged care when it’s widespread in the community but the impact is much, much less than in 2020 when we didn’t have the vaccines.” The biggest immediate impact is staff shortages while access to rapid antigen tests in aged care is proving problematic, restricting the return of some staff and visitors to facilities. Yates says facilities needed to be on the front foot to avoid prolonged lockdowns. He called for residents to be able to have an essential visitor who can be treated as a pseudo-staff member to keep in contact with them. Labor’s aged care spokeswoman Clare O’Neil has criticised the federal government facilitating “diabolical” conditions within aged care facilities, saying staff and residents had been neglected for the better part of a decade. She also took aim at the low booster rate of staff, saying less than one in three have had a third jab. But a spokesperson for the Health and Aged Care minister, Greg Hunt, said senior Australians have been a priority throughout the pandemic, noting the country has had one of the lowest levels of death in aged care from the pandemic. The government has delivered 5.6 million rapid antigen tests to aged care facilities – “the largest deployment across the country of tests from the national medical stockpile”, the spokesperson said. More than 1,700 facilities have had boosters administered to eligible residents and workers with a higher than 99% vaccination rate among staff. All facilities are due for completion in January, the spokesperson said. Fining people for failing to report a positive Covid test result is unhelpful and unnecessarily punitive, the Australian Lawyers Alliance (ALA) says. NSW and South Australian governments yesterday announced $1,000 fines for those who don’t report positive tests. Greg Barton, spokesperson for the ALA, said: Threatening to punish people with exorbitant fines for failing to report their results creates one more barrier for people who are already struggling to get tested, to understand the changing rules and [to] manage their health. The policing and enforcement of this health order will be almost impossible. This punitive response will not work and may be counter-productive. Being threatened with a $1,000 fine is a disincentive to get tested, especially when accessing a rapid antigen test is already expensive and difficult. These fines will particularly hurt the most disadvantaged people in the community who are already struggling with losing their employment due to illness and having difficulty accessing and being able to afford rapid antigen tests. Instead of focusing on penalties for failing to report results, the government must focus on ensuring everyone has access to testing and providing support for people who are unwell or are in isolation. More bad news for little penguins: AAP report that a dog is thought responsible for killing 17 of them near Burnie in Tasmania. You may recall our story from earlier this week about more deaths at a colony in Western Australia. Here’s the story: Wildlife authorities in Tasmania are calling for help to identify a dog thought responsible for killing 17 little penguins in the state’s northwest. The birds were found dead at West Beach in Burnie on December 31. Tasmania’s Parks and Wildlife Service released CCTV images of a dog that was in the area around the time of the attack. “It is possible this dog is the animal responsible for the penguin deaths,” state compliance coordinator Michael Spaulding said. “We ask anyone who may have information to assist with identifying this dog to please make contact with us.” Post-mortem investigations determined the little penguins, the smallest of all penguins, died as a result of a dog attack. “Dogs can cause a lot of damage to penguin colonies very quickly. It is important owners control or contain their pets effectively,” Spaulding said. Tasmania in 2019 passed tougher laws increasing potential penalties for owners of dogs that kill sensitive wildlife. Owners could be fined up to $5,040, have their pet destroyed, and be liable for other costs. The penalty for taking a dog into a prohibited area containing sensitive habitat for native wildlife was increased to $3,360. There were several mass penguin deaths due to dog attacks in 2018 and 2019, including one at Low Head where 58 perished. The Northern Territory reported an increase in Covid cases but a drop in hospitalisations on Thursday, AAP reports: The Northern Territory has reported 550 new COVID-19 cases as it relaxes testing requirements to reduce PCR queue lengths and waiting times for results. Thursday’s new infections in the 24 hours to 8pm on Wednesday bring the territory’s total active case load to about 3,000 with 24 in hospital, four fewer than the previous day. Chief minister Michael Gunner said 18 patients were suffering severe symptoms and one was in intensive care. “At the moment, all things considered, the growth in numbers is fairly controlled although it is highly unlikely we have reached our peak,” Mr Gunner told reporters on Thursday. “We do not have a high proportion of severe cases which indicates our high vaccination rate is doing its job and our testing numbers are high”. Under new testing rules for the NT, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests will also no longer be required to confirm a positive rapid antigen test (RAT) results, Mr Gunner said. But people who test positive using a RAT will be required to report the result to the health department or face a hefty $5,000 fine. “While they are not as accurate as PCR tests, rapid antigen tests are still pretty accurate,” Mr Gunner said. “At the scale we are at now with hundreds of new cases a day, the margin of error of RATs [is] not a big issue”. Positive COVID-19 cases exiting isolation will also no longer need to take a final PCR test to confirm they are negative, so long as they are not symptomatic. Additionally, close contacts can use a RAT in the first three days of isolating, instead of queuing for a PCR test. Mr Gunner said RATs delivered results far quicker than PCR tests, which was important given the speed at which the Omicron variant could spread through the community. “We are making these changes today because we don’t want Territorians to go through what people elsewhere went through over Christmas and New Year,” Mr Gunner said. “We don’t want you stuck in queues for eight or nine hours waiting for a test and we don’t want you stuck at home waiting for five, six or seven days waiting for a result.” Mr Gunner said the change would keep Territorians safe and let them get on with their lives. The NT detected 352 new cases on Wednesday, 594 on Tuesday, 403 on Monday, 481 on Sunday and 594 on Saturday. Here’s something else worth your time over lunch: a lovely preview of what hosting its first Ashes test means to Tasmania. The test starts tomorrow. Allowing fossil fuel companies to extract gas from beneath the Lake Eyre basin would “blow out of the water” the Queensland government’s emission targets and make it more difficult for Australia to comply with its international obligations, a new report says. Origin Energy was given approval by the state government to begin exploration for gas on leases in the basin in late December. If allowed to proceed, the application could open up the region – home to one of the last major free-flowing desert river systems – to the extraction of fossil fuels across 225,000 hectares of Queensland’s channel country. You can read the full story below: Here is our full story on the news from earlier today that Crown Resorts is ready to accept a takeover bid from Blackstone, via Ben Butler. Here’s some pleasant lunchtime reading for you all: Thank you Matilda for again demonstrating blogging skills that are as rare as an RAT. With that, I shall hand you over to the amazing Nino Bucci who will take you through the afternoon’s news. Here is the full statement from the Victorian government on their decision to cap ticket sales for the Australian Open to 50% capacity. All tickets sold to events that already have over 50% capacity will be honoured, however. The search for missing Victorian teenager Krystal Cain, who was last seen in flood waters in south-east Queensland, has entered a fifth day, reports Marty Silk from AAP. The 14-year-old became separated from her father when their car was submerged in flood waters on the Burnett Highway near Booubyjan, north-west of Gympie, in the early hours of Saturday. Police have grave concerns about Krystal and will on Thursday reveal whether the search will be scaled back Emergency services and volunteers in helicopters, boats, trail bikes, 4WD vehicles and on horseback have been looking for the teen. Bauple farmer Steve Bottcher, 52, and a 22-year-old Sunshine Coast man were killed in the floods after ex-cyclone Seth dumped more than half a metre of rain on the Wide Bay-Burnett region. There were tributes for Bottcher after the father of five was swept away when his boat capsized on his property on Monday night. “Steve was a very fun loving man who was always up for a yarn and some coldies,” friend Haelee Faithfull wrote on a GoFundMe page set up to help pay for funeral costs. It’s such a sad loss for his family and friends and our community. The ACT has recorded 1,020 new Covid-19 cases today but this does not yet include results from at-home rapid tests. The Herald Sun is reporting the crowd capacity at the Australian Open will be halved under new restrictions in an attempt to slow the spread of Omicron across Victoria. It says all tickets that have already been sold will be honoured, even if the event goes over 50% capacity, but all further sales will be limited to stay within the new restrictions. This has not yet been independently confirmed by Guardian Australia and I’ll bring you more updates as soon as I can. Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath has addressed a statement published by a minor Queensland nursing association overnight that suggested unvaccinated nurses were being welcomed back into the workforce in Queensland. She has stated unequivocally that this is untrue: I have seen reports overnight from the nurses professional association of Queensland who have put out statements on social media saying they welcome the government’s position to allow unvaccinated healthcare workers back into the workforce. I want to make this clear that that’s not correct. We are not, nor are we considering welcoming back unvaccinated healthcare workers into the health system. At all. I hope that the NPAQ immediately clarifies that statement putting on social media. Unvaccinated staff aren’t able to work in our hospitals. The only staff unvaccinated he will be allowed into our hospitals were still not allowed in clinical settings are those who have been granted exemptions, which there are very few, and there are those who are seeking exemptions currently. Those people aren’t allowed to work in the workplace unvaccinated so I want to make that very clear. John Gerrard: There are 530 cases in hospital, a slight rise from from yesterday, from 525 ward patients, and 26 inpatient intensive care patients in hospital at the moment. It’s not a great difference since yesterday but we shouldn’t read too much into changes on a day-to-day basis. We need to look at trends. There were 33,849 tests performed yesterday by Queensland Health facilities. Queensland chief health officer Dr John Gerrard is giving details on those six Covid-19 deaths overnight. He says none of these people had received a booster shot: Two people in their 70s, three in the 80s and one over the age of 90. All had underlying medical conditions. Three of them were in residential aged care. Five them were double vaccinated, one was unvaccinated and none had received a booster. Our thoughts are with their families and loved ones today. Out of respect for families, I won’t say anything more clinically about these patients ... Sometimes it’s difficult to work out if an individual patient has died from or with Covid or to what extent the virus has played a part in their death. So from now on, our reporting will simply report the death that is, just that individuals that have had a positive Covid test around the time of their death. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk says from 1am Saturday all of Queensland border requirements will be scrapped as the state heads towards 90% full vaccination: Anyone coming domestically across into Queensland, either by our road or by air, they do not have to show that they have had their border pass, they don’t have to show that they have had a rapid antigen test but this is the time and the time is now right as we head towards hitting that 90% next week. In terms of international travel, we will wait until that is formally declared. Annastacia Palaszczuk says there are 556 people in hospital, 26 in ICU and 10 ventilated in Queensland. Queensland has recorded its deadliest day in the pandemic, with six deaths and 14,914 new cases. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is speaking now: When you think about during the whole two years of the pandemic, we lost seven people, to lose six in one day is a big shock and we are, our thoughts are with them. It’s quite upsetting ... Can I please express my deepest sympathies to the families of the loved ones that are passed away, these are people that make people’s grandparents, brothers, sisters, uncles and I think this will be a very difficult time for families at the moment? Unfortunately, we are in a pandemic but still, a very, very sad day for these families. The six people who have lost their lives are aged between their 70s and the 90s. Police have descended on Parliament House after a Sovereign Citizen protest gathers outside. More updates to come: My colleague Ben Butler compiled this comprehensive overview of the supply chain problems that will exercise our state and federal (and territorial) leaders when national cabinet meets today. A good place to start is finding more truck drivers, which is at the heart of the problem, says Nathan Roost, a partner at EY who specialises in supply chain operations: Of late, the challenge has been road transport because of the shortage of truckies, but also the state-by-state differences in how each jurisdiction is handling Covid, and the restrictions to get you in and out. The global nature of the constraints are also exacerbating the strains: There’s tremendous demand right around the world. Sometimes we don’t get allocated what we want because the US or Europe are more important and a bigger market for some of these multinationals. If it’s predictable, supply chains work fantastically ... If demand is peaky, if demand is unpredictable, then that causes all kinds of havoc both for the manufacturers but also for logistics companies. It’s going to be a difficult six to eight weeks. Roost adds that we’re all more conscious of the need to ensure we have resilient workforces and not just flashy new equipment. Still, despite the strains we can expect for a while, he is confident that the enormous pent-up demand – aided by huge government spending and low-interest rates – will power the economy over these speed bumps: There’s a shock, clearly in the short term, but I think longer term the economic momentum will remain somewhat positive. We are just standing by now to hear from the Queensland premier with the state’s Covid-19 update. Given the burden on the healthcare system, what Covid symptoms are manageable at home, and when should you seek urgent medical assistance? Guardian Australia science reporter Donna Lu has spoken to Australian GPs and compiled their advice on how to handle Covid at home. Victorian Liberal MP James Newbury is trying to label Daniel Andrews’ rule allowing asymptomatic close contacts to go to work if they are deemed essential as a “soft lockdown”. ... OK. Here’s what we know about the Covid-19 numbers so far today: NSW Cases – 92,264 RAT – 61,387 (from 1 January) PCR – 30,877 Hospitalisations – 2,383 Deaths – 22 Victoria Cases – 37,169 RAT – 16,843 PCR – 20,326 Hospitalisation – 953 Deaths – 25 Queensland Cases – 14,914 RAT – 2,812 PCR – 12,102 Hospitalisations – 530 Deaths – 6 ACT Cases – 1,020 RAT – not yet included PCR – 1,020 Hospitalisations – 24 NT Cases – 550 Hospitalisations – 24 Deaths – 0 Tasmania Cases - 1,100 Hospitalisations - 23 Deaths - 0 South Australia Cases - 3669 Hospitalisations - 225 Deaths - 4 Anthony Albanese: This government, when they announced some testing for free for concession cardholders, then went out afterwards and told pharmacists that they were on their own accessing the tests to be made available for concession cardholders. It is just extraordinary the arrogance of this government and as I said, I think Australians are getting to the point whereby they want a government that actually governs and governs in their interest. Not one that always says, “I don’t hose,” or “it’s not a race’ when it comes to access to the vaccines, or, “I don’t drive a delivery truck.” Enough of the photo ops, enough of the photo ops, this bloke needs to do his job. OK, we’re heading up north to check out what’s going on with Labor leader Anthony Albanese, who is speaking now in Rockhampton. When the public hears comments like “the health system is under strain” or “hospitals are at breaking point”, it can be hard to grasp what it means. NSW Health’s critical intelligence unit now says the share of intensive care beds taken up by Covid patients has increased from one-fifth a week ago to one-third in just a week. Normally there’s not a lot of spare capacity to treat people in bad car accidents or who have heart attacks or other health events needing such care, so a shift of that proportion in one week rings alarm bells. But within the wards of our hospitals, the strain is, if anything, more acute. A senior nurse in one of Sydney’s most prominent and typically well-resourced hospitals tells us nurse-to-patient ratios are soaring to dangerous levels. Patients in the high dependency unit of this hospital would normally expect one nurse for every three patients. That’s now about one to five, and rising. Resuscitation efforts usually involve as many as eight staff to bring somebody back to life; that’s now more like two or three now because of Covid curbs and staff shortages. And this unit is taking Covid patients when they didn’t have them before, even during the Delta surge because of inadequate equipment to limit the airborne spread of Covid. Staff fear for the safety of non-Covid patients who have little immunity left. Read more here: If you know more please contact peter.hannam@theguardian.com Daniel Andrews has been asked if he thinks Novak Djokovic will have his visa revoked, but the Victorian premier is trying to make it clear that this is the federal government’s problem, not his: I’m not a punter, I’m not a betting person, what I’d say to you is those matters are for the federal government, I don’t issue visas, they do. I leave it to them ... That tournament is a lot bigger than any one person, it’s got a grand slam for a reason, it’s better than any one person. Just like the safety of our community is bigger than any one person. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews says his government has no plans for additional business supports to help make up for the loss of customers and staff shortages Omicron has caused: There are significant supports for those who are waiting for a test result, there are significant supports for those who lose hours of work … I’m not here to make further announcements and business support. Businesses are open, there is no lockdown or restrictions … We have provided Victorian taxpayers, have provided to Victorian businesses, the best part of $10bn of business support so that very significant. And I’m not here to make any further announcements about that. The glaring shortages of rapid antigen tests have been well-documented. But it appears shortages of PCR supplies are now also hampering testing efforts in Australia. ACT Health last night announced it was shutting down roughly half of its PCR testing centres due to what it described as “unavoidable supply issues”: Shortages are being experienced across the country whilst demand for COVID-19 testing remains high. This has obvious consequences for those who cannot find a rapid test but are symptomatic or are at high or moderate risk of exposure. I’ve asked other jurisdictions whether they are also experiencing PCR supply shortages. Daniel Andrews says the government is also providing a supply of booster vaccines to help ensure supermarket staff are able to keep operating: The other thing I should note just by way of example, we will provide a booster, a third shot booster supply to Woolworths and to Coles and to that sector and they will run booster clinics inside their business, so we are taking the booster program to them ... We will provide them with the supply and they will most likely engage a private provider to administer the vaccine. We do not have the staff to do it ourselves because we are doing kids and boosters more broadly. That is another example of something spoke about yesterday and something we have agreed to do where we will take the booster program to them and that means they can get a higher rate of staff who are boosted and that is really important to drive down infection. Reporter: Were the supermarkets able to give you a forecast of how long it will be like this in terms of the supply shortage? Daniel Andrews: No. They are working as hard as they can and we are doing what we can to support them and obviously, they are assessing things daily, weekly. It is different in different parts of the state, different in different parts of the country as well, although these challenges are national they are not just challenges that Victoria faces. Andrews has clarified that those tests will be used in cases where the government is the employer. He is asked if the government will be supporting other large employers, such as Coles or Woolworths, with getting tests: If and when we can help, obviously we will but that is and there are lots of different ways in which we provide that support and I think businesses genuinely appreciate and understand that not only is the government grateful to them, the community is grateful to them for the extra effort they are going to with the challenges and the pressures they are under but they also appreciate that there is only so much the government can do. Daniel Andrews has been asked if it will be the workplace or the essential worker who will be required to produce the rapid antigen tests when coming to work from close contact isolation, and what will happen if neither can get their hands on any: National cabinet today I think we will talk about those issues, because they are hard to find. There are 10m to be released from the national medical stock while Victoria would expect to get pro-rata, so about 2.5m. They are different to the at-home kits, they are involved but they can take the of some of the kids that we have been using in different settings and that will free up some kits for these sorts of purposes. Weimar: Yesterday we allocated 65,000 rapid antigen test through our 64 centres and in the first week we have allocated 180,000 rapid antigen tests through those centres and that has become an important platform for us to ensure we can enable effective testing across the wider community. That is also enabled the development and use of daily rapid antigen testing results and can I thank the 112,000 Victorians who have uploaded a positive result over the first few days, the first week that we have had the platform. Good news for Victorians awaiting a PCR test result, Jeroen Weimar says most are now coming back within two days: Sixty-nine per cent now of PCR test results are coming back within 48 hours and over half are coming back the next day. There is still work to do, it is still is short of the [time frames] we believe we should be at. The slow recovery of the last seven days is directly associated with the introduction of rapid antigen testing into testing centres and there are now 64 testing centres that are able to offer rapid antigen tests to those they deem appropriate. Here is testing commander Jeroen Weimar giving us the nitty-gritty details of the new essential services quarantine exemptions: The premier outlined the sectors – emergency services, corrections, transport and freight distribution, etc. It is important to understand that it applies to those vital workers within those sectors. Those undertaking critical roles within the sectors, it is not an open slather for everyone in the sector. It applies to close contacts of a Covid-positive case. Somebody who lives with somebody who already has C0vid and what we allow for is for that person to leave the normal seven-day quarantine and attend work for the critical work function. For the rest of the time they will be in quarantine. They can go to work and do the critical work and then they are returning to quarantine. Unable to do other social activities during the seven-day period. It requires an individual to undertake a daily rapid antigen test before attending for work on that test must be negative and they need to be asymptomatic ... they are required to wear a mask through the entire length of their duties at work, preferably an N95 mask. Employers will be required to ensure that people are able to take separate meal breaks ... Clearly, if they become symptomatic in that time if they become positive during that time then they have to start a seven-day quarantine period as per normal. Andrews says that the lack of delivery drivers has become the most critical bottleneck in the food supply chain across the state. I had a meeting with supermarket CEOs yesterday and gave them a chance to reflect on some of the challenges that they are facing, we are a in ongoing contact and deep engagement with that sector and so many others but it was important to hear first-hand, and not the first time I have done – a bit important to hear first-hand about the challenges they are facing. Last week was distribution centres and bottlenecks there, this week it is truck drivers and a shortage of those to move. There is a lot of stock in many different parts of their round but challenges are not so much about the availability of stock it is about moving the stock from one part of the country to the other. We continue to work with them and the unions to try and do whatever we can to ease that pressure. These announcements, those made on Monday and the fact that we added to the list today, will support many different businesses in many different sectors to try and balance or deal with the challenges that we all face at the moment. Andrews: They are important additions to make sure that whether it is waste or power, gas, all the way through to law enforcement at present, all of those sectors, they need to continue, regardless of the fact that we are in a global pandemic and have a variant of concern and exempting those workers, not all workers in those businesses but those workers is that make those sectors, exempting them from home isolation requirements is a commonsense way in which we can keep those services and important parts of our economy and society as close to normal as possible. Daniel Andrews has confirmed that Victoria will extend the ability for essential workers to forgo close contact isolation if they are asymptomatic to the emergency services, education, critical utilities, custodial facilities and transport and freight sectors: Cabinet have made a number of decisions last, yesterday afternoon and into the evening to add to that list and I am pleased today to be able to announce that, based on the hard work of our public health team, we are able to add to the list of food and food production, food distribution. We can also add emergency services, education, critical utilities, custodial facilities, transport and freight. So all transport and freight, not just food production or food-related transport and freight, those sectors will join the food sector in a broad sense. They will be exempt if they are playing a critical role, they will be exempt from having to do home isolation. They will need to take a RAT test for five days and if that is negative they can proceed to do that critical work that we need them to do and, in those circumstances and given where the pandemic is up to where our broader context, that is a safe setting and critically important that they play those key roles in those industries and the food sector more broadly. Andrews has confirmed that of the state’s 37,169 cases, 16,843 were from positive rapid antigen tests.=: Beyond that, a further 20,326 people received a positive PCR result from 62,406 results. That came to us yesterday. It gives us the total new number of cases, a new case tally of 37,169 and that takes the total number of active cases across the state that we know of through self-reporting rapid antigen tests and laboratory-confirmed PCR tests to 221,726. Daniel Andrews: Now there are some 953 people in hospital, that is steady on yesterday: 111 people in ICU, 29 on a ventilator. Sadly, 25 people with Covid-19 have passed away and of those, 17 passed away in the last two days. Of course, we send our very best wishes and our condolences to their families. This will be an incredibly difficult time for them. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews is speaking now. He says vaccines are “nowhere near” as effective at preventing the spread of Omicron as they are with previous variants: Nothing is more important at this stage in our fight against this global pandemic than those who are eligible for a third dose or a booster going to make an appointment and honouring that appointment, getting a booster. That is what will give you greater protection, not just against severe illness and critical illness but also transmission of the virus and that is the Omicron challenge. We see small numbers of people who are gravely ill, that is a good thing, but the vaccines used to this point are nowhere near as effective at stopping Omicron from being transmitted as they were at stopping Delta cases. That is a challenge we all live through at the moment, that is the challenge that industry and everyone faces. Speaking of Novak Djokovic, The Asylum Seeker Resource Centre has joined forces with the Visa Cancellation Working Group, Refugee Advice and Casework Service to call for an “urgent inquiry” into Australia’s visa cancellation process following the fall out from the tennis star’s case. Sanmati Verma, deputy chair of the Visa Cancellation Working Group said in a release issued this morning, that most people whose visas are cancelled are not given adequate time to respond: There has been a huge increase in visa cancellation since 2014. The Novak Djokovic case has thrown light on the longstanding unfair and arbitrary use of the Commonwealth’s cancellation and detention powers.” Most visa holders whose visas are cancelled on arrival are denied time to provide a response and the chance to get advice from a lawyer. Many are turned around at the border quickly while in immigration clearance with little or no recourse to redress, even if they face serious harm in their home country.” A Spanish radio station is reporting that the Spanish government is now investigating to see if Novak Djokovic entered Spain illegally at the end of last year, after the tennis star’s visa saga in Australia revealed he had travelled to the country. Guardian Australia has yet to independently confirm this. If you are among the tens of thousands of people who will be testing positive to Covid-19 on a rapid antigen test today, you’d better get up to speed on what to do next. Check out our TikTok below that explains how to register your positive result with the government. If that link doesn’t work for you, you can also check out the video here: The board of troubled casino empire Crown Resorts says it’s ready to accept a takeover bid by Blackstone after the private equity group sweetened its offer. If it goes ahead, the takeover would see billionaire James Packer finally end his association with Crown (and trouser a fat payout for his shares). In a statement to the ASX, Crown said Blackstone had increased its offer by 60c a share, to $13.10. This is a premium to yesterday’s closing price of $11.63. There’s a bit more to be done to get the deal over the line – Blackstone needs to conduct additional due diligence work and make a binding offer. From Crown’s statement: Should Blackstone make a binding offer at a price of no less than $13.10 cash per share then, subject to the parties entering into a binding implementation agreement on terms and conditions acceptable to Crown, it is the Crown board’s current unanimous intention to recommend that shareholders vote in favour of the proposal in the absence of a superior proposal and subject to an independent expert concluding (and continuing to conclude) that the proposed transaction is in the best interests of Crown shareholders. We will be hearing the Victorian leaders in about half an hour when they give their Covid-19 update. Michaelia Cash’s department has defended religious schools’ right to sack teachers for their views on sexuality and appeared to confirm that safeguards for gay students will be delayed until after the religious discrimination bill. The Attorney general’s Department’s submission to two inquiries states that changes to the Sex Discrimination Act will wait for a further review 12 months after the bill passes, despite a purported deal with four Liberal MPs to prevent expulsion of gay students at the same time, in exchange for their support of the religious discrimination bill. Cash also walked back her reported commitment in December after a backlash from religious groups including the Australian Christian Lobby and Christian Schools Australia, which threatened to scupper their support for the bill over the deal. You can read the full report below: Former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull is getting stuck into the Morrison government nice and early this morning, asking for an explanation as to why Australian rapid test technology has been used overseas but not on home soil: deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce raised some eyebrows this morning when he told Nine’s Today that people should not panic about Omicron as it was like a “mild flu” for the double vaccinated: It’s everywhere. It’s in Queensland, NSW, it’s – the place is alive with it. We are lucky it’s a mild case ... for people who have been double vaccinated. And I’ve had it and it’s like a 2.5 out of 10 flu for a couple of days. That’s how I experienced it. Presenter: That is not for everyone, though, deputy prime minister. It’s a lot worse for a lot of people. Joyce: I know. I know. For some people ... And, yeah, and for some people it can kill you. I am not putting aside the seriousness of it for some people. But, you know, why do I say that? I say that so we don’t have this sort of complete panic because it’s – I’d be worried if the flu breaks out because a lot of people haven’t had the flu for a couple of years. We haven’t been in touch with it. And, you know, that will have a serious effect as well but we can’t shut down the country over that and we’ve got to move on. With rapid antigen tests, we are bringing in tens of millions of these rapid antigen tests. Just to clarify, Victoria has actually recorded 37,169 new Covid-19 cases overnight. The number in the 60,000s was the number of PCR tests conducted. Apologies for that. NSW Health has published details on how many of the cases reported today were part of the rapid antigen test backlog. It says 61,387 positive RATs have been logged, dating back to 1 January. Of those, 50,729 were from the last seven days. Victoria has also published its daily numbers (it started working through the RAT backlog several days ago). The state has recorded 37,169 new cases and, sadly, 25 deaths. NSW has reported a record 92,264 cases of Covid-19, however, it’s important to note this number includes a backlog of tens of thousands of positive rapid antigent test results dating back to 1 January. Sadly, 22 people have died in the latest reporting period. Federal health minister Greg Hunt says nearly 350,000 Covid-19 vaccines were administered in Australia yesterday, including 254,112 booster shots. We are standing by for those Victorian and NSW Covid-19 numbers to come through in about 20 minutes. Remember, we are expecting a big jump in the NSW numbers as the state begins working its way through the backlog of positive rapid antigen tests. An Extinction Rebellion activist whose home was raided by Western Australia’s counter-terror police over a chalk message has had the case against her thrown out by a Perth magistrate. Rosa Hicks was one of six people arrested after a group of activists used washable chalk paint to write messages on a pedestrian bridge in Perth within view of Woodside’s headquarters to protest against the company’s development of the $16bn Scarborough gas project. Hicks was not involved in applying the paint, arrived after the protest had started and took photos on someone else’s phone. She said she had not taken any active part and was very conscious of avoiding any violation of the conditions of her visa. You can read the full report below: Just jumping back to Anthony Albanese for a moment – the Labor leader has labelled the Novak Djokovic saga an “international embarrassment for Australia”: How do you get a visa in the first place? Australia has a policy of not allowing unvaccinated people into Australia. The government is yet to explain how that occurred. And this has been a debacle yet again, a government sitting back, waiting for a problem becomes a crisis before it acts. This is an international embarrassment for Australia. Everyone knew about Novak Djokovic and the Australian Open. It’s not like we didn’t know when the date was. It’s been the leading sports story in the world for many months. How is it that it came to this? Sydney Festival chair David Kirk says that the board “missed” that the Israeli embassy would be sponsoring the festival, a fact that led to dozens of acts pulling out. He promised that a “comprehensive review” would now take place: There is a lot of work for us to do after the festival ... We’re intending to undertake a comprehensive review of everything that was done in the lead-up to this festival and what may have caused us to be in a position where artists felt unsafe. The opposition leader has been asked how he plans to win back Queensland in the upcoming election. Anthony Albanese: By being concerned with their interests – by listening. I have spent a lot of time in Queensland as the Labor leader but before that for many years. I think Queensland has trusted me to be able to deliver … We are campaigning on ... a better life with working families, with cheaper childcare, with dealing with Medicare and strengthening it, not undermining it like this government has done. Affordable housing. The second issue is that of secure work. Anthony Albanese: People knew as part of the national plan that we would face increased number of infections and therefore increased pressure. But we have had now a circumstance whereby people can’t get access to their booster shots, they can’t get access to rapid antigen tests, and the government said pharmacists should go out and find them themselves. An extraordinary comment or position for the government to take. And of course we know that there isn’t food on supermarket shelves in places right around Australia at the moment. And parents are under pressure because they were told their children could be vaccinated at this time and so many of them have struggling to get appointments. Anthony Albanese is laying the blame of Australia’s Covid predicament squarely at Scott Morrison’s feet: How is it we have got to this point? The rapid antigen tests were approved last September. The national plan made it clear that once we opened up there would be an increased number of infections and we needed to make sure we planned for it. We needed Scott Morrison to do his job. But he just went through saying we will all be together [at] Christmas, it will will all be right, without putting in place mechanisms required. And in the tender that was bought by the government, some $62m of RATs that have been purchased, it was because of urgent and unforeseen circumstances ... Why wasn’t there a normal commercial operation. Well, this was foreseen. Federal opposition leader Anthony Albanese is up on ABC now, and he has kicked off the morning by slamming the Morrison government for not buying rapid tests en masse earlier: Working people have been saying that they needed access to testing, for example, for months after months. The Transport Workers’ Union wrote to the government last September about supply chains and the disruptions that could occur if they didn’t get access to rapid antigen tests and now we know this government only ordered en masse rapid antigen tests this week. It’s extraordinary their complacency. We have had a grand slam of failures from this government, whether it’s tracing, testing, and quarantine. On each occasion they wait until ... a problem becomes a crisis before Scott Morrison acts. Further to our piece on traders on Melbourne retail and hospitality strip Chapel Street declaring a “code red”, a spokesperson for the Victorian minister for small business, Jaala Pulford, tells Guardian Australia she will meet with traders this afternoon. National cabinet will meet today to discuss measures to increase the labour supply as a wave of staff shortages caused by the Omicron wave wreaks havoc across the Australian economy. But so far states and the federal government appear to have little appetite for the cash handouts for which businesses are asking, with Scott Morrison calling for “patience”. And at the Victorian state level, government sources indicate there’s a reluctance a return to the disaster payments or business grants handed out during the Melbourne lockdowns last year. Figuring out who is eligible would be a problem, but one big issue appears to be who would pay for it. The state budget has already been blown up by Covid and proposals by traders that Canberra fund half seem so far have fallen on deaf ears. Novak Djokovic could face a fine or even prison in Serbia after his admission that he broke isolation while he had Covid last month, lawyers have said, as the Serbian prime minister warned his behaviour appeared to be “a clear breach” of the rules. The 34-year-old Belgrade-born tennis player is chasing a record-breaking 21st grand slam victory at the Australian Open beginning on Monday, but could yet be deported by the government which is unhappy with his medical exemption from inoculation. Djokovic on Wednesday acknowledged that he knew he had tested positive when he attended a newspaper interview and photoshoot in the Serbian capital on 18 December, saying in a statement on social media he had made an “error of judgment”. You can read the full report from Jon Henley and Milivoje Pantovic below: Well, scratch that, Victor Dominello has just told Sunrise that the number of positive antigen tests registered with the NSW government is now up to 82,000: As it goes, it is 82,000, but that is 82,000 over 12 days. We expect to get a high number given that we have provided for people to put their data from 1 January. This is not just people putting in data from yesterday, it is people having rapid antigen tests on the second and third and fourth of January, putting that information in and getting it together. They are high numbers. New South Wales residents have rushed to post positive results from rapid antigen tests since the start of the year, as the state government admits it will be “almost impossible” to apply fines for non-compliance, reports AAP’s Jack Gramenz. By Thursday morning, more than 78,000 people had uploaded positive results from tests taken since 1 January, customer service and digital minister Victor Dominello said. This is a jump of about 25,000 from the 53,000 results posted by Wednesday afternoon. The reporting system for positive RAT results went live on Wednesday morning and while the requirement only became mandatory on the day, NSW residents have been asked to add tests taken since the start of the year. From January 19, the government will begin imposing a $1,000 fine on anyone who does not report their positive RAT result. Dominello admitted to the Nine Network that will be very difficult to do but the government had to send a message that reporting a positive result was important. It’s almost going to be impossible in many ways to enforce ... But the majority of the states and territories in the country have gone down the path of issuing a fine or putting a fine in place – Tasmania, South Australia, Northern Territory, ACT – and some have chosen the other path of just saying please do it. Dominello said registering a test result was mainly about connecting infected people with any healthcare need they might need or federal government financial assistance. The number of Covid-19 cases in NSW is expected to spike as the government begins adding RAT results to standard PCR test results. NSW Health will provide an update on infection numbers at 9am on Thursday. Hash Tayeh has been back behind the counter at the burger chain he founded, Burgertory, for the first time in three years as he struggles to keep the business going in the face of the Omicron wave. He has been doing night shifts at his outlet on Chapel Street in Melbourne, a fashionable shopping and entertainment strip which local traders say has been overwhelmed by Covid-related staff shortages. The pandemic taught him to “just never get too comfortable and always be humble”: So I was helping them take orders, take out the rubbish, mop the floors, do the dishes – wherever they needed me. Two hundred and sixty of Burgertory’s 400 staff have had Covid. You can read the full report below: Good morning everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here on the blog with you, ready to bring you all the day’s news (as well as milking the fact that I now have Covid-19 for sympathy as much as humanly possible). Now we are all bracing for a tidal wave of cases from New South Wales this morning as today is the first day rapid antigen tests will be included in the daily numbers. It’s expected that the sizeable backlog of positive results will result in a record high. In the afternoon we also have a national cabinet meeting to look forward to. The main things on the agenda: students’ return to school for the 2022 year, and food supply chain security. Leaders will also hear from Treasury officials on the economic reasons to keep schools open. It’s expected the list of sectors classified as essential will also expand after the national cabinet meeting, to keep supply chains moving. This all comes after Australia’s leading medical advisory group recommended this week that food and grocery workers be able to return to work after being a close contact of a positive Covid case, provided they then return a negative rapid test. A similar proposal could be laid out for other sectors classified as essential, which could include road, rail and air transport, mental health, education and energy supply. It’s expected transport and logistics workers will be prioritised. Meanwhile, ministers have flagged the possibility jobseeker recipients could be deployed into workforces that are facing staff shortages. A plan to increase the hours international students are able to work to 40 hours a fortnight is also being considered as a way to alleviate pressure on sectors hardest hit by the virus. National cabinet will also settle on a date for when concession cardholders can access free rapid tests from pharmacies. So as you can see there is plenty to get through! So why don’t we get cracking!What to look out for There are more and more transfers in women’s football as more resources are put into the clubs, although the January window is usually quieter than the summer one. Still there are exciting title races to be had in the WSL, Division 1 Féminine, Frauen-Bundesliga while in Serie A Femminile Juventus are running away with the title, as are Barcelona in the Primera Iberdrola. Across Europe there are relegation battles to be had and Champions League places to be won. In the Women’s Super League, will Arsenal try to halt their slide by making signings? Hope Powell’s Brighton have already brought in two Sweden internationals in Emma Kullberg and Julia Zigiotti Olme. Italian clubs have already been active with Fiorentina bringing in three players in the opening days of the window, Ronja Aronsson, Valentina Giacinti and Verónica Boquete all joining while Martina Piemonte has left the club. In the Division 1 Féminine it has been quieter so far with mainly outgoings at the top clubs, such as Lyon and PSG, while the clubs at the bottom of the table, Issy and St Etienne, have yet to make acquisitions.Less than a month before the Beijing Winter Olympics begin, the Games are a massive political thicket. China is earning global condemnation for its human-rights abuses against Uyghurs and other Turkic Muslims in Xinjiang Province, what Human Rights Watch calls “crimes against humanity”. The Chinese cities of Xi’an and Yuzhou are in lockdown after experiencing the largest Covid-19 outbreak that the country has seen since the early days of the pandemic. The National Hockey League yanked its players from the Games in light of coronavirus concerns. Olympic qualifying events are in disarray, wracked by positive Covid cases. A diplomatic boycott by the US, Australia, Britain and Canada has only added to the mayhem. When the Biden administration announced its diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Games, a spokesperson from China’s foreign ministry responded that the Olympics were “not a stage for political posturing and manipulation”, adding that the boycott was “a grave travesty of the spirit of the Olympic charter” and “a blatant political provocation”. Hypocrisy abounds in every direction. The Chinese official was right: a diplomatic boycott is a political act, just as China’s boycott of the 1980 Moscow Olympics over the host country’s invasion of Afghanistan was political. While Guantánamo remains open under the Biden administration and home to ‘forever prisoner’ Abu Zubaydah – who withstood CIA waterboarding more than 60 times – the president’s finger waggling looks duplicitous. But when it comes to the hypocrisy Olympics, the International Olympic Committee takes the gold. The group that oversees the Games was the real perpetrator of “a grave travesty of the spirit of the Olympic charter” when, back in 2015, it selected Beijing to host even though it knew full well at the time that China was engaging in extreme human-rights violations that clashed mightily with the Olympic charter’s commitment to “the preservation of human dignity”. The IOC’s hypocrisy is legendary. From behind the public-relations lectern the group eschews politics while simultaneously taking credit for convincing political leaders from North and South Korea to create “unified” hockey teams competing under one flag at the 2018 Pyeongchang Winter Games. The IOC trumpets its high-level political negotiations with the Taliban to secure safe passage for Afghan athletes. In 2001, when Beijing was vying for the 2008 Summer Olympics, the city’s bid team pledged that hosting the Games would jump-start political and human rights in China, a claim the IOC used to justify its selection. This human-rights dreamscape never arrived. It’s telling that today, neither China nor the IOC are vowing that the Olympics will spur democracy. The IOC’s willful gullibility reemerged when it meekly intervened in the case of Peng Shuai, the three-time Olympian in tennis who accused a high-level Chinese politician of sexual coercion. IOC president Thomas Bach held a 30-minute video call with the athlete and then issued a statement that she was “safe and well”. This was more a blatant publicity stunt designed to ensure that the Beijing Games proceeded apace than a sincere effort to appraise the athlete’s well-being. Peng later retracted her allegations under suspicious conditions. The Beijing Olympics are about so much more than sport. The US diplomatic boycott arrives amid escalating tensions between China and numerous western nations. In the US, China has become a bi-partisan punching bag, with politicians on both sides of the aisle making evidence-free claims that would make McCarthy blush. This feeds oversimple narratives that juxtapose a freedom-loving USA against a diabolical Chinese state. In turn, this sanctimonious outlook stokes the US war machine; when Congress passed the whopping $770bn defense bill, which included $24bn more than Biden requested, analysts rationalized the uptick by citing China as a rising geopolitical threat. This saber-rattling ignores the fact that the US has around 750 military bases circling the world while China has only one, and it comes at a time when US-China cooperation is vital on climate change and other security matters. Moreover, US politicos are swift to slam China while ignoring human-rights abuses for which they are responsible, from kids in cages at the Mexico border to unquestioning support for Israel (a country Human Rights Watch recently described as carrying out “crimes against humanity of apartheid and persecution” against Palestinians) to the homelessness situation in the US, a humanitarian crisis in plain sight (in Los Angeles, the 2028 Olympic host, around 1,500 unhoused residents have died since the coronavirus pandemic began). The demonization campaign is working: in 2021, the Pew Research Center found that 67% in the US held negative feelings toward China, an increase of 21% since 2018. In a sense, the IOC is complicit in escalating tensions between China and the US, and it has placed athletes in the middle of the imbroglio. On one hand you have an obvious human-rights abuser as host and on the other you have the IOC twiddling its thumbs as it prepares to count its money. In this ethical vacuum, pressure is building on athletes to step up and lead – some academics and activists are even calling on athletes to boycott the Games. Olympic athletes are in a vexing position, but it’s the International Olympic Committee that has placed them there. Athletes have no say where the Olympics go, and when the IOC hands the Games to a repressive host, Olympians all too often bear the brunt. The IOC has a slogan, “Putting Athletes First”. But when the IOC handed the Olympics to Beijing, it actually put athletes among the last. The IOC continues to hide behind its thin scrim of apoliticism despite abundant evidence to the contrary. If nothing else, the 2022 Beijing Games should be the death knell of the risible myth that the Olympics are not political. Sports are never simply sports. Let’s see the Beijing Games for what they are: a stage for a rising global hegemony with serious human-rights problems and a democracy on a ventilator.Small businesses and unions have condemned as inadequate Scott Morrison’s response to a burgeoning staffing crisis caused by the Omicron wave. The crisis has pushed supply chains to breaking point, emptied supermarket shelves and forced some retailers and hospitality operators to close. Under new rules announced by the prime minister after a national cabinet meeting on Thursday, workers in a swathe of industries including food distribution and transport will be allowed to go straight back to work after recording a negative rapid antigen test. However, Morrison again rebuffed calls from small businesses and unions for free rapid antigen tests in the workplace, and industries including general retail and hospitality have been excluded from the relaxed regime. He also did not respond to calls from retail and hospitality businesses, which are not included in the new testing regime, for cash subsidies to staunch the flow of red ink from balance sheets. Alexi Boyd, the chief executive of the Council of Small Business Organisations Australia, said the new rules excluded many industries, amounting to hundreds of thousands of workers, that needed relief from isolation requirements. “What we’ve been saying in the last few days is that every business and every small business is essential right now,” Boyd, who joined the consultations with governments in recent days, said. It was frustrating for the government “to turn around and say, at this stage, for small that are going through so much, they are not essential”. According to Boyd, many of those excluded actually make up the supply chain to industries that were included in the eased conditions over isolation. “It’s another set of circumstances that small businesses need to navigate and understand and unpack. “What we need now is Safe Work Australia to make it abundantly clear what the consequences are for employers, and making sure that what they do meets the requirements of Safe Work.” Morrison said the decision a fortnight ago to narrow the definition of close contact was “already having a positive impact” on supermarket distribution systems, but “we need to go further”. In a sign the crisis may yet deepen, supermarket chain Woolworths joined its main rival, Coles, in re-imposing purchase limits on some products – a move last taken during the first wave of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020. After enjoying a few months of pre-pandemic style “business as usual” following last year’s lockdowns, many Australian companies have been crippled because staff are off work while waiting for a Covid test, isolating or sick. At the same time, consumer confidence has plummeted and customer numbers at retail, hospitality and tourism businesses have fallen as people stay home in a bid to avoid the highly contagious Omicron variant. Morrison said up to 10% of the Australian workforce was off at any one time. However, some industries estimate rates that are much higher, at up to 50% in some businesses. Close contacts, which were redefined just before the new year to include only members of the same household as a Covid case, are required to isolate for seven days. Under the new rules, which the prime minister said come into force “as soon as possible”, workers in the transport, freight, logistics, emergency services, energy, water, waste management, food, beverage, telecommunications, data, broadcasting, media, education and childcare industries will be allowed to return to work immediately after a negative rapid test. Morrison said he met with big businesses this week and “they have been sourcing the rapid antigen tests for some period of time going back many months … going back to August of last year.” However, small business has consistently said the tests are expensive and difficult to obtain. In October, industries and unions jointly called on the government to buy them in bulk and hand them out for free so that workers could be tested. State and federal governments currently have about 200m rapid tests on order but many of them are not expected to arrive before the end of the month. On Wednesday, Morrison said he would prioritise “healthcare and aged care workers, and then those who are symptomatic and close contacts” when handing them out. From 24 January, concession card holders will also be able to get 10 rapid tests over three months, with a maximum of five a month, from pharmacies under a program jointly funded by the commonwealth and the states. The Australian Council of Trade Unions has called an emergency meeting of unions for this coming Monday after Morrison failed to respond to a letter sent by the council’s secretary, Sally McManus, at the beginning of the week. It said allowing more workers back to work after a negative rapid test was not a solution to the crisis because it increased the risk of transmission. “The federal government’s plan to open up, if there is one, has clearly failed our health systems, our economy and the essential national supply chains,” McManus said. She said free rapid tests were a “key measure” needed to keep workers and the community safe. “Essential workers are being forced to put themselves in harm’s way to keep food on the shelves, medicines in stock, the lights and water on and keep this country open for business.” The Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, representing many mid-sized firms, offered qualified support for the eased close contact rules but said more needed to be done. “Until supply constraints on rapid antigen tests are resolved, many employees caught up in isolation requirements will still be unable to return to work,” ACCI’s chief executive, Andrew McKellar, said. “It’s disappointing that national cabinet did not extend the changes to other sectors,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Thousands of businesses around the country have not been able to open or trade at full capacity since the onset of Omicron. It is likely we will need to revisit the scope of these measures over coming weeks.” He also expressed frustration over the government’s failure to procure the tests when they were needed. “We have been calling for rapid antigen tests to be freely and widely available for Australians, small business and other industry settings since September last year.”It was at 4.30am on 3 June 2020 that Dr James Whitfield sent the email that would detonate his career. Like many Americans, Whitfield had stayed up late that night, seething over the killings of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and Ahmaud Arbery. Barely a month into the promotion to principal of Colleyville Heritage High, he wrestled with how to reassure his 1,974 students as scores of protesters took to the streets in cities all over the world. He had seen the virtue signals from Fortune 500 companies, the black squares on social media, but they seemed lacking. As Colleyville’s first Black principal, he felt like he should say more. Emboldened by friends, he decided to make a teachable moment out of this summer of unrest. “I wanted to give people a message of hope and encouragement,” he says, still sounding stunned over the phone. The email he wrote declared systemic racism to be “alive and well” and encouraged the community to band together. Education, he told them, is “a necessary conduit to get liberty and justice for all”. Initially, the responses were overwhelmingly positive. Grateful, even. But over the course of five months they slowly gave way to freedom of information requests for his email, text messages and social media posts from members of rightwing extremist groups. “Nobody in the community was calling me or anything,” he says. “But I started to hear word that, ‘Hey. these people are talking about you and they’re saying you’re doing critical race theory.’” He didn’t think it would amount to anything – but then he was placed on paid administrative leave pending investigation. In the year and a half between Whitfield being praised and him subsequently losing his job over the email, the American right was lasering its focus in on critical race theory – a school of thought that would have been unfamiliar to most a year ago. Critical race theory examines how racism is perpetuated by the law and seeks to understand how the effects of slavery and segregation still ripple through society today. Critical race theory was largely intended to challenge white liberals who regard post-civil rights America as a colorblind society, but as the gruesome video of George Floyd’s death was forcing white Americans to confront structural racism, it rose to mainstream attention. This started with then-president Donald Trump, who became preoccupied with what he saw as an academic pursuit to make white people feel guilty for being white, after hearing about the New York Times’ 1619 Project being taught in schools. “Teaching even one child these divisive messages would verge on psychological abuse … It is a program for national suicide,” the former president wrote about critical race theory in June 2021. In a September 2020 executive order, Trump called for new federal workplace requirements aimed at “promoting unity” by barring training on “divisive concepts” including “race or sex stereotyping” and “scapegoating” or any other instruction painting the United States as fundamentally racist. (The Biden administration has since rescinded that order.) Fox News, Trump’s preferred TV network, also developed a fixation: at one point late last year, the broadcaster uttered the phrase “critical race theory” more than 1,900 times over a three-and-a-half-month span. And so, when Stetson Clark – a Goldman Sachs alum turned defeated school board candidate whose children do not attend Colleyville Heritage High – took to a school district meeting on 26 July 2021, with a full-throated, two-and-a-half-minute condemnation of Whitfield’s letter, the audience was ready to hear it. “How ’bout you fire him!” one voice in the gallery said about Whitfield. “The revolution will not be televised,” shouted Clark, feeling censored for being told not to mention Whitfield specifically. He said it without irony, although he was echoing the words of the disruptive Black American poet and musician Gil Scott-Heron. Clark’s list of complaints about Whitfield included the following: Whitfield encouraged members of the community to become revolutionary by being antiracist; he told teachers that racism is any system that reinforces one race’s superiority over another and that Whitfield had used his Twitter feed to recommend books by Barack Obama (A Promised Land), Lonnie Bunch (A Fool’s Errand) and Richard Rothstein (The Color of Law). Clark’s call for Whitfield’s immediate termination was received by cheers from the gallery. Weeks later, Whitfield received a disciplinary letter from the district before being placed on paid administrative leave. Whitfield shrugs when I ask him how he felt at the time. “It’s our job as educators to present the truth and present you with opportunities to investigate for yourself – to think critically – and I know critical is a very touchy word,” he jokes. Clark breaking decorum and naming Whitfield was a clear sign to Whitfield that this disagreement was about more than just a letter. “At this point, I could no longer sit back and chalk [the outrage] up to a few misguided crazy people,” says Whitfield, unmasking those apparently concerned community members as activists with a clear agenda. “When you hear the background in the gallery shouting, ‘Fire him!’ it’s reminiscent of a different place in time.” Shortly thereafter he was pushed out of his job and his life was turned inside-out: now, Whitfield has emerged as a central figure in the debate over how history is taught in American schools. Whitfield’s removal came as 30 states have proposed constraints on any substantive teaching of America’s racist history in schools. . Much of that legislation has been introduced by Republicans with full backing from conservative groups that have entrenched themselves inside the public school system for a new culture war – branding critical race theory as fundamentally anti-American. Whitfield disagrees that what is being taught in the classroom has really changed. “What’s interesting is far-right opponents are saying they want the curriculum to say America is not inherently racist, that America did all things perfectly and everything is rosy and good and slavery was just a minor footnote,” Whitfield says. “But they’ve already got that.” He points to the agency that presides over primary and secondary public education, Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills, and explains that the mandated state curriculum hasn’t changed near enough to justify this backlash. “We still have a whole [school] year, the seventh grade, dedicated to Texas history where kids are learning that the Alamo was this heroic cause,” says Whitfield, speaking of the 1836 standoff that has been canonized as a noble moral victory over Mexico (and not the bloody defeat it actually was). “We have this way of glamorizing our most ill moments and if you say anything that speaks to what really happened, you’re chastised for being unpatriotic,” he says. ••• Perhaps it was only a matter of time before Whitfield ran into trouble in Colleyville, a 99% white exurb with a $150,000 median household income. When Whitfield took the job, the fact he would become Colleyville’s first Black principal was not mentioned in any of the school’s promotional material. But the journey the district and the school went through before getting to that point was immense. In the mid-aughts, well before his high school principalship at Colleyville Heritage, Whitfield taught geography and coached basketball at Richland High – a neighboring school with mostly students of color. But whenever his students prepared to play matches against Colleyville, it wasn’t the competition they were most afraid of. “Our kids would be on edge traveling to that school,” says Whitfield, describing a hostile environment during the games. Colleyville’s white students would hurl racist obscenities at Richland players, he claims – forcing the team to move their strategy huddles all the way on to the court during play stoppages so they could avoid being within earshot of the abuse. But as the school district expanded, Colleyville Heritage’s student population became more diverse. When Whitfield was lured back to the district for a job as an assistant principal at Colleyville middle school in 2018, following a private sector stint as a leadership strategist, he was shocked by what he saw. “You had ethnic diversity, religious diversity,” he says. “There were, like, 54 home languages spoken at this school. Fewer kids were coming from Colleyville. The district was changing.” He was hopeful. An early 2021 job evaluation gave no sign that his career was in danger. Before the critical race theory row, he seemed to be performing well: he signed a contract to return to Colleyville Heritage for the 2021-22 school year last April. And then the council meeting took place. After Whitfield was placed on paid administrative leave, it was open season. His school shared photos of Whitfield and his wife with People Magazine, something which Whitfield has openly said caused his family great distress. The photos, showing the two lying on the beach together, were taken for a fifth anniversary shoot – which the school had asked Whitfield to remove in 2019. Whitfield wrote a a lengthy Facebook post justifying himself and accusing his bosses of bullying. But the district held its line, trashing the photos as “overly intimate”; and scorning Whitfield for publicly questioning the district’s decision on his Twitter feed to return students to the classroom before proper health and safety protocols had been installed. In the September 2021 board meeting to decide Whitfield’s fate, Gemma Padgett, the district’s executive director of human resources, called him “disrespectful, unreasonable and insubordinate”. Colleyville’s decision to cut ties with Whitfield, they claim, is unrelated to Clark’s board meeting rant or the Facebook photos or any evidence that he promoted CRT. Rather, they justify the move by accusing Whitfield of deleting emails and citing him for other “deficiencies in his performance”. (Whitfield denies there were any.) He was given the opportunity to stay at the school, subject to him agreeing to a number of directives which he cannot discuss, but ultimately he decided to let his 15-day deadline to respond lapse. On 30 August he was relieved of his computer, badge and keys. While Whitfield awaited the outcome of his administrative leave, the Colleyville Heritage High community rallied around him; around 100 students staged a two-day walkout in a show of solidarity and called Whitfield’s sacking “blatant racism and bigotry”. On the heels of the student demonstration, it was announced that Whitfield would not be welcomed back. Even after everything that’s happened, Whitfield still thinks there’s a lesson to be learned. “I want people to know that if there’s something you believe in, it’s OK to fight,” he says. “One of the things I wish I had done earlier, is be more vocal in standing up against it.” Meanwhile, his peers have shown a willingness to join in his fight. In a special session last May, the Dallas Independent School District’s board of trustees unanimously approved a resolution to the legislative pushback against CRT, believing it “would greatly hinder efforts to create inclusive and equitable learning environments and develop more informed, engaged citizens”. The resolution makes the case that schools have not shifted to teaching CRT and speaks of the importance of teaching American history in schools. But the bill remains largely symbolic - in part because of how nebulous the term “critical race theory” has become. Now, it is being used by its detractors to describe any teaching that challenges the established American backstory as unpatriotic. While Whitfield continues to be paid the balance of his $125,000 salary through the 2022-23 school year, per his leave settlement, he now fills his days writing, volunteering and reflecting on his surreal Colleyville Heritage tenure. Late last year, he pursued a seat on the state board of education but pulled out in December. “The more I thought about it, the more counterproductive it seemed to jump into a political campaign when I firmly believe politics has no place in K-12 public education,” he explains. But he still can’t quite believe that he’s essentially been kicked out of school for an email. “For the better part of the past two decades, all I’ve known is get up, go to school,” he says. When I asked him if he could ever imagine a day where critical race theory is taught in schools, perhaps under a less-polarizing name, he took a long beat. “These far-right groups have brought to light a topic that we have long needed to wrestle with,” Whitfield says. “About how a true and accurate history is taught and whose narrative is being centered. It’s almost like a blessing in disguise,” he says.“I wanted,” says the narrator of Claire Vaye Watkins’s second novel, “to behave like a man, a slightly bad one” – and if ever there was a sentence to put on a tote bag, it’s this one. Which woman hasn’t, at times, longed to adopt the kind of smiling mediocrity men take for granted? But what is mediocrity in a man is unforgivable in a woman; worse if she is also a mother. And so we find ourselves boxed in by circumstance; and the worse the circumstance, the smaller the box. This is the territory Watkins explores, and she does so powerfully, resisting the need either to sentimentalise or apologise. Shortly after the birth of her first child, the novel’s narrator walks out of her home, taking her breast pump, but leaving behind her husband and daughter. Leaving, too, her middle-class academic’s life to return to the California she grew up in, a place of chaotic poverty and casinos, OxyContin and coyotes and desert. This imploding narrator’s name, it becomes evident, is Claire Vaye Watkins. Fictional Watkins shares at least some biographical details with author Watkins – a mother called Martha; a father who first procured girls for, and then gave evidence against, Charles Manson – and yet this is unquestionably a novel. It is a mark of Watkins’s confidence that she displays her source material so brazenly, and I loved her for it. The question of female imagination seems at times to be tediously inescapable, the autofiction tag so readily applied, that to find an author meeting the issue head on is invigorating. It also pre-empts interrogation, forcing the reader to concentrate on what’s in front of them. And what emerges is a study of intergenerational pain. Although the novel is focused on women, it is poverty, rather than patriarchy, that is presented as the central evil, and Watkins writes with clarity about the fact that acquiring money doesn’t automatically alleviate the legacy of a difficult childhood. Almost all the characters who drift in and out of view are damaged in one way or another by chronic poverty and the scavengers that follow it: poor service provision, a predatory gambling industry, the prescription drug crisis. In one of the book’s most haunting sections, Claire’s mother, after years sober, is casually prescribed opiates for Lyme disease, which was long dismissed as hysteria, and quickly loses control of her life. The exception is Rust, the narrator’s college friend, who, insulated by past and present wealth, finds perfect joy in the smooth action of his automatic kitchen towel dispenser – a detail that made me both laugh and wince. Still, the men, even the good ones, pass on their suffering to women, expecting to be cared both for and about. “I was determined to make it out of college unraped,” Claire says, “an actual goal I had” – but she can only manage this by sleight of hand, choosing to cast as something else the time her boyfriend, “not at all violent but also not relenting”, holds her down. This, she seems to say, is how so many women survive – through a dogged refusal of victimhood, which is quite different from not being hurt. There were parts I found less convincing. When Claire speaks to her college friends, the writing loses some of its power. Perhaps the intention was to show a failure of connection; if so, it didn’t quite work for me. Teenage letters from the narrator’s mother to a cousin add little to the thrust of the book and are presented in reverse chronological order, a slight misstep in a novel that is otherwise impeccably readable, despite its episodic structure. On the other hand, Watkins is excellent on the dulling quality of depression, the way it can make one both lucid and careless. A section in which Claire lists her problems, ranging from not being able to find her phone to not being able to grasp how final death is, ends: “My problem is I am only a little bothered by all of this and want to change not at all.” She is good, too, on how having a child can feel like being broken. “Motherhood had cracked me in half … The woman they admired, who’d written the books they liked or at least had heard of, if only today, was on the other side of a canyon.” I had this book pegged, at first, as angry, but struggled as I read to characterise the quality of this anger – until I realised that what I had mistaken for fury was something else. I Love You But I’ve Chosen Darkness is a novel not of rage but of incandescent sadness, radiating grief for the lost, the damaged, the left behind. It is remarkably clear-sighted. While presenting the causes for Claire’s crisis, Watkins never mistakes context for excuse. What she offers instead is compassion, and the suggestion that, for those lucky enough to have the option, it is possible that the only way out is through. • Jessie Greengrass’s latest novel is The High House (Swift). I Love You But I’ve Chosen Darkness by Claire Vaye Watkins is published by Riverrun (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Arsenal are pushing to sign the midfielder Arthur Melo on loan from Juventus but the Brazil international will be allowed to leave only if his club can find a replacement. Arthur is understood to be open to joining Arsenal and talks are continuing over the 25-year-old, who moved to Juventus from Barcelona in June 2020 for an initial €72m. The Premier League club are ready to cover his full salary. Arthur has more often been a substitute than a starter since returning from injury in October. He came on during Juventus’s Supercoppa Italiana defeat by Internazionale on Wednesday night. The Arsenal defender Pablo Marí is close to completing a loan move to Udinese, who have reached an agreement to bring in Filip Benkovic, another centre-back, after his release by Leicester City. Arsenal are continuing to pursue the widely coveted Fiorentina striker Dusan Vlahovic and on Wednesday Mikel Arteta insisted the best players in the world were keen to join the club. “Historically this club has always been targeting the best players in the world and the best players in the world are always interested to come here and I can say that situation hasn’t changed,” the manager said. “Any time I have spoken to any player, they were so willing to come.”Manchester United’s malaise continues, but moves may well be happening to restore the club to former glories. Whoever succeeds Ralf Rangnick – and remember it is Rangnick who gets to choose that – may get the use of Brighton’s former Chelsea full-back Tariq Lamptey, who will cost £50m. Rangnick has not been impressed with Aaron Wan-Bissaka or the credentials of Diogo Dalot to be the first-choice right-back. Ousmane Dembélé could leave Barcelona on a free transfer this summer and can thus join United’s ranks of indolent flank forwards. How might such players’ wages be met? The answer is the departure of Paul Pogba to Paris Saint-Germain, as has long been trailed. Another exit may be Eric Bailly, who Milan would like on loan this month. Antonio Rüdiger, an upgrade on Bailly, may not be possible as he seems set to sign a new contract with Chelsea. As it stands, and despite some poor performances of late, the plan is to keep Marcus Rashford on board and talks are afoot that he will sign an extension to stay. And in that gaping hole where midfield once was, Borussia Mönchengladbach and Switzerland midfielder Denis Zakaria continues to be heavily linked. Tottenham’s defeat to Chelsea in the Fizzy Energy Cup on Wednesday included a team selection that left many a Spurs fan aghast. Neither full strength nor reserve team it appeared an attempt by Antonio Conte to show new boss Daniel Levy that fresh blood is required. And Conte sure does like a transfer or two. Will any arrive in January? The most likely seems to be Adama Traoré, who Wolves appear resigned to losing, though not on the initial loan Levy has proposed. The fee is £20m and Tottenham have been asked to pay it. Newcastle corner: following the flagship capture of Chris Wood, the new ownership are not prepared to stop there. Interest in Sevilla defender Diego Carlos continues with a £28m fee wafted at the Spanish club. Leipzig and Mali midfielder Amadou Haidara is also linked, and so is a teenage striker in Hugo Ekitike of Reims, one of Ligue 1’s freshest talents with eight goals scored in 18 matches this season. A further player linked is Norwich’s Todd Cantwell, in a possible repeat strategy of weakening a relegation rival, in the style of luring Wood from Burnley. Any Arsenal moves this month seem unlikely, though there appears an acknowledgment there is a Granit Xhaka-sized hole in midfield, and Juventus’s Arthur Melo is being floated as a candidate to fill it. In the long term, and this would be a costly business, a move for Youri Tielemans of Leicester is being mooted. As with Dusan Vlahovic, the finance is not there to engineer a move this month. On the way out may be Pablo Marí, the forgotten centre-back ready to join Udinese on loan. Another club brimming with ambition are Aston Villa, already Philippe Coutinho and Lucas Digne to the good. Yves Bissouma, Brighton’s often excellent midfielder, is the next target for Stevie Gerrard.An Egyptian media tycoon with close ties to the government has been detained pending an investigation into allegations of sexual assault. The Egyptian public prosecution service says it is investigating reports that businessman Mohamed al-Amin sexually abused girls living in an orphanage that he owned and took them on trips to his holiday villa. Amin, best known for establishing the pro-government CBC network in 2011, was arrested on Friday to be held for four days. The court decided to extend Amin’s pre-trial detention for a further 15 days in a hearing on Sunday where he told the court: “I never did anything wrong. I treated those girls like my own children.” Allegations of sexual abuse at the Safe Hands Home for Girls were first made public in December by the humanitarian organisation Missing Children. Its founder Rami el-Gebali told the Guardian that an official in the Ministry of Social Solidarity told him in mid-October of multiple complaints about the orphanage that the ministry had been slow to pursue. The ministry says that it closed the home on 29 November. Three girls at the orphanage, aged between 13 and 18, reported to Missing Children that Amin had molested them and taken them to his seaside house on Egypt’s north coast. The girls said they had been made to wear revealing clothes and to dance for Amin. One 13-year-old said that he had presented her with a marriage contract, which he pressured her to sign. In an interview with Egyptian talkshow Sada El Balad, the minister of social solidarity, Niveen Qabbag, said she had initially been impressed by the facilities at the Safe Hands Home when she officially opened it in March 2021. She added that it was well known that Amin would frequently stay at the orphanage with his wife, but that the ministry responded quickly to the sexual abuse allegations in shutting down the home. The story has been widely spread on Twitter in Egypt, with many calling the case “Egypt’s Jeffrey Epstein”, drawing parallels with the US financier who was found dead in his cell in 2019 while awaiting trial for sex offences. Amin came to prominence in July 2011, when he launched the CBC news channel after the Arab spring protests. The network became well known for supporting the official line of the interim government, at a time when many stations used the increased press freedom to take a more critical view after president Hosni Mubarak had stood down. When President Abdel Fatah al-Sisi came to power in 2014, Amin was appointed to the board of trustees for the presidential development fund, Long Live Egypt, to which his company reportedly donated 1.2bn Egytian pounds (£56.2m). After his arrest, member of the House of Representatives Mostafa Bakry defended Amin on Twitter, saying that he was “the first to donate to the Long Live Egypt fund”, and calling him “a man known for his faith and piety”. Amin is not the first establishment figure to be arrested in recent months. In June last year, businessman Hassan Ratib and former MP Alaa Hassanein were charged with financing illegal excavations and the smuggling abroad of ancient Egyptian antiquities. Their trial began on Saturday where the court heard that the two men funded four archaeological digs in different regions.The Duke of York’s accuser Virginia Giuffre would be unlikely to accept a “purely financial settlement” to end her sexual assault civil lawsuit against the royal, her lawyer has said. David Boies was speaking after a US judge rejected Prince Andrew’s motion to have the civil case against him dismissed, paving the way for a possible civil trial in the autumn. Legal experts say one way for Andrew, 61, to avoid trial would be to reach an out-of-court settlement with Giuffre, 38, who claims she was trafficked by the financier Jeffrey Epstein to have sex with powerful people, including Andrew, when she was 17. Andrew has consistently denied her allegations. Boies said: “I think it’s very important to Virginia Giuffre that this matter be resolved in a way that vindicates her and vindicates the other victims.” “I don’t think that she has a firm view at this point, nor could she, as to exactly what the resolution should be. But I think what’s going to be important is that this resolution vindicates her and vindicates the claim she’s made,” he told BBC’s Newsnight. Boies said there had been no suggestion of settlement discussions at this point. He said that prior to bringing the case they had “reached out” to Andrew and the prince’s lawyers and suggested mediation, but “there was no interest in that at that time”. “Whether that has changed or not, I think we’ll have to wait and see.” He added: “A purely financial settlement is not anything that I think she’s [Giuffre] interested in.” When asked about the US ruling, a spokesperson for Buckingham Palace said: “We would not comment on what is an ongoing legal matter.” Andrew now faces the prospect of Giuffre giving a detailed account in court of the allegation she was trafficked to have sex with the Queen’s second son when she was 17. The Manhattan federal judge Lewis Kaplan dismissed a motion by the duke’s lawyers on Wednesday to have the civil case thrown out after they argued Giuffre had waived her right to pursue the royal by signing a confidential settlement in 2009 with Epstein, in exchange for $500,000, in which she agreed not to sue any other potential defendants. In his detailed ruling, Kaplan decided there was more than one interpretation of the 2009 deal, saying it was ambiguous and that it was premature to consider the points raised by Andrew to cast doubt on Giuffre’s claims, though his efforts would be permissible at trial. The ruling means the case now moves to the “discovery” phase. As it progresses towards trial, the duke, Giuffre and any other potential witnesses would have to give depositions. Boies said the judge’s ruling was “an important step” in moving towards any trial. “It is, however, just one step and there are many more steps to be taken,” he said. The next would be the taking of evidence, and they were already in the phase of exchanging documents, he said. He said Andrew had made a lot of statements in his 2019 Newsnight interview, “which he will have to try and back up in his deposition”. Andrew’s approach had been “to deny, deny, deny, to blame Virginia, to criticise her, to attack her character, her moral credibility, and we will see how all that plays out when he’s under oath”, Boies said. Asked whether, if the case went to trial, Andrew would be likely to appear in person, Boies said he thought the chances of the case going to trial were good. “Whether he shows up himself, or simply his lawyers, is something that is in part up to him, and in part up to the court. In a civil case it is not always necessary for the defendant to be present when the trial takes place. It’s typically advisable because it is often hard to defend yourself when you’re absent,” he said. Andrew has three main options: ignoring the lawsuit, which is his right; engaging with the American legal system to defend himself against the allegations, or attempting to reach an out-of-court settlement with Giuffre. If he ignores the civil proceedings, a default judgment would be made in favour of Giuffre.When I was in my late 30s, someone came up to me in the street and started talking to me as if I were Sidney Poitier. To the extent that they called me “Sidney”. I said: “I’m sorry – my name is Don.” And they looked at me and said: “Oh Sidney, when did you change your name?” They simply would not accept I was somebody else. Even if you didn’t model yourself after Poitier, other people would. He was just the go-to reference. I’ve yet to meet a Black actor who hasn’t been compared to him – which is both irritating and enjoyable. And says more about the one making the comparison. Yet when I was a little boy growing up in Newcastle, I was of course inspired by him. Poitier meant everything because he was the only light at the end of the tunnel. He was there and doing it and visible and Black. No one else was – or, at least, almost no one. And at that age one somehow needed inspiration from an almost untouchable source. Poitier had done it. And he’d done it with dignity and panache and grace. There wasn’t a moment in anything I ever saw him do on film which made me feel ashamed, which was remarkable. I remember watching The Defiant Ones and In the Heat of the Night and Lilies of the Field and I was so proud of him. There was no sense of this being a Black man doing something – it was just a man. He somehow allowed people into him, beyond his colour. I think the other reason he especially connected with me is that we both came from the Caribbean [Poitier from the Bahamas; Warrington from Trinidad]. I could relate to him coming from a sister island and so his course felt like one I might be able to chart too. Other people simply seemed out of reach. I think this heritage was also crucial in his cut through with both white and Black audiences in the US. Being outside the system meant he didn’t have that oppressive history Americans do. There was a kind of breathing space. Maybe it allowed him to be more himself at a time when to be Black and in America and trying to do what he was doing was very, very hard. That awful legacy still weighs heavily. It might be one of the reasons why people such as Steve McQueen and Chiwetel Ejiofor could make – and be celebrated for – 12 Years a Slave: they were not American. Being an outsider always makes a difference, although it’s not always a good thing. It gives you distance but also leaves you slightly isolated. Poitier went out of fashion. For some people he was too white to be Black. They wanted to give Black people a full range and didn’t care for that kind of representation. But he carried on doing exactly what he was always doing and the world came back to him. I think few people know how committed he was to the cause, and how brilliantly he used his insider status in the system to his – and other Black people’s – advantage. I suspect he often used subterfuge to get what he wanted. He made it possible not only for Black actors to act but for Black people to want to do it. He climbed the ladder but he didn’t pull it up after him. He went: “This is it! You can come here too, and if I can help, I will.” Poitier was the one who made it to the top of the hill. It was a hard climb, but he did it, and his achievement maybe offered a glimpse of what might be possible for people like me. We could at least try.A new report has revealed that a record number of Americans are now alarmed about the climate crisis. The study, published by the Yale Program on Climate Change Communication, found that Americans overall are becoming increasingly worried about global heating, more engaged with the issue and more supportive of finding solutions to the issue. The study categorized Americans into six distinct groups based on their beliefs, attitudes, policy support and behavior about climate change. The six distinct groups are: the Alarmed, who are the most engaged and very worried about global warming; the Concerned, who think global warming is a significant threat but prioritize it less and are less likely to take action; the Cautious, who are aware of climate change but are uncertain about its causes and are not very worried; the Disengaged, who are largely unaware of global warming; the Doubtful, who doubt it is happening or human-caused and the Dismissive, who firmly reject its reality and oppose most climate change policies. The study revealed that the largest group, Alarmed (33%) greatly outnumber the dismissive (9%) by more than three to one. Approximately six in 10 Americans (59%) are either Alarmed or Concerned while only approximately two in 10 (19%) are Doubtful or Dismissive. Over the last five years, the Alarmed group has nearly doubled in size, growing 15 percentage points in total. From just March 2021 to September 2021 alone, the Alarmed segment increased by 9 percentage points. Meanwhile, the Dismissive group shrank from 11% to 9% in the past five years, with only about one in 10 Americans now firmly rejecting the reality of human-caused global warming. When the group first began its surveys in 2008, the Concerned was the largest segment. Two years later, the group decreased slightly while the Cautious grew and became roughly equally as large. On the contrary, the Alarmed was the second smallest group as recently as early 2015. The Cautious, Doubtful and Dismissive groups have all shrunk in recent years. “The growth of the Alarmed segment … is encouraging because progress on climate change requires strong, coordinated, and sustained action, and the Alarmed are the most likely to demand and support these actions by leaders,” the study said.A London-based online payments company has become Britain’s most valuable private fintech business after its latest fundraising valued it at $40bn (£29bn), handing its surf-loving founder a paper fortune of about $20bn. Checkout.com, which simplifies payment processes for businesses, achieved the valuation after a $1bn investment that puts the stake of its 40-year-old chief executive, Guillaume Pousaz, at about $20bn. Pousaz, a Swiss national, dropped out of university in 2005 when his father became ill with cancer and he then moved to California to pursue his love of surfing. It was only after running out of cash that he took up a job with International Payment Consultants, a payments processing firm, in 2006. “I didn’t choose payments – payments chose me,” Pousaz told the Sunday Times in 2020. “I only took that job so I could go surfing.” A year after joining IPC, Pousaz left to launch his first startup. He founded Checkout.com in 2012. Fintech, a catch-all term for financial services firms operating in the digital sphere, has become a key driver of the UK’s success as a tech investment hub, featuring companies such as Revolut and Wise. Venture capitalists, who invest in new companies by taking stakes in them, invested a record £29.4bn in the UK tech sector last year. The number of unicorns – startup firms worth more than $1bn (£750m) – reached a high of 29 in 2021 including Depop, the British secondhand fashion resale app sold to US online marketplace Etsy for $1.6bn this year, and the car-selling platform Motorway. Checkout.com, which is now worth more than the British fintech peer Revolut, valued at $33bn, said it would use the funding to launch products and further its involvement in the Web3 space. Web3 is the term used for the next chapter in digital innovation (after Web 2.0 was coined for social media companies) and centres on technological breakthroughs such as blockchain; a digital, decentralised ledger that underpins the cryptocurrency market. Investors in the latest Checkout.com funding round include US investment firms and the Qatar Investment Authority, the Arab state’s sovereign wealth fund. Checkout.com processes payments for clients including Netflix, cryptocurrency trading platform Coinbase and Pizza Hut. The fundraising comes a year after the London-based company’s previous round of investment, in which it raised $450m and achieved a valuation of $15bn. Change in how consumers use financial services and a pandemic-driven rise in use of digital services has drawn investor interest in fintechs, prompting global investors to ramp up bets on the sector.It was easy to scoff at the initial reports that University of Michigan coach Jim Harbaugh was considering a return to the NFL. In the normal cause of business, it looked like a well-timed (if obvious) leak on the heels of a successful season, a college coach looking to maximize his value and extract maximum dollars and influence out his school. Not so fast. At this stage, Harbaugh returning to the NFL feels like a fait accompli. He has been linked with all of the head coach openings that have trickled out of the league this week, and has yet to issue any public denials that he’s looking to leave Ann Arbor. In case you’re in need of a quick refresher on Harbaugh’s time at Michigan: He returned to his alma mater as a conquering hero, a former Wolverines quarterback who turned into one of the most successful coaches – in college and the pros – of the 2010s; he had a reputation for heading to places that stunk and immediately making them great; he had previously taken the 49ers to within a play of winning the Super Bowl; things turned sour over the Niners potential rebuild; he was in high demand in the NFL; he rebuffed interest in favor of returning to his school. In his first couple of years back at school, Michigan were good but not good enough. Then they stunk. Then Harbaugh, at one time the highest-paid coach in the country, took a meaty pay cut. Then Michigan became really good, finally toppling bitter rivals Ohio State and making it to a first college football playoff – where they were boat-raced by eventual national champions Georgia. In the abstract, a coach beating the once-unconquerable rival and making it into the postseason would signal the start of something. For Harbaugh and Michigan, it seems like the end. Harbaugh’s anticipated return to the NFL – be it with the Bears, Raiders, Dolphins, Giants, or any of the open positions that have interest in the coach – is about more than one coach, one college, and one NFL team. It’s about a shift in the landscape of coaching at the highest level. There was a time when college coaching jobs ranked as the best in the country. Sure, college coaches would bounce up to the next level to test themselves, as much an ego play as anything else – a chance to see if they could really coach against the best of the best. But the expectations, the short tenures, the salary cap, the draft meant sustained success was difficult. Parity is legislated in the NFL; it’s equality by design. In college, the rich have always gotten richer. You recruit well. So you win. So you recruit even better. So you win even bigger. On and on the cycle rolls. Coaches were apt to stay where they could rack up wins and champions and accrue ever-increasing amounts of power. In the NFL, teams are designated one first-round pick a year. At the blueblood college programs, they’re consistently pulling in two or three future first-round picks a year in high-school recruiting, with a gaggle of second and third-round picks filling out the roster. In the good old days, once you had established a program, the thing could sit on cruise control for close to a decade; the season coming down to one or two games at the end. But times they are a-changin’. Athletes at the college level have been given some agency. Now, the playing body has some power. Athletes are now free to transfer schools, one time, penalty-free. They’re able to put their name in the ‘transfer portal’, to let other schools know they’re available and open for business. And it is indeed a business. The advent of Name Image and Likeness (NIL) in all its unregulated glory has led to a recruiting arms race. What was once covert is now overt: players are being paid full-time salaries to play collegiate football. The mechanics are goofy. Coaches cannot outright recruit a player based on NIL. A booster must set up an LLC and ‘license’ a player’s (or whole position groups) image. Still: The implications have been immediate and gravity-altering. Bringing payments out of the shadows is what allowed Jackson State, an HBCU in college football’s second division, to attract the No 1 overall recruit in the country. The traditional powers continue to hoover up the majority of the talent, but the playing field has been democratized. If your school has a wealthy backer willing to hand over dollars to college students, you’re in The Game. Those jigsaw pieces taken together have changed the structure of the sport. Alabama built a dynastic program on principle that it was ‘fourth-and-goal every day’. Now, it’s free agency every day. A college coach is no longer spending whatever free time he can muster firing off texts to teenagers or flying across the country to check out the next biggest thing. He is re-recruiting the players already in his building. There is no legislation that could stop Bryce Young, the reigning Heisman Trophy winner, from putting his name into the transfer portal tomorrow. He could offer his services to the highest bidder at the click of a button. That may be Alabama, it may not. The power that schools and the coaches that govern those schools once held over the players, their future NFL prospects and earning power, has eroded. The players gaining a modicum of power has loosened the grip of once dictatorial coaches. Every conversation, every decision is a recruiting pitch. Bench a player for his backup, he’s gone. Unable to pony up the NIL deal commensurate with your lineman’s value? He’ll see you at the class reunion. There’s a reason Nick Saban is suddenly all smiles; the talent will go where it’s fun and they pay. It will require a different style of coach moving forward, a different mindset. When asked about whether he had ever dreamed about taking the Miami job, new head coach Mario Cristobal, widely considered the nation’s top recruiter, shot back: “I don’t have time for dreams”. There was not a hint of jest in his voice. He was serious. Why take time for things such as sleep when there’s another deal to be struck with a three-star cornerback in Boca Raton? While you’re dreaming, Cristobal is ‘crootin. Once upon a time, with four-year scholarships and coaches able to block transfer requests from their athletes, a college coach could build for the long-term. It was the NFL that was a place that demanded immediate results. Now, college football is the place of upheaval; the NFL is where a coach can find some stasis. Sure, since the NFL expanded its playoff field 11 teams have failed to make the playoffs and 10 of those sides have made coaching changes (not strictly for on-field reasons). But – ah – guaranteed contracts; a set number of draft picks; a salary cap; the chance to sign your quarterback to a deal that means he cannot up and leave for a bigger offer in eight months’ time. No coach goes into a job assuming they’re going to fail. They think they’re going to succeed. And if you think you’re going to hit – that you can out-scheme opponents and find the talent needed to win – the NFL now offers an advantage over the college game. When you get done with work, you’re done with work. Player movement doesn’t really begin until the offseason – and it’s regulated. Those TikTok dances you’ve had to do in an 18-year-olds living? They’re out. Sleeping over at a kicker’s house to fend off your recruiting rivals? They’re gone, too. Team-building is streamlined. There are no backroom dealings with boosters. There have always been extremes between the college and professional ranks. It’s why so many of college football’s superstar coaches have flamed out in the pros. The broad outline was the same but the nitty-gritty required different skill sets. That divide is now growing. Those who could stomach the old way of doing things — their way of doing things – will soon start running for the hills now that the players have a say. One game requires a fresh skillset; the other a different entirely. Harbaugh will be the first to jump from the new lifestyle because he has the pedigree to do so. And while college coaches have had rough records when jumping to the pros before, that won’t stop NFL owners from offering big-time deals to try to lure away the next hot candidate. Now more than ever, they will listen.Amika George, 22, didn’t set out to be an activist. “None of my immediate family were involved in formal politics in any way,” she says. And yet, while still a teenager, she ran the successful Free Periods campaign that led to free sanitary products being placed in schools and now she has a book, Make It Happen, about how to get involved in politics from the grassroots. Featuring prominent voices from Arundhati Roy to the Egyptian writer and radical Wael Ghomin, its worldview is that there is an infinite possibility for change, situated in the hands of every one of us. In other words, it is a remix of Hannah Arendt with a sunnier chorus. So I am surprised when I speak to her, not just by her hinterland but by her manner. I was expecting a punchy, studs-first Marxist; instead I find a quietly spoken, very thoughtful committed Christian, who is constantly challenging, often playful but always with serious intent. George was just 17 when she read a headline on the BBC website: “Girls Too Poor to Buy Sanitary Products Missing School”. She had read an article about period poverty in India, and what now caught her eye was that one charity was diverting products that it had intended to send to Kenya to the UK. Students in the UK, it seemed, were facing the same problems as those in the developing world. That was 14 March, 2017; by April, she had set up Free Periods, to campaign against period poverty. She promoted her cause diligently: from the obvious (a petition on change.org) to the festive (a demonstration in Parliament Square just before Christmas 2017. “Even though everyone was protesting period poverty – something so horrendous – it was also a celebration of periods”, she says). A collaboration with the Red Box Project, founded around the same time with similar aims, led to a legal campaign against the UK government, urging it to comply with its obligations to “ensure equal access to education for all children, irrespective of their sex”. Two months after that, in January 2020, the Department for Education committed funding for free period products in all English schools (similar commitments had already been made in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland). “Free Periods was successful,” she concludes simply. “That took two and a half years. I started my campaign before I could even vote, and I think that’s a testament to the fact that, actually, you can achieve change as somebody who is not represented in politics.” Were her parents (her mother works in financial services and her father is a project manager) surprised by her campaign? Only moderately; she had always been fiercely independent. Her school friends must, surely, have thought her single-mindedness extreme? “I don’t think so. Not unless they were saying that behind my back!” Just because the battle was won in such a short time, however, it doesn’t mean it was easy. The levers of democratic change started off remote and unresponsive. George recalls being at school, learning about the Houses of Parliament, then going off to a meeting in the Commons the same day, and “having a meeting with an MP who was quite resistant to listening”. It is an arduous life lesson, that parliamentary representatives don’t start paying attention until they absolutely have to. Then, there were flat, uneventful times when nothing seemed to work, and only social media was keeping her ambitions afloat (“floods of DMs and emails and tweets from people who were incredibly supportive”). George initially fell foul of other campaigners, too, changing the language she used after “I had conversations with trans men or nonbinary people who felt excluded.” But switching to “students” or “children” led to criticism from some feminists who insist the words “girl” and “woman” should not be discarded. On this, though, she is relaxed. “I didn’t have to reevaluate the aims of my campaign or what I was asking the government to do,” she says. “It just meant that I was making people feel included. What I find upsetting is that the people who were already included see that as an affront.” At the start of her campaign, she was shocked at just how horrible keyboard warriors could be. “I went to an all girls’ school: everybody was quite open in talking about periods, I hadn’t been touched by the stigma. It never occurred to me that people might not like any mention of periods. That there was this disgusting blame culture, either denying the existence of period poverty or saying: ‘The parents are clearly just spending all their money on cigarettes or alcohol.’” She says she turned that “dismissive attitude” into “campaigning energy”. which is an incredible, yet somehow believable, skill: she is aware of prejudice or bigotry, yet never sounds like she is taking it seriously. All the while, she was becoming a poster girl for youth activism, being named on the Time Most Influential Teens of 2018 list, the Big Issue Top 100 Changemakers and Teen Vogue’s 21 under 21 list. But, rather than basking in this celebration of her work, she questioned it. “On the news, you always see one face. On climate change, it’s always Greta Thunberg. I think she’s incredible, but I think it’s very indicative of how the media approaches young people and politics. They don’t see those two things as a natural fit, they have to pin it on one person. Suddenly it’s: ‘There’s this one teenager that actually understands politics.’ You’re heralded. As great as that can feel, it’s also really dangerous. If you have no experience in politics or activism, you think you have to be at that level of confidence or resource or privilege before you can be involved in the conversation.” Yet the plaudits kept coming. George was awarded the Goalkeepers Campaigners award from the Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation, and made connections and inroads at the UN. Then, last year, she became the youngest person to receive an MBE, while she was still at Cambridge. This, however, was a double-edged sword – since it was only when she started her history degree that she got to grips with the details of empire. Then she wasn’t sure she wanted to be a Member of its Order. (George was born in London; her grandparents moved to the UK from Kerala in the 1970s.) “Literally, I got to university before I even understood the true atrocities of what the British did in India, which is where a lot of my extended family still lives. Something like the Amritsar massacre, it should be British history, but I heard nothing about it. I was taught Henry VIII’s wives about six or seven times.” She accepted the MBE all the same, on pragmatic grounds; her campaign comes first, and the award opens doors. She had served enough time hitting brick walls. For her dissertation, George focused not on empire but on “British Asian teenagers in London in the 90s – how they wove their political identities into music and TV and clubbing; also how music was a really important tool in building up the anti-apartheid movement”. It is a bit bracing, to discover that people can now study the 90s as part of a history degree. But it is also quite typical of George’s approach: studious but always relevant, practical. She is taking a gap year, then wants to do a masters on Kerala, “the only democratically elected Marxist government in the world. I’m really interested in how that’s been sustained, particularly given that India’s national government is, obviously, so rightwing.” She is also keen that the university doesn’t rest on its laurels when it comes to diversity. “There’s a big conversation happening at universities like Cambridge around access, around the private and state school divide. But I don’t think people are differentiating between grammar and comprehensive schools. Grammar schools, schools like mine, are overrepresented, which is still replicating privilege. But to a person from a private school, they don’t differentiate. They just think: ‘They’re all free.’” In political terms, she is clear about where she doesn’t want to go next: formal politics. And she doesn’t want to start another, different campaign. Instead she wants to slot into something that already exists. Climate change is one focus, and part of her reason for writing Make It Happen was the strong sense of anxiety in her generation. “It feels like a completely insurmountable thing for one teenager to tackle. That’s why I talk about breaking it down to a community level, fitting it into a larger framework of issues, connecting with people who are working on similar things.” One criticism that vexes her is that is the claim that even the act of breaking poverty down into types – period poverty, fuel poverty, food poverty, child poverty – enables the discourse to step around poverty itself. “I find that dismissive, ridiculous,” she says. “When you have these micro campaigns, which are often asking for quite tangible actions, you get a lot of energy.” Personally, I’m a bit sceptical of things like this, such as the Sustainable Development Goals, which always seem to be extremely good at diagnosing effects – a lack of clean water or education – but deliberately bad at diagnosing causes, which usually track back to exploitation. George gives that pretty short shrift as well: “I met so many activists through the global goals, and got a huge amount of support from people within the UN, people within the campaigning worlds, who were tying up all these threads into a bigger blueprint for change. Period poverty sits at the intersection of gender, of education and of health.” She may orientate towards the possible, but that doesn’t mean she is not radical, or angry, or that she’s always optimistic. “Activism is important because you need to see success and when you look for success, it’s people doing things. You find your hope in people. But I hate to think that activism requires constant optimism.” She is pessimistic about the UK government, particularly the police bill moving through parliament. “I think it’s one of the most urgent issues in the country today. I don’t know if there’s the right level of awareness of just how damaging it is. Even going back to the Free Periods protest, that was the first time I got my head around just how many people wanted to give their support. Loads of MPs turned up as well. I realised I wasn’t alone, that it was actually a community effort. My mum wouldn’t have let me go if she thought I’d be arrested.” It is ironic, too, she says, that many recent protests have been against structural racism, and the legislation this government is trying to pass hands more powers to the police, an institution accused of so much structural racism (“People of colour, particularly black people, are so overrepresented in stop-and-search”). She considers quite carefully what kind of activist she is: certainly leftwing, definitely not trying to overthrow capitalism, or at least, not out loud. “I would say my views on gender, particularly,” and by this she means believing in gender equality, and LGBTQ+ inclusion, “would be considered extreme or radical, which is unfortunate. I don’t think they should be.” But, anyway, the shape of politics has changed, she says: activism doesn’t have to be all-consuming, you don’t have to identify as extreme. “Maybe it’s a generational difference,” she says, tactfully. She brings these entirely unfamiliar traits to the world of direct politics: tact and respectability. From a distance, it seems a little too polite to make change, up close it is admirable, a bit humbling. I wouldn’t say it was key to her success, though; I think she would have succeeded anyway. Make It Happen by Amika George is publishing in paperback with HQ, HarperCollins on 20th Jan 2022The temperature was below freezing but Alexis Sánchez kept shedding layers: first his match jersey and then his thermals, until he stood bare-chested under the Curva. It was as though he wanted everyone at San Siro to see him, to know he was still here, still in peak physical condition, still, as he described himself in a post-game interview, “a monster”. He had delivered the evidence that Internazionale supporters really wanted moments before, when he muscled past Daniele Rugani on the edge of the Juventus six-yard box and swept the ball into the bottom corner of their goal. It was the deciding act of this year’s Supercoppa, putting his team 2-1 up in the 121st minute. Here was the first trophy of Simone Inzaghi’s tenure as manager, confirmation of their status as Italian football’s top dog despite the departure of Antonio Conte last summer. They had not lifted this trophy since 2010, the year they won the treble. To reclaim it in such dramatic fashion, with the latest goal ever scored in this fixture and against the rival who dominated the decade in between, could only feel even sweeter. It had been a nervous evening. Inter controlled the tempo, finishing with more than 60% of the possession and three times as many shots as their opponents. They played with the authority of a team that sits top of Serie A, boasting an 11-point advantage over Juventus as well as a game in hand. Yet they also conceded the first goal and, even after equalising, were held in a stalemate for almost 90 minutes. Juventus were missing several starters – from Wojciech Szczesny to Leonardo Bonucci, Juan Cuadrado and Federico Chiesa – but defended from the front with Federico Bernardeschi and Weston McKennie on the flanks behind Álvaro Morata. Dejan Kulusevski was assigned to get under Marcelo Brozovic’s feet in the middle. It was McKennie who opened the scoring, converting Morata’s cross with a close-range header, but Juventus’s advantage was short-lived. Edin Dzeko got in front of Mattia De Sciglio, and the defender went through his heel. Lautaro Martínez converted the penalty. Inter always seemed the likelier winners thereafter, but clear-cut chances were few and far between. Denzel Dumfries saw a header pushed on to the bar and Dzeko narrowly failed to apply a finish to a cross from the same player, but that was about it. Then Inzaghi made a surprising choice, substituting the Bosnian forward and Martínez together in the 75th minute, sending on Sánchez and Joaquín Correa. If Inter had failed to win, this would have been cited as their manager’s great mistake. Dzeko has been integral to the team’s style under Inzaghi, his hold-up play and calm redistribution allowing the Nerazzurri to adapt away from the fast-break football they played under Conte to a more possession-based approach. His withdrawal seemed to further blunt an Inter attack that was already struggling to carve out openings; Sánchez sent a header just wide from a corner at the start of extra time, but that was it. Juventus were playing for penalties and as time ticked down, Bonucci stripped out of his tracksuit ready to come on and take one. But Sánchez scored before the Juventus defender could make it to the pitch. A share of the credit belonged to Matteo Darmian, who pounced to intercept after Federico Dimarco’s cross was chested awkwardly by Juventus’s Alex Sandro. The ball looped up over Giorgio Chiellini and Sánchez was on it in a flash, finishing at the near post. It was a goal to vindicate a player who feels he has been underused at Inter, starting only four Serie A games this season. “This is how champions are,” he told his Mediaset interviewer at full time. “Champions do things that others don’t. The more that champions play, the better they are … I am like a lion in a cage, if they let me play I am a monster.” Time will tell whether this moment can be a turning point. Sánchez’s contract runs to 2023, but it contains a clause allowing the club to buy him out for around €4m this summer. Previous reports in Milan suggested that they were strongly considering the option. More goals like this one may provoke a rethink. Either way, he has written his name into club history. The Supercoppa might not be the most important piece of silverware that Inter were aiming for this season but it was the first available. Claiming it was an important step for a team that is at once starting a new cycle under Inzaghi and seeking to build on what they achieved under Conte: proving that their first Scudetto in 11 years was no fluke. It is easy to forget now, but few people had them listed as favourites to win anything in the summer. The departures of Conte, Romelu Lukaku and Achraf Hakimi were widely perceived as the dismantling of a project. Massimiliano Allegri’s return to Juventus, meanwhile, was expected to restore the Bianconeri as frontrunners. The Supercoppa confirmed what we have learned since: that Inzaghi was an inspired appointment, capable of not just maintaining Inter but evolving them into something different. Only a prisoner of the moment could perceive Dzeko as a stronger option up front than Lukaku, Serie A’s second-highest scorer and assist provider last season, but the manager has adapted his team to get the very best out of the Bosnian as well as others around him: Hakan Calhanoglu has thrived since arriving from Milan and at 32, Ivan Perisic looks the sharpest he has in years. Greater tests lie ahead. Inzaghi won the Supercoppa twice at Lazio, too, as well as a Coppa Italia. Wednesday’s win made him the first manager ever to beat Juventus in three finals, but he would not have walked away from his beloved Biancocelesti last summer for anything less than the pursuit of a Serie A title. Still, Wednesday’s game mattered. You could see it in Sánchez’s celebration and the impotent fury of Bonucci, launching himself into a physical confrontation with Inter’s team secretary, Cristiano Mozzillo, on the touchline. You could hear it in Inzaghi’s own voice, cracking and failing in post-game interviews after a night of too much yelling. “We wanted this trophy,” he said, reminding his interviewer of the 11-year gap since Inter last won it. “That’s too long,” he insisted, “for a team with so much potential.”Persimmon has reported a bumper year, with weekly sales up a fifth in the second half of 2021 compared with pre-pandemic levels, thanks to a booming housing market driven by cheap mortgage deals and a stamp duty holiday. The UK’s biggest housebuilder by market value said in a trading update that revenues rose 8.4% last year to £3.61bn as it completed the sale of 14,551 homes, up almost 1,000 on 2020, as the average price of a home rose from £230,534 to £237,050 year-on-year. However, Persimmon said the spread of the Omicron variant has increased sickness-related absenteeism, with some customers delaying moving into new homes to follow government isolation advice. “While the industry continues to face the ongoing operational and economic challenges as a consequence of the pandemic, particularly as the Omicron outbreak unfolded in the last six weeks of the year, the group continues to manage these ongoing challenges comprehensively,” said Dean Finch, the chief executive at Persimmon. “The long-term fundamentals of the UK housing market remain strong and I am confident.” The company responded to government plans to force housebuilders to pay to fix defective cladding after the Grenfell fire, although Persimmon said it had built only a “very small proportion” of buildings affected. “We share the secretary of state’s aspiration that leaseholders should not have to pay to remove cladding,” the company said. “Indeed, we made a commitment a year ago that leaseholders in buildings constructed by Persimmon, including all those above 11 metres, should not have to cover the cost of cladding removal. “We have constructed only a very small proportion of buildings affected by this issue. In common with the rest of the housebuilding industry, we will shortly begin paying the cladding levy announced in the budget.” The company has previously said 26 of the buildings it has constructed have been found to have defective cladding. Along with its peers, the FTSE 100 company has benefited from the UK’s pandemic-fuelled housing boom as homebuyers sought to exploit the government’s stamp duty holiday, which ended last October, historically low borrowing costs and the “race for space” trend as the rise in flexible and remote working fuelled a rise in buyers seeking at properties in more rural and picturesque locations. Persimmon said home-buying inquiries had “remained encouraging” despite the end of government support schemes, with demand continuing to outstrip supply. However, the company said its £1.62bn order book at 31 December is slightly down on 2020’s £1.69bn, although it’s up on 2019’s £1.36bn.The remote working revolution triggered by the pandemic initially promised a grand new epoch for the world of work. Instead, we’re working more hours than we did before. According to a survey by the work management platform Asana, 87% of workers are working late – on average two hours a day. With all this work you’d assume we’re at least smashing our productivity goals. But more time working doesn’t always equal more work completed. The survey also revealed that just 26% of our work life is spent on the jobs we were hired to do, with 60% of our time spent on “work about work” – meetings about upcoming tasks, admin, and checking emails for updates on projects. It doesn’t have to be like this, there is an answer to our productivity pains and there’s finally an end in sight to that medley of meetings. But before we get to the solutions, let’s see how much assistance you need. Take our quiz to find out your working style … To understand how the changing workplace has impacted companies and individuals, and for more information on how to make it work for you, download Asana’s research report nowYou start the day with the best intentions, determined to be productive and efficient. Yet, before you’ve even had your mid-morning coffee, you’re derailed by a chaotic procession of interruptions, distractions and poor project management. Before you know it, you are stressed, tired and brain fog has descended. But don’t worry – help is at hand. Dr Sahar Yousef, a leading expert on productivity and cognitive neuroscientist at the University of California, Berkeley’s Haas School of Business, has partnered with the work management company Asana to offer expert tips on how to improve your concentration and efficiency at work. Treat emails as laundry Many workers feel pressure to respond to emails and other messages immediately, but this constant monitoring comes at a cost. It can take as long as 25 minutes to regain momentum after an interruption, so Yousef says we should treat email, texts, and other chat tools like we would laundry. “Let messages build up and then do a ‘load’ every one or two hours, as opposed to having everything always accessible and trying to process in real-time,” she says. Schedule focus time Yousef says a major enemy of concentration while working is “context switching”. This happens when you suddenly shift your attention to a different context, such as when you interrupt what you’re working on to join an unexpected call, or to respond to a message about an unrelated project. “Every time we switch tasks, we pay a fine in terms of both time and energy,” says Yousef. “And by energy, I mean our brains literally need blood glucose and oxygen to perform the switch”. So, instead of switching between different tasks throughout the day, schedule dedicated time to focus on one specific project. Two good ways of doing this are timeboxing and time-blocking. With timeboxing, you estimate the amount of time a task will take and dedicate a certain amount of time to complete it. During that time you should ignore all other tasks. Time-blocking is similar – but instead of boxing out time for a single task, you group similar tasks together and complete them all in one “time block”. For example, you might schedule a time block to answer your emails or to catch up on those nagging admin tasks. Plan virtual meetings better Online meetings have become much more common during the pandemic, but they aren’t always helpful. According to research by Asana, despite increased face time with colleagues through virtual meetings, teams have less clarity about what needs to be done and when. On top of that, Yousef says: “Video conferencing is actually physiologically more draining and requires more neurological effort to stay alert and maintain attention.” So make sure you approach your next video call carefully. First, you can consider if you actually need a meeting at all. If you do, then share an agenda and any materials ahead of the call, so that everyone is prepared. If you have a series of virtual meetings scheduled, make sure you take at least a few minutes’ break between each one, to help your brain reset. Yousef also suggests turning off self-view during video meetings, or cover the image of your face with a sticky note on your screen. She says that seeing your own face during a video call activates the part of your brain responsible for facial recognition and is an extra drain on your focus. Change default settings on hardware There has been an “explosion” in digital tools whose business models are based on getting you to look at their screen, says Yousef. These tools are naturally designed to be “as addictive as possible and to hijack your attention away from the present moment”. So if you have chat windows open, and notifications switched on for emails, messengers and social media, you’re going to have a tough time concentrating. Close any programs you do not need open and switch off notifications on as many apps as possible. “Until we push back and don’t accept the default settings, these technologies will continue to make it difficult to focus for long periods of time,” says Yousef. Create triggers to help focus Having trouble concentrating? Try using cognitive associations to let your brain know it’s time to focus. You might want to clear your desk before you start work, or light a candle or listen to a specific type of music while you’re at your desk. If you work from home, wearing specific clothes for work can also act as a helpful trigger. “Our brains rely on cognitive associations to help us figure out what is appropriate – and inappropriate – behaviour in a certain situation and to save us time and energy,” says Yousef. “If, for example, we have clear associations between our work environment and getting into a ‘focus mode’, whenever we enter that work environment specific neural networks fire and our brain knows what to do.” Find out more about how companies, teams and individuals can thrive by taking a look at Asana’s Anatomy of Work Index 2021“Burnout often happens after an extended period,” says Jacky Francis Walker, an integrative psychotherapist and burnout expert. “Often after six to 18 months of working too hard for too long, with insufficient opportunities to refill the tanks.” The World Health Organization has only officially recognised burnout as an occupational problem since 2019, but Walker’s analysis of how the condition operates will be familiar to many. After almost two years of unprecedented disruption to our personal and working lives, burnout rates have surged among workers around the world. According to a survey by the US recruitment company FlexJobs, of the 75% of employees who reported experiencing burnout at work, 40% said this had occurred specifically during the pandemic. Similarly, in a survey by Asana of more than 13,000 knowledge workers in eight countries, 71% reported experiencing burnout at least once within the past 12 months. Workplace wellbeing With public health experts warning that “the mental health impact of the pandemic is likely to last much longer than the physical health impact”, it’s vital that organisations of all sizes act now to better support staff and reduce the risk of burnout. This isn’t just a moral imperative; there’s a clear business case for improving wellbeing in the workplace too. As Louise Chunn, founder of the therapy and counselling directory welldoing.org, points out, “[Before the pandemic] 54% of all lost working days in Great Britain were attributed to mental health concerns and not physical sickness. Mental ill health is responsible for 72m working days lost and costs £34.9bn each year. Annually, it costs business £1,300 per employee whose mental health needs are unsupported.” Reducing burnout and improving wellbeing involves understanding the root causes of excessive stress. In the Asana survey, 46% of respondents said being overworked was a key factor, while 32% mentioned not being able to switch off from work, and 29% cited lack of clarity on tasks and roles. The survey also found that burnout leads to low morale, more mistakes, lack of engagement, miscommunication and more time required to get work done. Know when to switch off According to Walker, addressing expectations around workloads is crucial for companies to tackle at an organisational level. “Business leaders need to prioritise achievable workloads and identify practical ways of resolving the inevitable conflict between business needs and employees’ wellbeing,” she says. “Organisations must set high expectations for clear and consistent communication from (and with) managers so that their teams know what they are expected to prioritise and know that their manager has their back [and] provide training for managers on what this looks like in practice.” Walker also suggests that “companies must learn to walk their talk: from the highest levels down, business bosses must demonstrate by their own actions that there is an off button and that everyone in the company is expected to have a quality of life outside of their work life.” Get the systems right One way to make workloads more achievable is to reduce the amount of time employees spend on “work about work”: those activities that aren’t the high value, skilled aspects of the role but are part of getting the job done. Work about work can be particularly time-consuming for those who are part of a team where talking about work and keeping on top of what’s happening with work is essential. The move towards hybrid working, where staff are not physically present in a single location all the time, has exacerbated this. Healthy relationships and clear communication between colleagues make teamwork more effective, but having the right systems in place plays an important role as well. For example, having a single project management platform, such as the collaboration tools offered by Asana, centralises communication within a team and helps with organising tasks. Using such tools establishes clear ownership and accountability for work, which tackles central causes of burnout. For organisations set on tackling burnout and improving employee wellbeing, the benefits go beyond an anecdotal thumbs up from staff. In a 2019 research paper: Employee wellbeing, productivity and firm performance, there was a “significant, strong positive correlation between employees’ satisfaction with their company and employee productivity”. So putting in the effort to genuinely address how employees feel about work will lead to more efficient output. We’ve all had that feeling of enjoying a particular project and doing a great job with it. It makes sense that we work better when we’re happier. If you’re experiencing burnout Whatever efforts your organisation is making to improve wellbeing at work, you may still be feeling the long-term effects of stress. If so, know that it is not a personal failing and you are certainly not alone. “Talk to your manager early on if your workload is overwhelming or you need extra support,” says Walker. “It may be obvious that suffering in silence is a guaranteed way to become burned out, but the energy to speak out gets eroded fast when entering a state of burnout.” Together, decide on changes to put in place. “Work out what practical steps you can take to stay on track,” says Walker. “Streamline how you do things and look at what your manager could do. Perhaps they can help reduce your load, provide support, or get office routines updated to be more efficient.” To understand how the changing workplace has impacted companies and individuals, and for more information on how to make it work for you, download Asana’s research report nowRight now the world is reeling from the effects of a “great resignation” – an economic trend in which employees decide to resign from their jobs. In the US, an estimated 24 million people quit between April and September last year. Companies are now seeking ways to address this issue. Nike, for instance, gave its head office staff a free week off in August in order to “destress”. Matt Marrazzo, senior manager of global marketing at Nike, said: “Our senior leaders are sending a clear message: take the time to unwind, destress and spend time with your loved ones. Do not work.” However, “Do not work”, isn’t expected to be a long-term strategy. So successful businesses need to know what’s putting a strain on productivity and how to combat it. The curse of work about work It’s somewhat ironic that people are working longer hours, spending more time communicating in meetings and yet being less productive. For the average worker, just 26% of their time is spent on the skilled work they were hired for and 14% on planning or strategy, according to research from the work management platform Asana. “One of the curses of the modern workplace is activities that take time away from meaningful work,” says Simon O’Kane, head of international at Asana. “This includes communicating about work, searching for information, switching between apps, managing shifting priorities, or following up on the status of work. None of which is the actual skilled work you were hired to do.” Asana’s study found that 60% of a person’s time at work is spent on this “work about work”. There’s also the duplication of work. Most work today involves more than one team or department. Yet the way many companies are structured doesn’t account for this. Departments such as marketing, sales and finance may have shared missions and objectives, but the work they do often takes place in silos. This lack of coordination and transparency can lead to duplicated efforts. For example, both sales and marketing might create a report on the impact of advertising. “Hours can be spent gathering the same data, undertaking similar analyses and building near identical presentations,” says O’Kane. Indeed, Asana research suggests that employees are losing 236 hours a year to duplication of efforts, a 27-hour increase from 2019. Why app switching drains the brain One challenge that hampers productivity is “context switching”. On average, people swap between 10 apps 25 times a day to do their work. How many times do we stop working on a project to respond to an email or to take a call? It disrupts focus and drains mental energy. It might be described as “multitasking”, but Dr Sahar Yousef, a leading expert on productivity and cognitive neuroscientist at the University of California, Berkeley’s Haas School of Business, argues that the concept of multitasking is, in fact, a myth. “In essence, it’s rapidly switching from one task to another, and then back again,” she says. “Unfortunately, every time you make that switch, you pay a ‘tax’ on both your time and your energy. For that reason, it’s almost always more efficient to focus on one thing and move on when you’re done. Otherwise, every time we switch, it’s draining and it takes longer to complete a task.” “App overload and the context-switching that it fuels present real risks to businesses,” says O’Kane. “As digital transformations continue, business leaders need to think carefully about the apps they are investing in and how this will impact employees. Blocking out time for set tasks, taking advantage of notification controls and making it easier for people to quickly find what they need can help limit the impact of app overload and context switching.” Wellbeing and the workplace According to the survey by Asana – which studied more than 13,000 knowledge workers in Australia, New Zealand, France, Germany, Japan, Singapore, the UK and the US – the root causes of burnout are related to how work is being managed. Overworking, a lack of clarity on tasks and roles, and an inability to disconnect from work were the top factors fuelling burnout. Asana’s research found that workers believe that having the right technology will enable people to work efficiently. Flexibility on working hours and clarity over priorities and work processes are also essential for workers. “It’s up to business leaders to deliver on these demands,” says O’Kane. “While it can be challenging to understand where to start, leaders can begin by recognising each of these priorities is linked. Tools like Asana allow organisations to streamline work-management processes, enabling teams to work together efficiently, rather than adding a layer of complexity. For example, by keeping all deadlines and updates in a single space, Asana can remove the need for unnecessary status meetings or multiple emails simply to update on a project’s progress.” However, tackling these challenges also requires a mindset shift. “No app can be a silver bullet,” says O’Kane. “Managers also need to give teams channels to provide feedback on workloads and pressure points.” Technology has a role to play, but providing clear expectations on roles and responsibilities and finding time to shout about success are also key to creating a culture in which no one is at risk of burning out. Find out more about how companies, teams and individuals can thrive in the year ahead by taking a look at Asana’s Anatomy of Work Index 2021The American Red Cross has declared a “national blood crisis” as the US faces its worst blood shortage in over a decade, predominantly due to a drop in blood drives as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic. “In recent weeks, blood centers across the country have reported less than a one-day’s supply of blood of certain critical blood types – a dangerously low level. If the nation’s blood supply does not stabilize soon, life-saving blood may not be available for some patients when it is needed,” the Red Cross said in a joint statement with America’s Blood Centers and the Association for the Advancement of Blood and Biotherapies. Since March 2020, there has been a 10% overall blood donation decline across the nation. The pandemic has contributed to a 62% drop in blood drives across schools and colleges. A surge in Covid-19 cases as well as winter storms have disrupted blood donation processes. “As these concerns compound, blood centers nationwide continue to face a decline in donor turnout, blood drive cancellations, staffing challenges and donor eligibility misinformation,” the statement said. As a result of the shortage, the Red Cross, which supplies 40% of the country’s blood supply, has had to limit blood product distributions to hospitals. According to the organization, some hospitals may not receive one in four blood products they need. Doctors have been forced to make difficult decisions about who receives blood transfusions and who will be required to wait until more blood products become available. The Red Cross has urged donors of all blood types – particularly type O – to make appointments now to donate in the coming weeks. It said that people who have received a US-authorized Covid-19 vaccine, including those from Johnson &amp; Johnson, Moderna and Pfizer, can donate blood and platelets, so long as they have no symptoms and feel well. Meanwhile, the Red Cross and the National Football League have partnered up for National Blood Donor Month in efforts to encourage individuals to donate blood and platelets. According to the Red Cross, those who came to give blood, platelets or plasma in January will have a chance to win a trip to Super Bowl LVI in Los Angeles in February. Those who donate could also win a home theater package and a $500 e-gift card. In addition to calling for donors, the Red Cross has also urged the public to volunteer and support blood collection efforts across the country.In 1980 a man called Steven Thompson was just one week from completing a six-year prison sentence at Gartree prison in Leicestershire. Then the prison guards cut his hair off. Thompson was a Rastafarian and his dreadlocks were an important spiritual connection to his beliefs. So he resisted. It was taken as a sign of a violent psychiatric disorder – and, instead of going home, Thompson found himself committed to a secure hospital. His detention caused outrage in the Black community and, soon, Dr Aggrey Burke was asked to help getting him released. Burke – the first Black consultant psychiatrist in the NHS – remembers travelling through the snow to Rampton Secure Hospital in Nottinghamshire. In a more than 40-year-long career he would fight tirelessly against discrimination in healthcare, sacrificing his own advancement to do so. He would take on racism in medical schools and offer psychological support to those traumatised by the infamous New Cross fire in 1981 that killed 14 young people. Yet Thompson’s case stuck in his mind as one that encapsulated many of the prejudices he had to battle. At the time, however, he just knew he would need to muster all his expertise and experience to convince the authorities Thompson was safe to release. Burke, who turns 79 this year, still has a Jamaican accent even after decades in the UK. “Unfortunately, my colleagues in psychiatry have tended to see the Caribbean person through tinted glasses,” he tells me over Zoom. “The first thing that comes to the observer’s eye is: ‘This is a dangerous one, watch out!’” Thompson’s detention led to “massive” protests in London, and in the House of Lords Lord Brockway asked for an inquiry into it. Burke was one of a group of independent psychiatrists who challenged Thompson’s diagnosis and negotiated with the staff. Finally, Thompson was released, to Burke’s “tremendous relief”. Burke’s arrival in the UK was entwined with the country’s history of racial tension. His father, Edmund Burke, was a high-ranking civil servant, and was dispatched to England by the Jamaican chief minister Norman Manley to ease tensions in the aftermath of the Notting Hill race riots in 1958. The riots involved seven nights of attacks by white teddy boys on Caribbean migrants. Edmund arrived with his wife, Pansy, and three of their sons – leaving their eldest son in Jamaica like many who migrated. The family settled in Kew, west London, a “strange place” to Burke, then a 16-year-old from St Elizabeth, Jamaica. He was the only Black child in his class, and though there was little explicit intolerance he felt isolated and excluded. One day he visited a friend after school. “I was in my blazer, my tie, everything,” he recalls. Walking up to the house he saw his friend’s mother sitting in the front room and knocked on the window. When she looked out and saw him she panicked. “She was frightened,” he says. Burke watched, helplessly, as his friend’s mother tried “to get help for this invader”. It was the first moment he remembers feeling how he – a young, talented student and member of the Christian Union – could be in front of someone, when all they could see was a terrifying stereotype. It was a “really sad moment”, he says, embarrassing for both himself and his friend’s mother. He enrolled in University of Birmingham medical school in 1962, one of a handful of Caribbean students. As well as studying, he volunteered with the grassroots self-help group Harambee Organisation, which organised a Black supplementary school to combat the neglect and abuse that Black children were facing in the education system. Burke says of that time: “I guess we didn’t call it racism, but whatever it was, it was pretty grim. And those early years were very, very unsettling.” Never one to be restricted by borders, he began his psychiatric training in Trinidad and Tobago, and then went on to teach at the University of the West Indies. In 1972 he returned to the UK and took up a research fellowship at the University of Birmingham. Then, in 1976, he was appointed the first Black forensic psychiatrist in London, working at St George’s hospital. Yet instead of retreating into privilege he focused on the issues facing Britain’s Black community. In his early landmark work he documented the experiences of Jamaican psychiatric patients who had been “repatriated” (often a euphemism for “deported”) – supposedly for their own good. “The idea among my colleagues was that by sending them home to live ‘under the coconut tree or a banana tree’, they would get better,” says Burke. But when Burke toured Jamaica he saw the real consequences of this medical decision to return people who had come to the UK to raise money for their families home, apparently “broken”. Far from recovering in the heart of their communities, many patients were “rejected because of the stigma attached to coming home mentally ill and penniless”. He met “so many who were living in the bush. Quite a number died by drowning themselves … Jamaica is not a welcoming environment if you’re not 100% well.” The message to people in Jamaica was clear in the refrain Burke remembers hearing as he travelled round tiny villages, often by minibus: “Going to England will mad you.” Reflecting on lessons from this work in the wake of the Windrush scandal – where hundreds of people who had lived in the UK since they were children were threatened with deportation – Burke says it’s clear these policies, then and now, create feelings of rejection and instability. They send a message to people of colour that they do not truly belong. “Do we have a long-term stay in Britain – and can it be altered? That’s a huge question for the youngsters to deal with. Because I don’t think there is a sense of security yet. And I don’t think it’s going to come overnight,” says Burke. “So you know, there’s going to be this question of who qualifies to be part of the British clan. And can one achieve it by protest, or by negotiation?” Alongside his NHS work Burke was also at the forefront of helping those in one of the ugliest episodes in recent Black British history – the New Cross fire. The fire killed 13 young people at a house party in 1981, with one survivor later taking their own life, and a bungled police investigation, lack of media coverage and silence from politicians sparked anger and resistance throughout Black communities. The slogan “13 dead, nothing said” became a rallying cry for political action. Burke helped set up a group to attend to the emotional needs of the survivors and the families. It was gruelling, emotionally and mentally. “I did two jobs every day for about 18 months. The pain was alarmingly high,” he says. With no state support, it was essential work. “We worked to boost the morale of the community and those who were injured.” His therapeutic support for the bereaved continued during the burials, the anniversaries, and what Burke calls “the horrendous business of the inquest”. To this day he works with the Young Lewisham Project, dealing with the continuing trauma to the community. He says: “So many people suffered who weren’t in the fire.” With his impressive CV Burke could have been a professor by the 1970s, yet it was a position he was never offered throughout his long career. He is quite clear why: he spoke out about racism and sexism, and was punished for it. In 1986, along with his colleague Joe Collier, he published a damning paper that showed clear evidence that women and people with “foreign-sounding names” who sought admission to London’s medical schools were being discriminated against. In the paper he named his employer at the time, St George’s. Burke says he knew the risks of publishing such criticism: “It’s always very difficult challenging a system that you’re integrally involved in.” Yet he would not let the consequences stop him. “After a little time thinking about it, we decided that it had to be exposed.” The blowback was immediate. “It is as though one had offended against the whole system; we were blamed, unfairly treated and made to feel that we were outcasts.” Burke believes such attitudes are still too prevalent today. Black people remain more than four times as likely to be detained under the Mental Health Act, yet even this figure hides the scale of the problem, because those who identify as “Black other” are more than 11 times more likely to be sectioned. This group is likely to include a significant proportion of descendants of Caribbean migrants who no longer feel a strong bond to the region. For Burke this is because the “baggage” from slavery is still in the “DNA of the system”. He points out: “You can’t capture a group of people, treat them worse than you treat all kinds of animals and say that they’re free.” Burke notes that the assumption that Black people have “much more mental illness” remains prevalent in psychiatry but the biases in diagnosis can be seen in the way psychosis has been treated over the years. Psychosis, which Burke defines as being in a state where “delusions predominate”, is often associated with patients who are seen to be “dangerous and violent”. Before the 1960s, psychosis and conditions such as schizophrenia were seen as affecting highly intelligent, artistic white people, whose creative minds had led them to lose touch with reality. But, when the civil rights era brought Black anger and protest on the streets, psychosis became associated with violence and danger and became a label disproportionately placed on Black bodies. Some psychiatrists genuinely theorised there was a “protest psychosis” brought on by delusional dreams of racial equality. Burke believes the reason so many Black people are sectioned is because fear of the violent, disordered, rebellious Black body remains rooted in psychiatric practice. For Burke “psychiatry labels people, and I think one of the tragedies that we’re talking about is that to be Black is to become a baddie”. In trying to understand why there has been so little improvement on the issue of race and mental health Burke sighs: “Society doesn’t actually believe that we are healable, so there is no attempt made to make things better.” Burke continued working at St George’s until he retired, but being a pioneer came at a serious cost. “Coming to London as the first Black psychiatrist was a bit of a problem,” he says. “The first problem is you do not have a support structure in place.” Instead: “You need to have a bus-full of firsts – so when something’s wrong, we can come and support you.” Without that protection Burke felt vulnerable: “New Cross and the medical school event – they were quite close together. The system decided that I’m finished.” Even today, however, that is far from true. His next target is education and he is currently working to raise attention to the disproportionate exclusions of Black youth in schools. “One of the tragedies that we’re talking about is that to be Black and play truant is different from white and playing truant,” he says. Once a child has been labelled “difficult” it sets them on a path to “bad outcomes”, he says, including incarceration. After almost 50 years, Burke’s work is not completed. And, he says, nothing will stop him from “continuing the work that my father was sent here to do” – to improve life for Black communities in Britain.More mysterious than the riddle of the Sphinx: the mystery of how this increasingly ridiculous quiz keeps getting published. Ahead of you are 15 topical and general knowledge question in a bizarre set of categories including “Blowing things up, but at sea”. You’ll also meet Kate Bush, Ron from Sparks, and have a hidden Doctor Who reference to spot. It is just for fun, there are no prizes. Let us know how you get on in the comments – but do try not to take it so seriously that you end up fact-checking the jokes. The Thursday quiz, No 38 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quiz master’s word is always final, and he is seething about people relentlessly banging on about the completely made up January “Blue Monday”.Hamish is a rich and successful entrepreneur, a man who seems to be winning at life. Yet secretly, he is falling apart. His second wife has left him, he’s stressed out of his mind and he has just mournfully realised that no matter how many trophy girlfriends or French chateaux he acquires, some other millionaire will always have a better one. If you hate Hamish already, then you may be missing the broader lesson of this book, which is that unhappy working lives are just as complex and fascinating as the unhappy private lives they frequently mirror, and also just as deserving of attention. Hamish, it turns out, is now a happy social entrepreneur with an admirable sideline mentoring former care leavers and ex-prisoners into work. Jenny Rogers is a work coach, one of those professions that arouses instant scepticism in some, although the absorbing case studies she has collected in Are You Listening? suggest she is really more of an office shrink. The high-flying executives she is hired to help invariably start off presenting dry corporate dilemmas, but soon end up weepily confessing to some childhood trauma or hidden vulnerability, which turns out to be what is really driving their behaviour in the office. Time and time again, it becomes clear that the emotional baggage most people carry doesn’t just affect intimate relationships. Many of us end up lugging it into work, and dumping it on our colleagues, too. Her book is resolutely not a self-help manual for those in a difficult professional situation, although reading it may make you slightly more likely to identify the resident office psychopath. And while it contains some universal themes, Rogers’s generally well-heeled clients may not be all that relatable to the average office worker. But the stories are intriguing, told well enough to draw the reader in, and en masse contain some shrewd truths. The overall effect is rather like a middle management version of the psychoanalyst Stephen Grosz’s The Examined Life, which distilled a lifetime’s worth of conversations on the couch. If Rogers seems at times overly keen to highlight parallels between coaching and psychotherapy, that perhaps comes from a lifetime of people snorting in disbelief (as Hamish initially does) that “people actually pay you money for this”. But the sensitive process she describes seems worth taking seriously, not least for anyone who has experienced the profound daily misery that a bullying boss or dysfunctional team can cause. It’s also a useful reminder both that tricky colleagues may privately be grappling with more than meets the eye, and that ultimately it’s people that make a workplace tick. Managers sometimes criticise younger staff for wanting to bring what millennials call their “whole selves”, and previous generations might call “messy personal stuff”, to work. What this book elegantly exposes, however, is that there’s really no such thing as keeping it “strictly business”; that somewhere beneath even the stiffest of corporate stuffed shirts, there beats some semblance of a heart. • Are You Listening? is published by Penguin (£14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Winning tip: Spain and Portugal before tourism Fabled Shore is Rose Macaulay’s account of her journey in 1949, alone and by car, round the coast of Iberia from Catalonia to the Algarve. She found dire poverty and the Spain she describes, still reeling from civil war, is unrecognisable to us now. Today’s tourist hotspots were then empty, pristine beaches with ramshackle houses, sometimes only with a barn to sleep in, and curious children who clustered round this strange creature – a foreign woman travelling alone by car. The prose is full of beautiful descriptions, with a very funny account of what she found in Gibraltar. Strange to think that there are people still alive who remember that time. Read this, and weep. Barbara Forbes Bedouins and expats, the Middle East Arabia: Through the Looking Glass by Jonathan Raban was published in 1979. The author visited the Middle East before the vast wealth of the 1970s oil boom damaged Arab culture and traditions. Raban’s gregarious nature and the chatty eloquence of his writing reveals the hidden depths of the people he encounters. You’re pulled into conversations with expats and Bedouins with equal intensity. As a young child, I spent two years living in Saudi Arabia during the exact time of Raban’s research. This book allowed me to experience the entire region with an adult’s insight, wit and well-crafted observations. Emma Russell Portrait of Scotland I promised my eldest that I wouldn’t book another holiday in Scotland this year … but that was before I read Helen Ochyra’s Beyond the Bagpipes and now it’s going to take all my willpower not to book us another remote Scottish cottage. Beyond the Bagpipes charts the author’s journey around Scotland following her mother’s death and is a cliche-free and evocative portrait of the country. I found my own experiences of places like the “moulded seascape” of Uig Sands mirrored in Ochyra’s descriptions, while folding down page after page to mark all the places I still need to visit. Emma A place for wanderers, Italy The incomparable Venice by Jan Morris is a love letter to a city that still exists behind the superficial hustle and bustle of mass tourism: a place of unique character, breathtaking contrasts and the indomitable spirit of a grand inheritance. Venice transports me to the serene dusk of quiet alleyways and the ever-surprising emergence into bright, busy squares. It reminds me that the ancient city is a place for wanderers, rewarding those ready to stray from the well-worn tourist trails. Less a travel book, more a book that exhorts you to stay and take the time to know a place, a people and their history. Sarah Buttery bicycle journey, France One More Croissant for the Road by Felicity Cloake made me want to head out to a Parisian bakery as soon as I read it. A woman cycles around France in search of the perfect croissant while trying lots of French delicacies on the way. There are recipes, great mouthwatering descriptions of the food, fabulous descriptions of France experienced on two wheels and just a general love of travel and France across each and every page. Wonderful and really evocative of the taste, sights and smells of this diverse country. Fabulous. Claire Austin A sojourn in Paris Vintage travel books hold a special place in my heart. The Flaneur: A Stroll through the Paradoxes of Paris by Edmund White is one such book. White draws on his 16 years’ experience as a resident between 1983 and 1998 and shows us a Paris full of contradictions. He guides us through a heady mix of elegant literary characters sharing ideas at bohemian cafes, while breathing life into the lives and experiences of some of the marginalised groups who call Paris their home. The Flaneur leaves you feeling entertained, just a little bit smarter and yearning to know more. Trudy Shard Can I have the Bill please? I like Down Under by Bill Bryson because the author never seems to use the same approach to each of his books. Is this book going to be snarky Bill? Is this going to be funny Bill? Is this going to be funny, yet informative Bill? Is this going to be snarky, yet informative Bill? I could go on, but my hands would start to cramp with the unlimited combinations. While many of the scientific discoveries outlined in the book were a little beyond me, I thoroughly enjoyed Bryson’s descriptions of the larger-than-life personalities behind the discoveries, which really brought the science described to life. Bill Bryson also loves Australia, and it shows. Aisha Khan Cycling from Ireland to India Reading Full Tilt by Dervla Murphy showed me how far you could go by just turning the pedals on a bicycle (in her case, from Ireland to India). An open mind, a bucketful of resilience and a deep respect for all those she met just added to the joy of adventure. It took a while between reading the book in my 20s and then pedalling myself east to west and north to south across the US in my 50s, but she has been with me the whole way, even laughing on my shoulder whenever it felt a bit tough, to spur me on. Debbie Carr Wonderful escape in New Zealand Anna McNuff’s adventure books, particularly The Pants of Perspective: One Woman’s 3,000 Kilometre Running Adventure Through the Wilds of New Zealand, were the most wonderful escape for me in the first (and neverending second) lockdown. Her bouncy voice and humour, and her lust for adventure, were honey for my hurting, quarantined soul. I felt as if I was there with her on the Te Araroa trail, feeling like I could manage anything and have that precious escape from WFH stress and pandemic anxiety. Beatrice Vetter-Ceriotti Romance and war, Italy Eric Newby’s Love and War in the Apennines was one of the books that inspired me to travel in Italy. It’s about the kindness of strangers to outsiders based on the help Newby himself received from local families and peasants as an escaped prisoner during the second world war. Struggling with a broken ankle, Newby was hidden in a hay loft for months and eventually met his future wife, Wanda. They exchange Italian and English lessons, learning about each other’s cultures and background all while evading enemy soldiers. Newby is moved from house to house, works on a remote farm and is hidden in a cave. You can smell wood fires – and share sunsets, fears and hopes. A great read. Nigel CoxThere have been many tributes to the great choreographer Merce Cunningham, whose centenary was celebrated in 2019. But I think this one might be my favourite. It sounds like a fringe concern, contemporary juggling meets modern dance (with an experimental sound score thrown in), but at root it’s all about rhythm, and, as per the title, rhythm equals life. From director Sean Gandini’s opening chat with the audience, where his wife and co-founder Kati Ylä-Hokkala demonstrates the basics of juggling’s art, he has us listening to movement, tracking rhythm and metre as leather balls fly and land with satisfying thump. Cunningham’s choreography asks us to do exactly the same thing – listen to movement, watch rhythms unfold in the body – and there’s a beautiful synergy between the two forms. Life was created with Cunningham dancer Jennifer Goggans – she makes her juggling debut – and the multi-talented performers slide and bend into Cunningham’s stark geometries, reinterpreting sections from the likes of CRWDSPCR and Split Sides. It all becomes ultra-complicated, the performers coordinating juggling rhythms, arm and leg sequences at the same time, catching balls while in deep pliés or balancing in arabesque. Watching them master these tricksy puzzles is immensely pleasing, but despite the complexity there’s something very pure about it, magnanimous, even. They expand into tossing rings and clubs in the air while composer Caroline Shaw layers up vocal and string sounds in a live score that’s adjacent to the action rather than related to it – although there are some serendipitous moments – all of which is very much in Cunningham’s spirit. You can imagine the ever-curious choreographer would have loved this little gem of a show. At Sadler’s Wells, London, until 15 January as part of London international mime festivalNigeria has lifted a ban on Twitter, restoring access to millions of users, seven months after it clamped down on the social media site in a row over Twitter’s decision to delete a post by the president. The government said the company had agreed to its conditions on the management of unlawful content, to registering its operations in Nigeria and to a new tax arrangement. “The FGN [federal government of Nigeria] lifts the suspension of the Twitter operations in Nigeria from midnight of 13 January 2022,” said a statement from Kashifu Inuwa Abdullahi, the director-general of Nigeria’s National Information Technology Development Agency. “The FGN has asked Twitter to fulfil some conditions before restoring its services. These conditions addressed legal registration of operations, taxation, and managing prohibited publication in line with Nigerian laws. Twitter has agreed to meet all the conditions.” The company had agreed to set up offices in Nigeria earlier this year, register its company in the country and comply with tax obligations, the government said. Nigeria would also be added to Twitter’s “partner support and law enforcement portals”, a channel for governments and organisations to deal more effectively with potentially unlawful or abusive posts. Twitter did not acknowledge the concessions stated by the government, but said in a statement: “We are pleased that Twitter has been restored for everyone in Nigeria. Our mission in Nigeria and around the world is to serve the public conversation.” The Twitter ban was widely condemned by millions of users and rights groups. Nigerian authorities initially threatened to prosecute users and companies who defied the ban. Relations between Nigeria’s government and Twitter had been difficult for a while. Officials often criticised the company for not doing enough to curb abusive posts and hate speech, and blamed it for destabilising the country because protest movements used social media as an organising tool. Fears of repression and curbs on free speech by Muhammadu Buhari’s government have grown in recent years, amid clampdowns on journalists and protest groups, including on key figures in the EndSars protests against police brutality in October 2020. The ban started two days after Twitter removed a post from the president that threatened to punish secessionists, which sparked mass outrage. “Many of those misbehaving today are too young to be aware of the destruction and loss of lives that occurred during the Biafra war,” Buhari wrote. “Those of us in the fields for 30 months, who went through the war, will treat them in the language they understand,” referencing his role as a brigade major during the Biafra war, one of the darkest chapters in Nigeria’s history. The war ended the attempts by mainly Igbo people in south-east Nigeria to create an independent nation of Biafra and many of the atrocities committed during the conflict have not been acknowledged. After the ban, the information minister, Lai Mohammed, said the government had acted because of “the persistent use of the platform for activities that are capable of undermining Nigeria’s corporate existence”. Twitter and Nigeria’s government then began discussions on the conditions that would require the social media giant to become operational in Nigeria. The government said the agreed conditions “opens a new chapter in global digital diplomacy” and “set a new operational template for Twitter to come back stronger for the benefit of Nigerians”.On Sunday, the deadliest New York City fire in three decades tore through a Bronx apartment building, killing at least 17 people. Among the dead were children as young as four and five. The New York City fire department blamed a space heater and a malfunctioning door for allowing smoke to spread through building. The door was “not functioning as it should”, said Dan Nigro, the FDNY commissioner. Residents told reporters on the scene that their doors often didn’t shut like they were supposed to. The new mayor, Eric Adams, raced to the scene. Since taking office, he has impressed the public with his energy and verve, promising a “get stuff done” mayoralty. In the Bronx, his message was clear: “If we take one message from this,” he said, it was to: “Close the door. Close the door. Close the door.” “That was embedded in my head as a child watching the commercials over and over again,” Adams said. “We’re going to double-down on that message … muscle memory is everything and if we can drill that in, we can save lives by closing the doors.” The story of the Bronx blaze, however, is not one of personal responsibility. It has little to do with tenants remembering to shut doors. Future tragedies won’t be avoided through “muscle memory” alone. By blaming individual actors, Adams instead allows the true culprits off the hook: the building owners. Why did a tenant need to use a space heater? Why were the doors so faulty? It’s notable that one of the owners of the Bronx building, Rick Gropper, is a member of the Adams transition team, a landing space for those who are likely to have influence over the new administration. At least six violations, over the years, have been slapped on the building owners from the city’s department of housing preservation and development. Multiple violations cited problems with the doors, which are supposed to shut to prevent the spread of fire and smoke. Heat, as any working-class tenant knows, was another major problem. One tenant told the New York Post that “they’re sending up just enough heat to say they’re sending up heat, but it’s not enough to keep you warm, and if you don’t use a space heater, then you use your oven”. “You can’t lounge around without a housecoat on.” The systems in place seeded this disaster. It was not one person who decided to use a space heater or another who couldn’t close the door. Apartment building doors should close on their own. Space heaters, in 2022, shouldn’t be required in the dead of winter if building owners are paying to send up sufficient heat. This is the message Adams, the new mayor, should have been emphasizing: such underinvestment and neglect should be unacceptable in America’s richest city. But it remains so – the status quo, distressingly, is a stratified reality where some dwell in million-dollar condos and others suffer on the city’s margins, hoping not to freeze on the way to bed or die in a fire the next day. Investors do not buy buildings to keep people housed; they own to make money, and when collecting rent from working-class tenants, services are trimmed to drive profit margins. Why send up a generous amount of heat when a little will do? Why pay to fix a door when, until a fire kills 17 people, the day-to-day is merely tolerable? Elite neglect is at the root of the devastation. The sort of neglect that forces tenants, many of them immigrants, to haul space heaters into apartment buildings that should be generously pumped with heat. Neglect that allows millionaire building owners to shrug off multiple department of housing preservation and development complaints. A different kind of mayor would challenge the real estate industry, immediately, to do better. But New York has not had that mayor in a very long time, if ever. Even Bill de Blasio, the self-identified progressive, allied closely with the city’s largest developers and took millions of dollars from them. Adams, a former Republican, is far less tenant-friendly than De Blasio. Landlords now have a dear friend in City Hall. A simple “close the door” campaign, which Adams will be happy to embark on, is exactly what men like Rick Gropper want. More children and adults obsessing over their alleged culpability in crumbling apartment towers will mean a real estate investor class that gets to keep doing what it is has always done – cut corners to drive profits. Yes, educating the public about fire safety is important, and must continue. But if the root causes of the carnage are not identified and bad actors are not named, little will change. Now, 17 people are dead who didn’t have to die. Ross Barkan is a New York City-based writer‘It is good for us that the owner is Thai,” said Teerasil Dangda not long after he arrived in England in 2007, one of three players from the Land of Smiles to sign for Manchester City. Sven-Göran Eriksson was also grinning, albeit with some bemusement, as he lined up alongside the striker, Suree Sukha and Kiatprawut Saiwaeo, all holding up blue shirts that they would never wear on the pitch. If it was good for Teerasil, now a legend of Thai football, who said he learned a lot in his short time out west, it could have been better. Instead of being brought to Europe by his country’s former prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra, he could have been signed by Ange Postecoglou. Celtic’s manager has brought another Asian trio to a British club, and Daizen Maeda, Reo Hatate and Yosuke Ideguchi, all Japanese, should have more impact at Celtic than their Thai predecessors did at City. The Australian, who led Yokohama F. Marinos to the 2019 J League title, knows exactly how good these players are. In the short term that spells bad news for Celtic’s rivals. Scottish clubs yet to get to grips with the prolific Kyogo Furuhashi, who has scored 16 goals since arriving in the summer from Vissel Kobe, may groan at the thought that Postecoglou has brought in more Japanese talent. These are three of the best players in Japan, home to one of the best leagues outside the big five of Europe. Hatate, a spiky son of a baseball player, has stood out for Japan’s dominant team, Kawasaki Frontale, and was named in the 2021 J League season XI. The 24-year-old has played only two years of professional football, winning two titles, and has admitted it may take time to get used to the language, culture and food in Glasgow. He is flexible enough to manage. Postecoglou has described him as an attacking midfielder and understandably so given his technique and eye for a pass, but Hatate can play in various positions. Maeda’s speed, physicality and clinical finishing – he was the league’s joint top scorer last season for Yokohama, the club Postecoglou left in June – should quickly endear him to fans. Ideguchi may have the hardest time winning over the doubters and not only because he is a defensive midfielder appreciated more for doing the simple things well and rarely giving away the ball. He and Postecoglou say he has unfinished business in Europe after he signed for Leeds in 2018 and then, like that Thai trio 11 years earlier, left England without playing a competitive game. The first move to Europe came too soon for the then 21-year-old. He is wise enough to know that he will be damned if he does well, with those from outside arguing it is proof of the Scottish league’s weakness, and damned if he doesn’t. No prizes for guessing what Rangers fans will want to happen, and, although they may not be too pleased should this new trio shine, it would be good for Scottish football. More Japanese talent would follow. In 2013 Arsène Wenger, who spent 18 months in charge of Nagoya Grampus before heading to Arsenal, told everyone that the J League was worth a look: “I find that a new market that is very interesting and very competitive is the Japanese market. Look at the number of Japanese players who play now in Germany for example.” That really took off in 2010. There had been Japanese players in Germany before a 21-year-old Shinji Kagawa signed for Borussia Dortmund but the numbers increased after his stunning success. There were 12 in the Bundesliga by 2014; only Switzerland, Austria and Brazil were more heavily represented abroad. Something similar could happen in Scotland. As in Germany, some will come, shine and be sold to richer leagues for big money in the manner of Kagawa and Shinji Okazaki, others will stay for years such as Makoto Hasebe and some will, like Kazuki Nagasawa, return home fairly quickly. There will be huge interest in Japan at seeing four compatriots in action for a storied European club. As always, translating interest into hard cash is a challenge but it may not matter too much given that the new signings hardly broke the bank anyway. There was consternation in Japan at how cheap the deals have been, with the three commanding a total of about £3.5m in another example of J League clubs being only too happy to virtually stand aside and wave their best players through to Europe. Celtic won’t care about that, the only downside being that should these three play to their potential, Postecoglou and his employers are going to face competition next time they go shopping in Japan.As a scientist and a movie maker, we both once naively assumed that data and storytelling would converge to help prevent the imminent collapse of our habitable climate. Fire tornadoes, mega hurricanes, biblical floods, fossil fuel companies misleading the public and gambling our lives for huge profits – of course, such apocalyptic imagery would lead to gripping newscasts, dramatic interpretations, and stirring speeches from our leaders, sparking action at every level of society. After all, the real-life story of the climate crisis makes even the wildest, biggest-budget film like Don’t Look Up seem like a charming EM Forster adaptation. But does this story-of-all-stories get wall-to-wall news coverage? Nope. Not by a long shot. Despite a horrifying parade of extreme weather events fit for an apocalypse film, only 0.4% of corporate news airtime in 2020 was about climate. According to a recent study by MediaMatters, corporate news coverage of the climate catastrophe plummeted by 53% in 2020 compared to 2019. Even before the pandemic, across the entirety of 2019, major networks devoted less than four hours of coverage total to the greatest threat to life on Earth in 65 million years, since the asteroid that took out the dinosaurs. Clearly we need to reassess how we’re communicating this massive story. So, Don’t Look Up tries to do something that perhaps doesn’t feel natural with a story as dark as climate change: make the audience laugh. Because when people laugh together it gives them perspective, relief and, most of all, a semblance of community. This is not conjecture. Research shows that humor can lower our defenses and make hard truths easier to hear. Hopefully comedy can help elucidate how our culture of swipes, clicks and likes is taking us further and further away from the one subject we must talk about. Corporations, advertising and PR firms are turning even the most basic exchange of information into a sales pitch or “brand enhancement” and it’s put us in a very dangerous place. What better way to rob this constant churning wall of spin, coercion and success porn than by simply laughing at it? FDR once said: “There’s no better way to disarm the Devil than by pointing out his fly is down.” (He didn’t really say that, but how cool would it be if he had?) This is not to say that everything should be jokes and memes. Some people need a book like The Uninhabitable Earth to give them a kick in the pants – in fact, that’s one of the things that inspired Adam to write this screenplay, along with the 2018 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report. Others need a climate solutions podcast like How to Save a Planet, which Ayana co-created, to show a path forward. We need all manner of compelling creations to reach all types of folks. The point of all of this is to welcome more and more people into the work of driving forward climate solutions. Seventy per cent of adults in the US say they are willing to take action on climate, but 51% say they don’t know where to start. Though fervent climate science deniers get lots of attention, they are only 7% of Americans. Amid all the dire news, these are encouraging numbers. Maybe some film or gif or TikTok has jostled you to think seriously about what you can do. Specifically you. Well, here’s one way to answer that question: think of a Venn diagram with three overlapping circles. In the first, put what you’re good at. (So, which Avenger are you and what are your specific super powers?) In the second, put what part of the climate challenge you want to work on. (Your mission, should you choose to accept it.) In the third, put what brings you joy. (What, for you, isn’t work because you love it so much?) And then find your way to the epicenter of that climate action Venn diagram for as many minutes of your life as you can. We don’t all have to do the same thing – in fact we shouldn’t. And if you want some help getting started, we’ve got you covered with some specific suggestions for steps you can take toward a safer planet. You see, when it comes to climate change, we are all in the writers’ room right now, deciding how the story unfolds and how it ends. And that story can be funny, dire, hopeful or all of the above. But not every story is guaranteed a happy ending, even though that’s mostly what we see in movies. So we can’t just sit back and watch. We are not an audience. Like it or not, we are in this story. Adam McKay is a writer, director and producer. Recent credits include Don’t Look Up, Vice and The Big Short Dr Ayana Elizabeth Johnson is a scientist who advises on climate policy. She is co-creator of the thinktank Urban Ocean Lab, the podcast How to Save a Planet, and the anthology All We Can SaveOver Christmas and the new year, three of the world’s leading naturalists died. Thomas Lovejoy, a conservation biologist credited with popularising the term “biodiversity” and a passionate defender of the Amazon, died on 25 December. A day later, Edward O Wilson, known to many as the “modern-day Darwin”, died in Burlington, Massachusetts. On 2 January, Richard Leakey, a world-renowned Kenyan conservationist who helped establish Africa as the birthplace of humankind, died at his home in Nairobi. From presidents to undergraduate students, thousands have paid tribute to the three men, whose achievements range from developing theories on forest and island ecosystems to reforming the Kenyan civil service and devising proposals to protect half the planet for nature. Alongside grand accomplishments, which were sometimes controversial, their passing has been a chance to reflect on the small and the mundane: fleeting interactions that inspired careers, kind words that propelled research projects, and generosity of spirit that has helped amplify the voices of those that practise and produce science. “There’s a whole generation of diverse ecologists and conservationists following in the footsteps of their work,” says Ricardo Rocha, a conservation ecologist from the island of Madeira, who studies bats and the human drivers of biodiversity loss. Holding books written by all three men, he says they all had a massive impact on his career and improved the diversity of their respective fields. “I’m black and I’m European. These were three white men that consciously and unconsciously helped promote a shift in the demographics of the scientific community.” The Guardian received dozens of responses to a callout about the legacy of Wilson, Lovejoy and Leakey. From funding field studies of indigenous territories in Peru to convincing prospective lawyers to pursue careers in human paleobiology, their impact has been far-reaching. In an email titled “Tom Lovejoy changed my life”, Alexander Nassikas explains how he switched from pursuing a career as a doctor to working on the climate crisis after visiting Camp 41 in the Amazon, where Lovejoy hosted presidents, researchers and celebrities from Tom Cruise to Olivia Newton-John. “He wrote me an email once telling me that he’s counting on me to make a difference in the world,” says Nassikas, who now works for the UN secretary general’s climate action team. Dr Dino J Martins, a renowned Kenyan entomologist and evolutionary biologist at Princeton, who heads the Mpala research centre near Mount Kenya, says his friend Leakey helped forge a path for African researchers to lead research in their own continent. “There is an entire cohort of African scientists who, against the odds, have risen because of Richard inspiring us, fighting for us and making sure we got on and did it,” he says. Dr Ben Okita-Ouma, co-chair of the world’s leading elephant conservation group, agrees. Okita-Ouma was inspired by the photo of Leakey burning ivory tusks in an anti-poaching campaign that was pinned to a noticeboard while he was at university in the early 1990s. They went on to work together at the Kenya Wildlife Service. “He loved and meant what he was doing in conservation, archeology and in dreaming big for Kenya as a nation,” says Okita-Ouma. Dr Corrie Moreau, a professor at Cornell University who founded the Women in Science group, was a student of Wilson’s at Harvard and shared his passion for ants, redrawing the insect’s family tree for her PhD dissertation. She paid tribute to his kindness and openness. Wilson, a prolific writer, wrote all his papers and books on yellow legal tablets, which were then transcribed by his assistant Kathleen Horton, who worked with him from 1965 to 2021. “Science was conducted almost exclusively by this gentleman’s club in the past. Not only did you have to look a certain way, you had to have a certain kind of background and identity,” Moreau says. “Ed saw that in order to really harness the power of our ability to understand the world around us, we had to fling open the doors and invite more people to be involved. I’m some tattooed kid from the south that was passionate about ants. That never interfered with Ed’s ability to see my intellect. That’s not true of a lot of people.” The death of all three men comes at an inflection point in the world’s ecological history. In Wilson’s final lecture in October, he reflected on the three environmental crises humanity will face this century: the climate crisis, a fresh water shortage and biodiversity loss. The new roads, infrastructure and farms that are carving up the Amazon, which Lovejoy wrote about his entire career, will dictate the fate of the world’s largest rainforest. Leakey, who was buried on his favourite ridge overlooking the Rift valley, helped ensure the African elephants and rhinos are there for future generations alongside many other achievements. Colleagues and family members say that despite rising extinctions and growing environmental destruction, Wilson, Lovejoy and Leakey remained optimistic. Lovejoy’s daughters and granddaughters paid tribute to his belief that our species would “figure it out”. For now, all three helped ensure the health of the planet remains an open question. “Giving up is a sure recipe for your worst nightmares becoming reality,” says marine biologist Elliott Norse, who, along with Wilson and Lovejoy, started using the phrase “biological diversity” around the same time in the early 1980s. “They saw bigger things in the patterns of what we do. I am eternally thankful for their contributions to our understanding of the nature of life, including the nature of humankind, and the unthinking things we are doing to our one and only home.” There were too many responses to our callout to include them all but here are a few: Tom Lovejoy was a peerless adviser because of his firm conviction that a healthy environment is the best way to provide quality of life to everyone on the planet.” Adalberto Luis Val, former director of the National Institute of Amazonian Research (INPA). Lovejoy was elected to the Brazilian Academy of Sciences shortly before his death. There will never again be anyone like Tom Lovejoy.” Primatologist Russell Mittermeier, Re:wild’s chief conservation officer, who met Lovejoy as a student at Harvard and was friends with him for half a century. Personally, Tom made it clear to me that I needed to get out more. He showed me the value of breaking out of disciplinary silos and finding partners where I didn’t think to look. He never prescribed or demanded greater breadth. He just asked the right questions at the right time for me to discover for myself the value of thinking differently. I often tell my students that if they walk into a room and know everyone already, they aren’t getting out enough.” Geoffrey Dabelko, professor at Ohio University. Lovejoy helped him start the Wilson Center’s environmental change and security programme in Washington in 1994 with PJ Simmons. The strong foundation [Leakey] laid during his tenure at KWS has helped us more than double Kenya’s elephant population to over 36,000.” Dr Patrick Omondi, former deputy head of the Kenya Wildlife Service. Leakey played a key role in listing African elephants as among the most endangered animals in the world in 1989, resulting in an international ivory trade ban. Had tropical ecologists in the 1970s-1990s deigned to ask their indigenous neighbours about the organisation and dynamics of tropical forests, we all would have made faster scientific progress.” Douglas Yu, a professor of the school of biological sciences at University of East Anglia, who, along with a colleague, was awarded a $32,000 grant in 1999 by Wilson to study Matsigenka indigenous forest classification. The study found indigenous knowledge about the Amazon was a “vast and underutilised database”. I was walking by the swimming pool in the evening before dinner when I spotted Tom Cruise. I thought that he was there shooting some movie in the Amazon. Then I saw Tom Lovejoy. He told me what he was doing, that is, to bring famous people to the Amazon to stress the global importance of protecting the forest and its immense biodiversity. I will never forget that casual and so relevant encounter with Tom. He even introduced me to Tom Cruise and some other actors as a Brazilian scientist concerned with the future of the Amazon, but certainly Tom Cruise will never remember having met me.” Carlos Nobre, a climate scientist at the University of São Paulo who co-authored articles with Lovejoy. Richard Leakey impacted so many people, whether they know it or not. People shape people and undoubtedly my time at the Turkana Basin Institute was shaped by him and countless others. It inspired me to continue on my current journey.” Kailie Batsche, PhD student at the Center for Functional Anatomy and Evolution at John Hopkins. A field trip in the Rift valley inspired her to shift from a career in law to paleoanthropology. He told me he could tell that I would do well in grad school, but also that there were still important questions in human evolution that needed to be answered and that the field needed people like me to continue to make progress and find those answers.” Sarah Baumgarten, PhD candidate in bioanthropology at Washington University, who went on the same field trip as Batsche. It was Baumgarten’s first journey outside the US and Leakey spoke with her about her future in the camp mess. We cannot stay. Entropy takes everything. Yet, although all that we have done and may yet do will be dissipated, the steps that were taken, the path of a life, forgotten or not, remain as real and eternal as the flow of time. I am made happy and feel lucky, that we have shared a goal, and above all, that our paths that have crossed, as we travel onward, on our journey to forever.” Adrian Forsyth, executive director of the Andes Amazon Fund, was a student of Wilson in the mid 1970s and worked with Lovejoy on and off for 40 years. He shared this extract from a goodbye letter he sent to Lovejoy before his death. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresHannah Gutierrez-Reed, who managed weapons and ammunition on the set of Rust, the western which saw live ammunition from the gun carried by lead actor and producer Alec Baldwin accidentally hit the film’s cinematographer and director, has filed a lawsuit against the supplier of guns and bullets. The lawsuit, against Seth Kenney and his company, PDQ Arm &amp; Prop, alleges that boxes marked as inert dummy rounds actually included live bullets. “Hannah and the entire Rust movie crew relied on the defendants’ misrepresentation that they provided only dummy ammunition,” according to documents in the suit filed in state court in New Mexico. It was on 21 October that the gun carried by Baldwin discharged during rehearsals for a scene. The bullet killed the film’s cinematographer Halyna Hutchins and wounded its director, Joel Souza. According to the lawsuit, Kenney had worked with Gutierrez-Reed’s father, Thell Reed, who is a prominent Hollywood armourer, around a month before the Rust shoot began, on a different movie set in Texas. Kenney had asked Reed to help train actors to shoot live rounds at a firing range off-set, the lawsuit says. It continues by alleging that Kenney took live rounds from this training, some of which may have ended up on the Rust set. In November, Kenney told Good Morning America he was confident this wasn’t the case. “It is not a possibility that they came from PDQ or from myself personally,” he said, adding that dummy rounds from his company are individually “rattle tested” before dispatch – dummy rounds rattle; live rounds do not. The new lawsuit details Gutierrez-Reed’s actions on set, handing the gun to Baldwin. “Hannah remembered the chamber that she believed needed to be cleaned in Baldwin’s gun and she cleaned it and then Hannah pulled another round from the dummy box, shook it, and placed it in the chamber. To the best of Hannah’s knowledge, the gun was now loaded with six dummy rounds.” Gutierrez-Reed, 24, was paid around $7,500 for her work on the film, which also involved working as a props assistant. Her lawyer has previously claimed that this double role, as well as the “rushed and chaotic atmosphere” on set made it hard for her to fully focus.A Conservative MP faces suspension from the Commons after the standards watchdog found he undermined a formal apology over intimidatory behaviour towards staff by indicating in media interviews that he did not fully mean the gesture. Daniel Kawczynski will be asked to make a series of fresh apologies, including to the staff members who originally complained about his actions, and who the Shrewsbury and Atcham MP effectively identified when talking about the case, the Commons standards committee found. In an often damning report, the committee, made up of cross-party MPs and outside members, said that even in his latest interactions with the standards process, Kawczynski appeared unable to fully grasp what he had done. “We note that even in his most recent comments to the committee, Mr Kawczynski has focused very much on his own personal ‘journey’ rather than on the damage he may have caused to others,” the report noted. While he understood, intellectually, the damage his comments had caused, the report added, the MP was “still struggling with a capacity for genuine empathy with others, and as a result still has a tendency, which he may not fully realise, to see himself rather than others as the ‘victim’”. While such conduct would normally merit a significant suspension, the committee said, as Kawczynski had committed to undertaking further work on his behaviour the suspension would be limited to one day. Kawczynski apologised in the Commons in June last year after an investigation found he ranted at one senior Commons official, called another a “snowflake” and “useless”, and denigrated a third staff member via WhatsApp, having drunk a “significant” amount of alcohol. Earlier that same day, Kawczynski had spoken to his local BBC radio station and the Daily Mirror, complaining that the process was unfair and that he had no choice but to apologise. In a live radio interview he also identified the specific job of one complainant. This prompted a fresh inquiry into whether the MP had undermined the sincerity of his apology and the wider disciplinary process. Kawczynski’s lawyer argued this was not the case because the interviews happened before the apology. But the committee concluded the comments had been damaging and “risked causing further harm to the complainants and discouraging legitimate potential complainants, who might be concerned that their confidentiality would be compromised”. The committee, which oversees the work of parliament’s commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone, said Kawczynski should make a new apology in the Commons, including to the complainants and to Stone, and make a “commitment to an improved attitude and behaviour and an invitation to other members to learn from his experience”.The reality TV star Kim Kardashian and boxing champion Floyd Mayweather Jr are among celebrities being sued over their promotion of an alleged “pump and dump” cryptocurrency scheme that investors say caused them to lose money. According to a class action lawsuit filed in a California court, executives of EthereumMax, in collaboration with Kardashian, Mayweather Jr and the basketball player Paul Pierce, sought to enrich themselves by making “false and misleading” statements to investors. Promotions by the company included an Instagram post to Kardashian’s 250 million followers that the head of the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority, Charles Randell, said may have had “the single biggest audience reach in history” for a financial product. The value of the company’s EMAX tokens increased by as much as 1,370% after the media marketing blitz before crashing to an all-time low, the suit claims. By using celebrity endorsements, the claimants say, EthereumMax’s executives, “touted the prospects of the company and the ability for investors to make significant returns due to the favourable ‘tokenomics’ of the EMAX Tokens”. Instead, the lawsuit claims, they were concerned with inflating the value of their own tokens in order to sell them at a profit to investors who ended up holding artificially overvalued assets. EthereumMax dismissed the allegations in a statement made via the company’s Twitter account. “The deceptive narrative associated with the recent allegations is riddled with misinformation about the EthereumMax project,” it said. “We dispute the allegations and look forward to the truth coming out.” EthereumMax previously told the BBC that Kardashian’s Instagram post was “simply intended to raise awareness of the project and its utility”. Mayweather Jr is alleged to have promoted EthereumMax at a cryptocurrency conference while Pierce, nicknamed Truth, tweeted that the company had made money for him. The Guardian has approached Kardashian, Mayweather Jr and Pierce for comment.Sometimes, change is the last thing you want. Yes, in the newfangled world of reality TV, you can now find innovative formats where dates are disposed of via a trapdoor or contestants woo each other without speaking the same language. But 2020 and 2021 were packed with enough plot twists to last a lifetime. This is why the return of TV staple The Apprentice is so welcome. After two years off air, almost everything in the world has changed, bar the show itself. As always, Alan Sugar takes on a crop of business hopefuls who are confident to the point of delusion (which is how one of them actually described themselves in the first episode). Even the first few minutes of its return were characteristically thick with quotables: “I am the EST of everything, which means I am the coolEST, smartEST and wickedEST in businEST”, assured one contestant. Fascinatingly, the opening episode took place as though the past few years didn’t happen. Bar the odd reference to the pandemic through Sugar’s bad dad jokes (“You don’t get furloughed, you get fired!”), you would be forgiven for thinking it had been shot pre-Covid. The economic uncertainty, the decimation of the high street and the remote-working revolution were things of neither the past nor the future. The strange time-machine energy was only exacerbated by the addition of the show’s first winner, Tim Campbell, stepping in for Claude Littner, and a contestant introducing the word “bouji” to her entirely baffled team. Watching The Apprentice in 2022 is an exercise in nostalgia, a televisual DeLorean to transport us to the simpler time of 2019. It almost feels like the suspension of reality is intentional. Why else would the first task have been to launch a luxury cruise line, after possibly the most disastrous period for the industry in recent years? While the two teams built their rival brands, in the real world, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that every US passenger cruise had Covid cases on board. Meanwhile, the UK is still reeling from the disaster of the Britain-registered Diamond Princess, the cruise ship that was quarantined at Yokohama for a month in 2020 after almost a quarter of its 3,700 passengers were infected with Covid. But this is not a criticism. More often than not, TV is about the suspension of reality – it is why sitcom characters referencing the pandemic can be so grating. If we wanted to watch the news, we would do so. The idea that the boys’ team might encourage a post-pandemic boom in cruises with a logo that – as pointed out by Twitter users – resembled a Covid variant is surely a thing of fantasy. The girls gave them a run for their money in the ineptitude stakes, their cringe-inducing branding not much better than the boys’ anthropomorphic oil spill. It is a demonstration of the show’s commitment to representation; women can be just as belligerent and ridiculous as men, thank you very much. In these times, The Apprentice’s comeback should have felt irrelevant for an endless list of reasons, but the deja vu made it even more enjoyable than usual. At times, the show has appeared allergic to the future; Sugar’s declaration in the opening episode that “TikTok is becoming very powerful” sounded partly fearful. But this time the show’s lack of innovation has worked in its favour. For nearly 20 years, we have been regaled by its familiar, formulaic combining of egos and schadenfreude – and we probably will be for 20 more. If “keep calm and carry on” were a TV format, it would be The Apprentice, the ultimate pair of reality-show safe hands.If someone said: here’s loads of money, but we get the right to CGI you into movies for ever after you die, would you accept? LarboIreland I’ve been in about 80 movies already. I guess part of being an actor is there’s some immortality. That’s why people are interested in showbusiness, because you kind of live for ever. So maybe I would. It depends how bad the movies are. Was the bust up between you and Jean-Claude Van Damme staged for publicity? Granadapanda The one in Cannes was staged. It got a little bit heated … I think somebody pushed my ex-wife into somebody. I can’t remember, but it was Jean-Claude’s idea. He’s a showman. How did they make you look like a giant in comparison with Stallone? LeaderOfTheFree I am taller than him [Lundgren is 1.96m (6ft 5in), Stallone 1.77m (5ft 9in)], so it’s all about camera angles. A lot of times, they put me on a box. When I come into the press conference in my uniform, I have lifts in my shoes. Stallone was clever to exaggerate the difference. Less talented actors would try to make themselves look bigger against the other guy, but he knew that, by building up the opponent, it made him look better at the end. Did you really hospitalise Sly while making Rocky IV? mrnobody74 I don’t know. He keeps talking about it, so maybe he’s right. He did go to the hospital, but I don’t know whether it was my punches or the fact that he was so overworked as the director, actor and writer. We shot those 15 rounds over two or three weeks, eight or 12 hours a day, so you’re throwing thousands of punches. If you don’t connect, it looks a bit fake, but it doesn’t mean you want to hurt the other guy. But there were no hard feelings. Did you use a stand-in? Hamble Back in the day, you had to do it all yourself: Rocky IV, The Punisher, Masters of the Universe, all the Expendables. I’ve jumped from a motorcycle to a truck; dangerous things I would never do now. Staying physically fit over the years has been nice. There aren’t many actors who can stay physically fit for a long time. Part of the game is trying to look fit, at least. Did your depiction of a Russian fighter gain you any respect in the Soviet Union? duffdawg I think so. When the Soviet Union fell in 1991, Rocky and Universal Soldier came out on VHS and were the first western films Russians were allowed to watch. They don’t have that many international movie stars in Russia, so they’ve adopted me to some degree. Do you still follow Everton? What do you reckon this season? Vammyp I follow soccer a bit, but it’s difficult in America, because you have to be a diehard fan to find out when it’s on TV. I prefer the World Cup or the Olympics, when it’s a big deal. The Swedish ladies were pretty good in Tokyo, but lost [in the final] against Canada. Belgium had a good team – a lot of big guys. Coleslaw or mayonnaise on a ham sandwich? Twatacus1 I would say mayonnaise. Hur ofta besöker du Sverige? Skulle du kunna flytta tillbaka till Skandinavien som oldie? [How often do you visit Sweden? Could you move back to Scandinavia as an oldie?] MissPiStorm I visit a couple of times a year. My fiancee [the personal trainer Emma Krokdal] is from Norway, so we’re both Scandinavian. My two brothers and two sisters still live in Sweden. My older half-brother has the same dad, then four of us have the same parents, of which I’m the oldest, so I am still in charge. When we were little, I used to direct my siblings playing soldiers, marching around in different formations. My dad was in the military, so I picked it up from him. They hated it, but were too scared to protest. I don’t know if I’d like to move back. I haven’t thought about it, but for now I like California. Los Angeles is where my job is and I like the lifestyle; it’s quite liberal, you can be who you want to be. People don’t care and leave you alone. The smaller the places, the more rigid the social structure, whereas everybody in LA is a bit of a freak, so I fit right in. Do you remember how to determine the Reynolds number for a Newtonian fluid? DirtyOverThirty Oh, shit. No. It rings a bell way back in my head. Reynolds number has to do with flow characteristics, but I can’t remember exactly. I studied chemical engineering at the Royal Institute of Technology in Sweden and got my master’s at the University of Sydney. Then I ran into the singer Grace Jones. We fell in love and moved to New York. I always wanted to act, so I decided to try it, but I never regret studying in college – making friends and the intellectual atmosphere. You take the things you learn with you. They have certainly enriched my life on another level, because acting is pretty limited. The love scene between Grace Jones and Roger Moore in A View to a Kill is really unusual. Do you agree? Leobatch I agree. I was there. She has a love scene with Christopher Walken and she has one with Roger Moore. Roger Moore was a practical joker. He always brought something into bed [scenes] to alleviate the tension, like a sex toy. I think he did the same with Grace, but she knew about it, so I think she brought something, too … I can’t remember what, but it was even more extreme and I don’t think he was ready for it. They have this S&amp;M moment where they wrestle around, if I recall, but it was all in character. I think she did a good job there. Do you ever wear the ear necklace from Universal Soldier when you go out? TeeDubyaBee It’s in storage. The rubber ears are 30 years old, so they’re decomposed and even yuckier than before. Do you still play the drums? themurph100 Very seldom. I played a drummer about 15 years ago [in 2009’s Command Performance]. But I don’t have a kit, because, first of all, it takes up a large space. Second, everybody gets annoyed. I used to have an electronic one, where you just hear it in the headset. Maybe I’ll get one of those. Actually, it’s a good point. I miss it. I really should do it. It’s very relaxing and meditative. Have you ever seen a ghost? ArthurSternom I haven’t seen one, but I think I heard one many years ago in Sweden. I was staying in this 18th-century manor house in the middle of winter with my half-brother and his dad, to go hunting. I woke in the middle of the night, got really cold, felt something in the room and got really scared. I usually don’t get scared. Then I heard this woman speaking on the phone in old Swedish or something, but I couldn’t really make out what was going on. There were no women in the house, but there was one of these old wooden phones outside in the corridor and all these pieces of luggage that used to be owned by my half-brother’s dad’s mother. She had killed herself in the room next to mine, but I didn’t know any of this until the next day. That was the first time I felt that there was something supernatural. I never went back to spend another night in that place. What was it like working with Brandon Lee in Showdown in Little Tokyo? KieranK1982 It was a pleasure. He was a good martial artist, a very good actor and very charismatic, just like his dad. It was very sad what happened. He would’ve been a huge star had he not gotten killed so early. Do you ever imagine yourself as a much older actor, like Max von Sydow, Sir Patrick Stewart or Sir Ian McKellen? A Gan‑Dolph the Grey? Murdomania I’m starting to feel that way, because it creeps up on you. In Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom, I play Amber Heard’s dad, this wise old king with a little beard and long hair. I don’t feel like a wise old king, but a lot of the fans watching that movie are maybe 10 or 15 years old. I’m 50 years older, so to them I am a wiser, older actor. It’s interesting, because it’s gone full circle. I got famous young, when I was 27. But I’ve had some hard times in my career. Luckily, in last four or five years, I’ve done Creed II, Aquaman, and I’ve just finished The Expendables 4. I’ve got some interesting scripts I’d like to direct. I’ve done so much action that I really enjoy working on characters more. I don’t miss running around on a motorcycle shooting people, or jumping from a cliff to a plane – I’ve done that. I think it’s more interesting to use maturity and experience as an actor. If you suddenly found yourself a young man in today’s world, what would you pursue? KitRey I had a lot of issues from my childhood that I had to figure out by becoming a fighter and then an actor. It was more like therapy for me. If I was a young man today, I would probably still want to persue acting and directing, but maybe have a chance to train without being thrown into it, which happened in my case. I got famous in one movie and then was suddenly starring in big movies, not really knowing what I was doing. I didn’t have much technique as an actor and I had to figure it out. So, I would probably pursue acting in a more serious way. • Castle Falls, directed by and starring Dolph Lundgren, is out now on Blu-ray, DVD and digital downloadIn 1985, Régis Airault arrived in India to work as the resident doctor of psychology at the French consulate in Mumbai. At the time, travelers from France, upon arriving in India, could visit the consulate to place their passport and return plane ticket into safe-keeping. Airault had the opportunity to speak to those travelers, often in their 20s or early 30s, soon after they landed in India. All were excited about their forthcoming travels. But soon, Airault began noticing a curious condition in some of the French travelers, particularly among those who had spent longer periods of time in the country: a spectrum of behavioral and psychological changes that later became known as “India syndrome”. The condition has cousins around the world: religious tourists to Jerusalem are struck with a spontaneous psychosis upon visiting the city, certain that they are hearing God or in the presence of saints; visitors to Florence are physically overcome, even hallucinate, upon viewing the beauty of the city’s art. In India, Airault would be dispatched to examine travelers who had lost their bearings, had become disoriented and confused, or had found themselves in manic and psychotic states. The contrast was shocking. “I would see them perfect when they arrive and after one month, I would see them totally unstable,” he recalls. Initially, what Airault observed was blamed solely on drug use, but many of the travelers were also exhibiting symptoms such as depression and isolation, stemming from a feeling of disorientation in an unfamiliar land or culture. In rare cases, others were later diagnosed with acute psychosis, delirium and delusion. At its most powerful, India syndrome could be all-consuming, leading to a complete detachment from reality or an overwhelming disconnection from familiarity. Airault came to call that group “the travelers who were lost forever”. Over the decade that followed, the French psychiatrist traveled back and forth between France and India researching and compiling notes and observations into a thesis, which he adapted into a book, published in 2000, called Fous de l’Inde – Crazy About India – which revolves around a central question: does India itself bring forth these transformations, or do people go there determined to be transformed? “More than any other country,” he wrote about travelers from the west, “India has a way of stimulating the imagination and stirring intense aesthetic emotions which can at any moment plunge the traveler into utter anxiety. For this reason, our ‘experience’ of India can be somewhat ambivalent.” This depends on each person’s personal history, their ‘impulse to travel’ and past traumas which have been buried deep inside,” he wrote. “The subconscious has a way of bringing us face-to-face with them at certain times of our lives. Because India speaks to the unconscious: it provokes it, makes it boil and, sometimes, overflow. It brings forth, from the deep layers of our psyche, the buried.” Airault distinguished the symptoms of India syndrome from common culture shock, the experience of travelers either feeling an intense connection to a new and different place or feeling an extreme rejection and disconnection from it. Culture shock often manifests within days of arriving; India syndrome, rather, typically emerges after weeks or months of residing in the country. He noted that many travelers arrive with some deep-rooted idea of what India is, previously held expectations of what India can offer – emotionally, physically or spiritually – and a hardened determination to realize that imagined experience: “The trip to India begins early, with the idea that we have made, conveyed by our culture, its cliches, its legends, its myths, but also by our childhood fed by marvelous tales and stories.” He included dozens of examples of foreign travelers he observed or treated: one had burned his passport shortly after arriving and spent two months in prison suffering from anxiety attacks; one had been wandering around India, in good health and spirits, for five years even as his parents had presumed him dead; and another had traveled to the holy city of Varanasi and believed that the goddess Kali could hear his dreams and was speaking to him. Many of the cases were more benign: travelers arriving with an emotional or traumatic history that was suddenly brought to the surface and confronted, which resulted in a breakdown. Much of what psychiatrists have noted as India syndrome, however, is rooted in an exaggerated and sometimes misplaced expectation for what travelers believe India might offer. They leave home expecting enlightenment at the pinnacle of their journey and stop at nothing in their pursuit. Though India syndrome, like many of its cousins, is not universally recognized or officially accepted as a psychological diagnosis, the symptoms have become enough of a concern that insurance companies selling travel packages to India-bound tourists have been known to include clauses that void the coverage if the traveler has a psychiatric history or if he or she takes drugs. Several embassies and consulates in India have permanent psychiatrists on staff to address and treat their nationals in distress. If they don’t, they contact a psychiatrist such as Sunil Mittal, who has built a career in part on diagnosing and treating the conditions that arise from India syndrome. As the senior psychiatrist at the Cosmos Institute of Mental Health and Behavioural Sciences, Mittal sees approximately one foreign tourist every week in his office in New Delhi who would fall under the umbrella of India syndrome. The tourists arrive at the clinic through the recommendation of an embassy, in response to the concerned pleas of a family member, or as the result of an arrest made by police. Mittal breaks down cases of India syndrome into two categories. The first occurs among those who arrive as simple tourists but bring with them some emotional or psychological issue or trauma relating to their family, their job, their relationships, or their past. “They come with a turmoil and they have a breakdown here,” Mittal explains. At the core of the person, he says, lies a vulnerability, a deep-rooted issue that he or she hopes to resolve. The second group is made up of those who come to India determined to embark on some form of spiritual journey to seek higher meaning or realization. They visit holy centers and sites and immerse themselves in training and study of meditation or yoga. They often become enamored by yogis or gurus, or the juxtaposition between what is expected and reality, and seek an extreme break from their life back home. “On the path of a spiritual quest, all the values that have been ingrained in someone are questioned,” Mittal says. “This can lead to a state of emptiness, a state of loss of direction, or a sudden feeling of exaltation – and then not knowing how to handle a situation.” Though drug use is rarely the only spark, it is often an accelerant. Cannabis has been consumed in India for centuries in three forms. The most common is bhang, prepared with ground-up leaves and seeds that are mixed into a drink like a yogurt-based lassi. Ganja is the flowering buds of the cannabis plant, most often consumed by smoking. And charas, or hash, is produced by rubbing the sticky resin off the leaves and buds of the plant until it forms balls that are smoked in a straight clay pipe. Records of cannabis use in Ayurvedic medicine date back a millennium. But the plant most famously appears in Hindu mythology as a favorite of Shiva. In 1986, India made the cultivation, consumption and sale of all forms of cannabis illegal, despite its continued use by sadhus and international tourists alike. The convoluted gray area that cannabis occupies – semi-illegal, openly used ceremonially – has tempted many foreign tourists to experiment. The results can be overwhelming. “It’s like a bomb,” Mittal says. The new lens that the traveler begins to see through can distort even the surest of convictions, replacing hesitation with complete openness, skepticism with blind trust. The lens can undoubtedly offer positive experiences, but also more extreme results. For a 2007 paper on the forces that push international tourists in India to renounce their lives, the Indian anthropologist Meena Khandelwal interviewed three foreigners who had moved permanently to India to pursue a spiritual journey and noted that a US consulate official in New Delhi had told her that “his office may see about 25 Americans each year who have exhausted financial resources and alienated family members in the United States”. Changes can manifest themselves subtly at first, as strong culture shock. Some begin to wear one of the many forms of Indian sari. They carry walking sticks, wear red threads tied around their wrists denoting blessings and sport long necklaces. Travelers who are not Hindu or Muslim or Buddhist or Jain before arriving become, at least in appearance, a model example of a convert. They stay in ashrams or monasteries, where they study and learn, reform their lifestyle or system of belief, or preach asceticism. Over his career, Mittal has treated hundreds of cases across a spectrum of severity. There was the American man found wandering near the Taj Majal, disoriented and confused. After noticing the man behaving bizarrely, the owner of a roadside eatery called the police. The US embassy was contacted and the man then sent to Mittal’s clinic. He determined that the man had arrived in the city of Agra like any other tourist; he had not been on a spiritual journey but simply wanted to see the iconic mausoleum. There, he had tried cannabis, something he had smoked back home with no adverse effects, but this time it had proved overwhelming. He arrived at the clinic unable to answer more than basic questions. “He left everything – his backpack, passport, everything – and just ran away,” Mittal says. Within a month of his return to the United States, he had returned to his normal self. Then there was the British woman who had been living alone for a year in a small cottage in the mountains of the state of Uttarakhand. Locals had become concerned after she had begun behaving and talking strangely and stopped paying her rent. When police arrived, she claimed she had been captured by spirits. Her family contacted Mittal, who saw that she was on a path to a complete renunciation of her previous life. And there was the American woman in her 20s who had been traveling in India before withdrawing from contact with home – one of the more severe cases Mittal has seen. After months of searching, she was found living in an ashram in Rishikesh and performing erotic, half-naked dances each night. When confronted by Mittal’s team, she was adamant that she was an apsara, a female mythological spirit who tempts yogis and priests to test their resolve in celibacy. She assured Mittal that she was fine and that this was her path, but she appeared to be in a trancelike state. For both Airault and Mittal, in most cases, the treatment is simple: a plane ticket home. But in other, more severe cases, the experiences of some individuals in India can leave permanent marks on their behavior even after they return home. In one case, a Japanese tourist had been reported missing and was tracked to Varanasi, where he had had a psychotic episode and been detained by police after trying to board a train without a ticket. When he was brought to the clinic, Mittal found him to be suffering from schizophrenia and sent him home to Japan. Four years later, he reappeared at the clinic, asking to be hospitalized. “He felt he was going to be safe in India,” Mittal says. “At one end, it could be a true pursuit,” Mittal explains, “and for somebody else it could result in a psychotic state.” At this darker end, some travelers come to believe that they are inhabited by spirits or are a god incarnate. Others place themselves in dangerous situations by pushing themselves to increasingly greater extremes in their search for spiritual fulfillment. As Airault concluded in Fous de l’Inde, there are some “who wander aimlessly, in another world and without desire, sheltered from emptiness, suffering and life … At the end of the road, the limit may be death.” Lost in the Valley of Death: A Story of Obsession and Danger in the Himalayas, is out now • This article was amended on 18 January 2022 to correct a misspelling of ganja.There is only one thing worse than having to thumb your smartphone torch into life so that you can read a restaurant menu: the youthful twentysomething waiter noticing you do so, and bringing you one of those LED clip-on lamps. Short of wheeling the house Zimmer frame to the table for you to use while popping to the loo, there’s nothing better calculated to make you feel like an old git. It’s profoundly irritating, partly because it’s so unnecessary; it’s entirely possible to have moody lighting while also dropping enough on to a table so that those of us whose sight is not quite what it once was can read the damn small print without recourse to Wembley Stadium’s floods. But mostly it’s irritating because it’s a huge own goal. It makes any restaurant seem exclusive; as in it was designed to exclude those of us not in the very first flush of youth. All too often this is literally the case, albeit usually by happenstance. The restaurant business is generally a younger person’s game. Setting them up and running them requires the sort of long hours that those of us with a few years on the clock may no longer find appealing. And people in their 20s and 30s may well have no idea what older customers want or need, simply because they haven’t got there yet. If a restaurateur only wants punters their own age, then fine. Turn down the lights. Turn up the music. Print the menu in six point Comic Sans. Otherwise, here is my plea: if you’re opening a new hospitality business in 2022 employ someone who is at least in their mid-50s. Ask them to try out the seats. Are they padded enough for an arse that has done an extra 20 years’ sitting? Give them the menu. Is the point size legible without recourse to that torch? Does the lighting help? Does the combination of music and hard surfaces make reasonable conversation difficult for those who might have started to lose the top end of their hearing? Beyond the all-important legal requirements of disability access, what are the stairs down to the loos like for someone who might, say, have a hip or knee replacement in their future? Are they well lit? And if you’re using gendered toilets, are the door signs obvious or are they bloody annoying? (The latter has nothing to do with age. Stupid loo door signs are always infuriating.) Not doing all of this is just bad business. Restaurants really ought to be welcoming to all those with the money to spend, and who has more of that? According to the most recent (pre-pandemic) survey of household income from the Office for National Statistics it is the over-50s. Which isn’t really surprising, because they’re the ones further into their careers and their households tend to be smaller. It doesn’t mean you have to target your restaurant at them, unless you want to; it just means you shouldn’t actively create a hostile environment. Given the massive hospitality industry staff shortages, employing older people also makes another kind of sense. The group that owns the Wolseley, the Delaunay and others in London actively recruits older staff. As co-founder Jeremy King put it not long ago: “There is so much experience and knowledge, or should be, among people who have lived a life compared to someone only a year or so outside of college.” Those of us greying and thickening around the edges shouldn’t be invisible. It’s nice to have a waiter who’s a grownup now and then. Not least because, if they’re working there, I can be pretty sure I’ll be able to read the damn menu.Cambridge United’s goalkeeping hero Dimitar Mitov hoofs a goal kick straight out of play deep in the Newcastle United half. The five minutes of injury time are up. Kieran Trippier throws it infield to Jonjo Shelvey and receives it back – the 39-year-old Wes Hoolahan doing shuttle runs between the two. Finally, the referee blows the full-time whistle – after holding on for those agonising final 20 minutes or so, the U’s have secured perhaps their most famous victory. The camera focuses on the bemused-looking goalscorer Joe Ironside. He grins uncontrollably before being enveloped by his teammates. I jump out of my chair, clench my fist and just manage to stop myself from emitting the involuntary full-volume “yesssssssssss come aaaaaaaaaaaaaan, fucking get in there” that coincides with any rare moment of Cambridge United success. I’m alone in my living room 10,475 miles away. My heavily pregnant wife is the only person to celebrate with. It’s four in the morning, so waking her seems inadvisable. I sit down in silence and well up – thrilled, giddy and completely drained. The camera pans up, further and further still – eventually training in on the 5,000 U’s fans up in the sky. A sea of delirious amber and black. And while the pride I have for the players and managers is overwhelming, I am gutted I’m not there in that noise. For the first time in the four months since leaving home, I feel out of place. It’s perhaps no surprise that at that moment of emotional weakness in the middle of the night I feel every one of those 10,475 miles. It’s the first big Cambridge game I think I’ve ever missed. The Cup runs of 1990 and 91: Millwall, Ashton Gate, the 5-1 and the Lee Philpott volley. The Palace quarter-final. Middlesbrough, Wednesday, Arsenal at Highbury. Chesterfield in the play-offs. The LDV Vans humiliation in Cardiff. Lionel Pérez taking, and failing to score, that last-minute penalty. Sheffield Wednesday home and away in the Worthington Cup. Back from three down at the City Ground. The play-off finals to get back into the league – those desperate 10 minutes of added time against Gateshead. Manchester United at the Abbey and Old Trafford. Leyton Orient away on some bloke’s balcony overlooking Brisbane Road last year. I’ve spent the game feverishly tweeting to try to feel involved. Social media might connect you like never before, but it shows you what you’re missing with unnerving immediacy. I wonder how fans who followed this path decades before managed to follow their team. News reaches me of a shout-out from Jeff Stelling: “I can hear him … and he’s in Australia,” he yells, Merse laughing in the background. My phone explodes with congratulatory messages – for the result, and the shout-out. I lie in bed staring at the ceiling. The following morning I blearily explain to my wife what it means for Cambridge United to be first on Match of the Day and I burst into tears. Supporters of big sides will never understand the excitement of getting wall-to-wall national coverage after months or years in the wilderness – however fleeting. I inhale every radio interview over the next 24 hours. I do one of them – with the best right-back on the pitch, George Williams. A week later and I’m still watching Cambridge United’s YouTube clip of the post-game celebrations on a loop, scrolling on Twitter to seek out every fan’s attempt to capture the VAR confirmation of the goal on their phone. I listen to Newcastle United podcasts to just hear them talk about our players. On the Sunday a mate sends me screengrabs of the back pages – but I’d do anything to sit in a cafe with every newspaper, to pore over the same picture of Ironside again and again, to read identical post-game quotes in a variety of different fonts. For years growing up I remember the BBC radio commentators welcoming listeners to the World Service halfway through matches and thinking nothing of it. When I was 18 I moved to Berlin and I recall hearing it from the other side. Some bizarre documentary on the Scout movement in the Ukraine would cut off and be replaced by Mike Ingham, Alan Green and Jimmy Armfield live from Goodison Park. That 45-minute taste of home meant so much. Anyone’s who moved country knows that most of the first few months are just an extended to-do list: an unstinting treadmill of un-Djokovic-like accurate form-filling, sitting on hold, living through the catch-22 of requiring a proof of residence to acquire the proof of residence you’re trying to obtain. Following that – new job, new house, new favourite cafe, new bin day – there hasn’t really been time to feel that yearn for home. And it is clearly trite to mourn missing a football match, given how many people haven’t been able to get home for far more important reasons over these past two years. But it isn’t the game, more what it signifies – and a realisation of what football actually means: the friends I would have cajoled into travelling north, the geordie mates I’d have had a glorious pint with afterwards. This season has been an interesting insight into perspective of the often maligned foreign fan. Held responsible for awkward kick-off times. Incorrectly portrayed as the main supporters of the failed super league. For those around the world who routinely set their alarm for a 2am kick-off and who might get to a game once in their life, perhaps the casual dismissal as “tourists” isn’t particularly fair. There’s an obsession with the definition of a “proper” football fan. The truth is there are many ways to be one. It would border on madness for the Cup exploits of any lower-league side to dictate where you choose to live – most of us have other, more practical considerations. But last Saturday I was 10,475 miles away from where I should have been. Straight after I scanned for flights for the fourth-round weekend. Luton at home – maybe I’ll hold off till the fifth.When I joined a community mental health team for older people 20 years ago, addiction wasn’t a central part of our work. One of our first referrals was for an alcoholic patient threatened with eviction. It was rejected – it wasn’t relevant to our service, or so I thought. But over the years the referrals combining social problems and addiction kept coming. We would bat the problems back to the GP, yet the same patients would be referred years later for depression and dementia. Their issues hadn’t gone away; if anything, they had worsened. It was a salutary lesson that led me to join forces with a group of professionals and delve more deeply into the problem of drug and alcohol addiction in older people. As we dug into the data, a pattern began to emerge of substance misuse among those born between 1946 and 1964: the so-called “baby boomers”. Their higher rates of addiction than in older or younger generations are coming home to roost, with implications for public health and clinical services. New analysis of NHS figures shows that the numbers of older people using addiction services have pulled away from other age groups at an alarming speed. Cannabis remains the most widely used illicit drug, with the number of people aged 55 and over under the care of drug treatment services rising by nearly 800% over the past 15 years – the figure for the over-65s is more than 1,000%. This compares to a drop of more than 25% among 18- to 19-year-olds. But it doesn’t stop there. For alcohol, opioids, cocaine, crack and amphetamines, there has been a drop of more than 25% in the number of 18- to 19-year-olds under addiction services, compared with a rise of more than 200% in the 55-and-over group over the same timeframe. There are many reasons for this trend. Baby boomers had considerably more exposure to alcohol advertising in their youth, socialising without a drink was looked upon askance and there was a more permissive attitude to “recreational” drug use, with little awareness of the potential harms of drugs such as cannabis. As they have grown older, this age group has also cut down on its drug and alcohol use less than previous generations. Indeed, some people may even have cut down previously, only to increase their use during retirement. And their problems may be masked. One of my female patients presented with recurrent falls until, after a year, she told me that she was drinking half a bottle of whiskey a day. A male patient of mine complained of constant tiredness and poor sleep until he told me that he smoked cannabis four times a week. In this context, it’s encouraging that the figures suggest more older people are seeking help. I have been making sense of data on drug and alcohol use in older people for years and putting it under the noses of policymakers. Some of these efforts have borne fruit. The £25m Big Lottery-funded Drink Wise Age Well project provided an evidence base for what can be done to prevent, protect and intervene so that the physical, psychological and social harms from alcohol can be mitigated among older people. However, drug addiction in older people is still flying under the radar. In 2019, a letter from the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs to the then home secretary, Sajid Javid, drew attention to the needs of an ageing cohort of drug users. The council recommended that a “particular focus should be the availability and knowledge of staff to address the complex physical and mental health issues of older drug users”. Yet in the second part of Dame Carol Black’s Independent Review of Drugs older people were conspicuous by their absence. We ignore the startling trend in treatment for drug and alcohol addiction among older people at our peril. Older people not only have distinct problems that reflect the physical and psychosocial consequences of ageing, but are also at risk of distinct mental disorders such as alcohol-related dementia. Looking to the future, truly integrated care will mean joining together public health and the NHS to rebuild addiction services. That will come at a cost, but one that will undoubtedly improve the lives and livelihoods of our invisible addicts. Tony Rao is a consultant old-age psychiatrist and author of the book Soul TraderA proposed UK ban on trophy hunting imports risks undermining the conservation of rhinos, elephants and other endangered wildlife, according to a group of leading scientists and conservationists who said African perspectives have been ignored by the government. On Friday, MPs will vote on a private member’s bill to ban trophy hunting imports while, separately, the government is preparing legislation to ban hunting trophies from thousands of species, including lions, leopards, rhinos, elephants and polar bears. In an open letter seen by the Guardian and signed by more than 100 scientists, conservationists and African community leaders, the group said the ban is poorly conceived and threatens to reverse conservation gains and undermine the livelihoods of rural communities across sub-Saharan African. It urged the UK government to implement a smart ban that incentivises good practice by prohibiting trophies from “canned” hunting operations, where captive-bred animals are shot at close range, or those that fail to share revenues with local communities. By allowing trophy hunting to continue within the UK, where hunters can pay thousands of pounds to shoot deer, the group said the government was opening itself up to accusations of hypocrisy by banning imports from countries with impressive conservation records such as Namibia and Botswana, where trophy hunting is used to fund conservation. “We understand (and many of us share) the public’s instinctive dislike of trophy hunting. However, the reality is that no alternative land use has yet been developed which equally protects the wildlife and habitats found in these vital landscapes while also generating valuable revenues for local communities. Indeed, where trophy hunting has been subjected to bans, wildlife has often suffered, and conflict with communities has increased,” the letter states. “This is not to claim that trophy hunting is perfect. It is beset with a variety of problems, including but not limited to the inequitable sharing of hunting revenues, inappropriate or poorly observed quotas, corruption and inadequate regulation. But tourism is not a perfect industry either,” it continues. Signatories include the heads of leading conservation NGOs such as Save the Rhino International, academics from the University of Oxford and African community leaders. The IUCN, which oversees the red list of endangered species, established that trophy hunting has supported the conservation of several species, including rhinos, African elephants and markhors, the national animal of Pakistan, and a UN report said that trophy hunting is helping to protect millions of acres of wildlife habitat in sub-Saharan Africa. Community leaders have previously criticised British celebrities for calling for a ban on trophy hunting, naming Ricky Gervais, Joanna Lumley and Piers Morgan in July 2020. Supporters of the trophy hunting import ban argue it will help protect endangered species and end a cruel practice. The prime minister, Boris Johnson, has called trophy hunting a “disgusting trade” and his father, Stanley, has campaigned in favour of the ban. But Leslé Jansen, CEO of the NGO Resource Africa, who signed the letter, said the legislation will harm conservation and African livelihoods and undermine the rights of rural communities to use their natural resources. “We have voiced these concerns many times, and have attempted to engage in the process. Why are Africans’ rights, views and conservation successes continually ignored?” she said. Dr Rodgers Lubilo, chairman of a community leaders network covering Angola, Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe, called on the government to reconsider the proposed legislation. “We have time and again told our international friends that trophy hunting is part of local rural livelihoods, and we will continue to pursue sustainable use of wildlife for generations to come,” he said. Dr Amy Dickman, a professor of conservation at Oxford University who signed the letter, said: “We shouldn’t base policy on what comedians and celebrities think. We should be basing it on expertise and on local opinion. Those are the two things that count the most. “Ricky Gervais has 14 million followers on Twitter, whereas the African Community Leaders Network, when they post about this, tend to get zero engagement. The people most affected have the smallest platforms,” she said. A Defra spokesperson said: “We are bringing forward ambitious legislation to ban the import of hunting trophies from thousands of species. “This will be one of the toughest bans in the world, and goes beyond our manifesto commitment, meaning we will be leading the way in protecting endangered animals and helping to strengthen and support long-term conservation.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresMuseum of Mechanics is a fascinating concept – a virtual hall of exhibits, featuring faithfully recreated examples of one idea (in this case, lock-picking) from games throughout history, alongside the curator’s explanation and analysis of each. The intended audience are game developers, but it’s enjoyable for anyone interested in the history of video games, and how they can approach the same idea in so many different ways. I came away from it with a renewed appreciation for the thought that goes into these seemingly minor elements of game design. When you reached a locked door in the original Fallout, your character’s stats and abilities influenced a behind-the-scenes dice roll to determine whether you could unlock it and move past. Games such as Skyrim give you on-screen picks that must be rotated in virtual locks. And in Mass Effect, you gained access by playing a hacking mini-game (the distinction between lock-picking and hacking is something that designer Johnnemann Nordhagen is quite preoccupied with, incidentally). All of these are recreated here alongside some much more obscure approaches, such as that of cult-hit Russian plague-game Pathologic 2, or Alpha Protocol’s timed lock-tumblers. There’s a nostalgic interest here for anyone who’s been playing games for a long time – I’d forgotten about all the time I’d spent tentatively feeling out locks in fantasy worlds. Now I know exactly how that little mechanic works, and why it felt so good to use. The museum itself is pretty rudimentary: a dark hall, with signposted identical locks pointing the way towards Nordhagen’s recreations of lock-picking mini-games. It looks and sounds basic, but the amount of effort, knowledge and understanding of the topic (and of game design and history more generally) that has gone into this mini museum is abundantly evident, from both the exhibits and the text that accompanies them. Like listening to someone talk about the PhD research they’re doing on a niche topic, it might sound boring at the outset, but by the end of an hour, you’ll come away with something you definitely didn’t know before. • Museum of Mechanics: Lockpicking is out today (Jan 13); Steam/itch.io.Torran, 30, Manchester Occupation Site reliability engineer Voting record Labour in every general and local election since he started voting, except one vote for the Lib Dems, later regretted Amuse bouche Can recite the first 30 digits of pi Martin, 55, Cheadle Occupation Brand consultant. Martin previously founded and ran a brand and design business Voting record Has always been a Labour voter, but has considered himself politically homeless since 2017 Amuse bouche Serves on the board of “Britain’s boldest orchestra” For starters Martin I knew I was meeting a trans person. I was concerned it would be someone who wanted to educate me or be aggressive. Both of us positively and warmly went out of our way to establish that we were going to be OK together and have a nice evening. Torran I prefer a quiet life most of the time. But I no longer feel I can sit back – it’s gone too far. Meeting ordinary people with anti-trans views and showing them that we’re just people, not some sort of evil conspiracy, sometimes has to be part of that. And honestly, the food was incredible. Martin It was a new take on Mittel European cuisine. Torran I had spätzle – solid pasta tubes. Martin I had interesting dumplings. The big beef Martin I was really straight. I said: “I believe that a trans man is a biological female.” My view is that person is a biological woman who’s living life as a trans man. We didn’t talk about pronouns because when you’re having a conversation, you don’t need to. Torran No one is more aware of biological sex than trans people. It’s an absurd idea that we’re trying to ignore it. It’s defined a lot of our lives. You don’t, when you meet someone, do a DNA swab and check their chromosomes – we base things on instincts and what people look like. If you want to delve into genotype [the set of genes in DNA responsible for a particular trait] and phenotype [the physical expression of that trait], then if someone’s phenotypically female, they’re female, regardless of what they’ve got in their pants. Martin It was like going in to debate about the royal family with a member of the royal family. Sex is immutable. My fear is you’re not allowed to say that, and it makes me a terrorist, a bigot, a phobic, unworthy of keeping my job. Torran Whenever I brought up a fact that contradicted him or a study I knew about or information that he didn’t have, he’d say: “I don’t have that to hand – I’ll never be as well informed as you on this because it’s your life.” At one point, I pulled out my phone to show him what the Equality and Human Rights Commission says – that people should be treated as the gender they’re transitioning to at any stage in the transition. Then he hared off in a different direction entirely. Martin Everybody’s got their own version of science. There is no incontrovertible truth. Everybody must identify as they wish, everybody must be supported. But this is a space where truth and immutable biology aren’t accepted. I find that depressing. Torran He was incredibly inconsistent in his views. Sharing plate Martin We agreed on wealth redistribution. If the next generation is going to be the first that’s poorer than the one that came before, then my generation has the responsibility to sort that out. Torran’s view was to do it all through inheritance tax. Torran Yeah, broadly, we agreed with making boomers pay more money to help young people who are skint. I’m in favour of just rinsing people when they’re dead. He’s more in favour of making them pay when they’re alive. For afters Torran We have pretty much the same political views, except he thinks the Labour party’s job is to be electable. Its job is to be electable but still Labour. Martin I think the Labour party is currently unelectable. Takeaways Martin Torran was more reasonable than I was expecting. We had more in common than I expected, within and besides the trans thing. Torran He described believing in gender identity as a religion. You hear this a lot – “It’s a belief system.” The logical conclusion of that is that there’s no basis for the belief. Trans people aren’t real. I was annoyed. And tired. He drove off and I wandered to the pub. • Martin and Torran ate at The Spärrows in Manchester Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out moreAmanda, 52, West Yorkshire Occupation Amanda has long-term renal and heart failure, so is unable to work Voting record Has voted Labour, Lib Dem and Green. Voted for Nick Clegg. Would probably vote Green if there was an election tomorrow Amuse bouche She met her husband on Guardian Soulmates in 1995 Yolanta, 54, Bradford Occupation Freelance accountant Voting record Used to vote Labour; switched to Lib Dem in 2019 Amuse bouche She also speaks Lithuanian and Russian For starters Amanda I arrived first and chatted to the owners, who were lovely people. Yolanta I thought she was a nice lady – that we would get along. Amanda She was quite closed. I think she was ready for a confrontation. Yolanta I ordered an orange juice, then chicken with a mushroom sauce. Amanda I ordered gamberoni, then penne piccante. The big beef Amanda We both read lots of papers, but I don’t read the Sun or the Mail. She said, “I read the Sun, but it’s not an intelligent paper.” Well, don’t read it then, would be my answer to that. She talked about the refugees arriving on the coast. My whole feeling is one of compassion. What a horrendous way to arrive in a country, desperate and alone. What have you left, to make that journey? Yolanta All the people who come, they’re all young – 18, 20, 25 years old. They come here just to live on benefits. People come without documents, and why? Western countries cannot solve all the world’s problems. It is not a leftwing opinion, but it is my opinion. Amanda She thinks people come here for a free house, to live for free. I said, “But they only get £39 a week” and she replied, “Well they could buy a loaf of bread.” She was very fixed against people arriving. The day we met [which was before 27 people died in the Channel’s worst mass drowning], crossings from France were getting a lot of coverage. But I look at the big picture. I read about Calais and the horrendous things people go through, the violence there. I don’t see people arriving in dinghies as a threat. I just see them being kicked from country to country. Yolanta They come here and they do not want to work, and they do not behave or dress as if they want to integrate. Amanda I think if you read the Sun, you’re going to read a lot of bile. Sharing plate Amanda She assumed I’d voted for Brexit. So it took the wind out of her sails, because I’m very pro-European and I voted to stay in. She said she had a whole speech ready to challenge my Brexit views. That was good in a way, because it broke the ice. Yolanta Let’s say for travelling, I am very pro-European. But if you want to work here, or if you want to live here, or if you want to get benefits, that has to be controlled. A strict control. Amanda I knew she’d been in the UK 15 years, and I was ready to think, “You’ve had freedom of movement, you’ve come here, and now I haven’t got freedom of movement.” But that’s not the kind of freedom of movement she minds. Yolanta We agreed that it is very nice to travel in the EU. But she told me that it would be difficult to get medical treatment in EU countries now. For afters Yolanta We disagreed on Black Lives Matter. That police officer, of course he was guilty. But I do not think that he wanted to kill George Floyd. The most important thing was that Floyd had a criminal record. Amanda I thought, “Oh right, so you think he deserved to have a knee on his neck and die in that way?” I hate this term woke, but I am woke and I am aware of injustice in the world, and I find it really difficult not to have compassion. The way he died was abhorrent and wrong. You can’t take away someone’s right to justice because they’ve got a colourful background. Takeaways Yolanta I think we agreed on many things and everything was very nice. Amanda We’re so far apart that we couldn’t find any common ground. But it was really interesting, and, because of my health now, I’m just grateful for the experience. I’ve had four kidney transplants, bowel surgery, heart surgery, and I’m running on empty. But I’ve had a very rich, full, lovely life, and I do my very best to live day to day. Additional reporting: Naomi Larsson • Amanda and Yolanta ate at Ristorante da Vito, Leeds Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out moreIt was a pretty comprehensive put-down from an erstwhile colleague. Douglas Ross, the Scottish Conservative leader and flag-carrier for the rebellion against Boris Johnson, is “a lightweight figure” of little consequence. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons and one of the prime minister’s closest allies, did very little to mask his disdain for Ross when he said so. Within hours of Ross’s demand for Johnson to resign, Rees-Mogg had gone on the attack. “I don’t think Douglas Ross is a big figure,” he told the broadcaster LBC. “He has been constantly in opposition to the prime minister, against Brexit; he is not somebody you would expect to say helpful things about the prime minister.” Some hours later Rees-Mogg doubled down. Interviewed by Kirsty Wark on Newsnight, he said: “Douglas Ross has always been quite a lightweight figure.” Alister Jack, the Scotland secretary and one of Ross’s five Scottish colleagues at Westminster, was “a much more substantial and important figure in this”. That dismissive and patronising tone grabbed people’s attention. It was intended to. It was a diversion designed to shift the story on to one individual. Ross was serially disloyal, Rees-Mogg implied; he had resigned as a junior minister in Johnson’s government in May 2020 over Dominic Cummings’ rule-breaking drive to Barnard Castle. Setting aside the inaccuracy of Rees-Mogg’s charge that Ross has not championed Brexit – he has – this strategy was intended to conceal a far more uncomfortable truth for Johnson, his cabinet and the Tory party at large: with the exception of Jack and perhaps one or two others, Ross has near unanimous support within the Scottish party. The party of the union is now deeply disunited. Ross has been backed by both his predecessors as Scottish Tory leader, Jackson Carlaw and Ruth Davidson, who was appointed by Johnson to the House of Lords. Although not all 30 other Tory MSPs have yet publicly lined up behind Ross’s banner, at least 26 have. Davidson, perhaps with an eye on her new gig as a Times Radio host, was the first to openly question Johnson’s position this week. She delivered a remarkable 13 Westminster seats in the 2017, helping Theresa May narrowly win that general election, and had once been mooted as a future prime minister. Under her leadership, the Tories pulled off the remarkable feat of replacing Labour as the main opposition at Holyrood, doubling its seats. This Scottish Tory revolt was undoubtedly coordinated. It is also freighted with risk. The evidence that this civil war is truly fratricidal became clear when Michael Gove, a fellow Scot, became the first to slap Ross down. Asked about Ross’s calls for Johnson to quit, Gove said: “My instant response is he’s in Elgin and the national Tory leader is in London.” The revolt is at a very delicate stage. Apart from Jack’s presumed loyalty to Johnson, Scotland’s four other Tory MPs – Andrew Bowie, David Duguid, John Lamont and David Mundell – have kept quiet, as have nearly all other Tory MPs. With the exception of Bowie, they also hold junior roles in the government so are watching and waiting, to see if other revelations emerge and then for the results of the investigation into partygate by the senior mandarin Sue Gray. Nonetheless, they share Ross and Davidson’s anxieties. They insist Johnson’s very poor reputation among Scottish voters is “priced in” but they have real fears the successive revelations about No 10’s disdain for its own lockdown regulations, the mishandling of the Owen Paterson crisis and Johnson’s generally shambolic leadership over Brexit are doing deep damage to the party’s brand as a whole, and thus to Scottish voters’ confidence in the union. They also face an immediate challenge holding their seats in May’s Scottish council elections, and are watching the polls give the UK Labour party a 10-point lead. While Ross successfully defended all 31 Scottish Tory seats at the last Holyrood elections against expectations, he does not have Davidson’s appeal to liberal voters or her subtlety. Ross’s domestic strategy is to appeal to an arch-unionist base. So any loss of confidence in the Tory brand at UK level is doubly damaging. The significance of the stakes for the pro-union camp were summed up by Andrew Percy, the Conservative MP for Brigg and Goole. He chastised Rees-Mogg for attacking Ross: “As someone who apparently loves the union, his personal attack on Douglas ... is a gift to the petty nationalists in the SNP who want to break this country up.”It’s 4am, and sparks from the circular saw are flying by my head. I have been given goggles to protect my eyes from the debris and although I’ve been told that I’m in safe hands, I do not feel safe at all. I’m cold from sitting on the road for five hours; my back is stiff, my hands are numb and, to top it all off, humanity is on the edge of extinction. This probably seems an odd way to spend my time to some of you, but this is how climate activists who engage in direct action try to be heard. We have tried everything else. We are exhausted and terrified. So we keep doing it. Last year I was included in an article about climate activists. In the original article, I was the only person pictured without my placard. My placard said: “Climate inaction = racism.” I want to talk about what this means. The countries that make up the global north are responsible for 92% of excess global emissions, but it’s the people in the global south who are suffering from the climate crisis right now. Our governments have allowed this to happen, in part, because the crisis has affected black and brown people first. That the safety and livelihoods of these people are not a priority is a reflection of the racist attitudes built into our political and economic systems. And it’s not just in the global south: in the UK, black and brown kids are most likely to live in deprived areas where pollution is at dangerous levels. Children like nine-year-old Ella Kissi-Debrah, who contracted severe asthma and died in 2013 due to shocking levels of air pollution in Lewisham, south-east London, where she lived. For decades, governments have helped corporations extract oil and other resources from the global south, especially those countries that are heavily in debt. Debt is a tool of neocolonialism which makes developing countries dependent on their former colonisers. Surely we should be the ones in debt to them. The climate crisis and the shape it takes is, therefore, inextricable from colonisation and oppression of black and brown lives. Instead of acting on it, energy is spent on greenwashing to hide what is happening. When your inaction causes suffering predominantly to black and brown people, then your inaction is racism. In the UK, we watch all these tragedies unfold on television or social media and think, “Well, that’s sad, but what can we do?’ It’s happening so far away.” And then we feel grateful that it’s not happening to us. Even in the climate movement, people talk about things happening in 10 years, 20 years, when food shortages and sea level rises really start to affect our way of life. What about the millions of people who are already suffering from food shortages, locust infestations and drought – all problems that are supercharged by the changing climate? Racism is embedded into the worldview that allows us to consume and pollute without a care for the people who are bearing the brunt of our carbon emissions. To move away from this we need to think about climate justice. This means protecting the indigenous people whose land we are destroying, and listening to them, centring their voices and acknowledging that they are not part of the system killing us and so need to be involved in a just transition to a sustainable future. We have to listen to those underrepresented in the climate movement, not remove them from the picture – as literally happened to Vanessa Nakate from Uganda. The next step is seeing how climate justice is intertwined with other struggles against state hostility and negligence. We have to stand up to our government when they deport black and brown citizens and pass laws paving the way for even more UK citizens to be deported. Doing something means giving your hard-earned money to organisations on the frontline such as Survival International, and those helping climate refugees, such as Care4Calais. Racism sustains the world’s brutally unfair hierarchy of comfort and suffering. Until the UK and other states and citizens in global north treat all human life as equal, we will keep heading towards the darkness. So this is not only about recycling or using less plastic or driving less. If we can’t even talk about racism and the part it has played in climate breakdown, then how do we get better? How do we break down the systems that got us here? How do we heal the damage done to people and the planet? Anti-racism means acting as if the lives of black and brown people on the frontlines of the climate crisis really matter. Inaction is simply not an option. Elise Yarde is a climate justice activist from LondonGood morning. Yesterday the House select committee investigating the US Capitol attack formally asked the Republican House minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, to cooperate with its inquiry into the 6 January insurrection. “We must learn about how the president’s plans for 6 January came together, and all the other ways he attempted to alter the results of the election,” Congressman Bennie Thompson, the chairman of the select committee, said in a letter to McCarthy. McCarthy responded late Wednesday that he would not cooperate with the investigation, setting the stage for a bitter political showdown. McCarthy had spoken directly to Donald Trump on the day the former president’s supporters stormed the US Capitol to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election win. The committee’s request to McCarthy marks a significant political moment for the investigation as they examine potential criminal conduct by the former president. Omicron so contagious most Americans will get Covid, top US health officials say Federal health authorities in the US are now comparing the pandemic to a “natural disaster”, warning that the Omicron Covid-19 variant is so contagious it is likely most people in the US will be infected. “I think it’s hard to process what’s actually happening right now, which is [that] most people are going to get Covid, all right?” Janet Woodcock, the acting head of the Food and Drug Administration, said at a Senate hearing. “What we need to do is make sure the hospitals can still function … [that] transportation, other essential services are not disrupted while this happens.” On the day of the Senate hearing, more than 761,000 Americans tested positive for Covid-19. On the same day the previous year, also the peak of a winter surge, an average of 251,232 people tested positive. Chuck Schumer outlines loophole to open debate on voting rights bill In a leaked memo, the Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, detailed a strategy wherein the House would amend an unrelated bill about Nasa to include provisions from two stalled voting reform bills: the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. This strategy would allow Democrats to evade an initial filibuster from Republicans seeking to block debate on the bill. Senate Democrats at the moment lack the votes to pass filibuster reform, as Schumer vowed to do in order to push forward on voting rights. Moderate Democrats Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema remain opposed to amending the filibuster. While the strategy would allow for open debate on the voting reform bills, it wouldn’t ultimately resolve the fact that, in an evenly split Senate, Republicans could use the filibuster to block a final vote on passing the legislation. Ronnie Spector, pop singer who fronted the Ronettes, dies at 78 Ronnie Spector, whose hits included Be My Baby and who defined the sound of mid-century girl groups as the frontwoman of the Ronettes, has died at 78, after a brief battle with cancer. Trump loyalists form an alliance in a bid to take over election process in key states Extreme Republicans loyal to Donald Trump – and to his lies that the 2020 presidential election was rigged – have formed a nationwide alliance aiming to take control of the presidential election process in key battleground states. With at least eight Republicans who are currently running to serve as chief election officials in crucial swing states, this alliance could determine the outcome of the 2024 presidential race. In other news … Prince Andrew remains embroiled in lengthy and embarrassing legal proceedings after a Manhattan judge yesterday rejected the royal’s efforts to dismiss Virginia Giuffre’s sexual abuse lawsuit against him. He denies all her allegations. Donald Trump hung up on a national radio host halfway through a scheduled interview after the host pushed him about his lies about the 2020 presidential election. A woman’s diary has gone viral after lockdown forced her to stay on a blind date in China. 2021 was the worst year on record for online child sexual abuse, according to the Internet Watch Foundation. Stat of the day: positive coronavirus cases on cruise ships have increased ’30-fold’ The CDC director, Dr Rochelle Walensky, said at a senate health hearing this week that Covid infections on cruise ships have continued to skyrocket, upending the industry and leaving passengers stranded onboard ships. At the end of December, cases jumped to 5,013 – up from only 162 in the first two weeks of December. “Just over the last two weeks with Omicron, we’ve seen a 30-fold increase in cases on ships,” Walensky said. Don’t miss this: the Texas principal caught in a ‘critical race theory’ firestorm Barely a month after his promotion to principal of Colleyville Heritage High, Dr James Whitfield sent a letter to his students in the aftermath of George Floyd’s murder, hoping to reassure them as protests rocked across the nation. Within months of sending that letter, he was put on paid administrative leave pending investigation. “Nobody in the community was calling me or anything,” he said about the initial response to the letter. “But I started to hear word that: ‘Hey. these people are talking about you and they’re saying you’re doing critical race theory.’” Climate check: cause for alarm A record number of Americans are now becoming increasingly alarmed by the climate crisis, according to a study published by the Yale Program on Climate Change Communication. The study, which categorized Americans into six groups ranging from the alarmed to the dismissive, found that the alarmed group, at 33%, greatly outnumbered the dismissive group, at 9%, by more than three to one. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last Thing: the smash TV hit that exposed a cultural divide Yellowstone, starring Kevin Costner, is a violent drama about familial legacy and the tides of changes in the mountains of Montana. It’s also the the most-watched show on cable in the US, though depending on where you live, you might not know it. Despite batting in the same league as Game of Thrones and The Walking Dead without a clear streaming outlet, Yellowstone doesn’t court the same critical attention or media scrutiny as its ratings predecessors. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comThe number of Covid patients in hospitals in England and Scotland has continued to rise this week, as NHS England reached a deal with private hospitals to free up beds amid the outbreak of Omicron cases. Meanwhile, Covid staff absences in England rose to their highest level since the introduction of the vaccine. The number of NHS workers in England off sick because of Covid was up by 41% in the week to 2 January, according to the latest figures. Five health workers describe some of the challenges they are facing, including understaffing, waiting times and bed-blocking. Paramedic, the Midlands Ambulances are becoming a service for everything With this new variant, we’re still seeing Covid patients, but they’ve stayed at the same rate as before. The Covid patients that we see are those that haven’t had vaccines. In the last month I’ve seen four or five Covid patients – none of them were vaccinated. One hospital in the area has a really bad problem with ambulance queues – up to six and a half hours, and the standard wait time is over an hour. At other hospitals, you queue for one or two hours max. There’s no movement. They aren’t able to get people out of A&amp;E on to wards, I guess because they’re not getting people out of wards. That’s due to a lack of care homes and care in the community. If you’ve got somebody who lives alone and can’t walk – we see a lot of that – how can they be sent home until they can walk? And that can take months. The main jobs we’re going out to haven’t changed – it’s still old people that have fallen, people that can’t walk, people that need antibiotics. Those are the main bread and butter jobs. If GPs, district nurses and care homes were able to cover these jobs, things would function much better. I think the ambulance service is becoming everything, including social services. A&amp;E consultant, south-east England No one even raises an eyebrow at a 10-and-a-half-hour wait in emergency The pressure is increasing on workload and capacity. There’s just so much Covid – staff are catching it and having to self-isolate. So, from mid-December we’ve been running with major gaps across all kinds of disciplines: nursing, medical, radiographers, cleaners. People aren’t terribly ill but obviously they’ve got to stay home. Our in-patient Covid numbers have doubled in the last few weeks, but the numbers are not rising to the levels of last January. We can manage, we know how to manage Covid, we’ve got the skill set. But the biggest problem is capacity in the hospital because we don’t have enough beds. We’ve got about 40 to 50 Covid patients taking up two wards. We’ve had to close some wards because of having to staff them, so that further reduces our capacity. This morning we had a 10-and-a-half hour wait – no one even raises an eyebrow at that anymore. Five years ago we’d have all been running around with our hair on fire if the wait was more than four hours. Critical care nurse, the Midlands A lot of nurses are going to agencies We probably have about 10 critical care beds free at the moment but we just don’t have the staff. A lot of people are off with Covid, and lately a lot of senior nurses, who are normally in charge of eight patients, have moved to new jobs. They’ve gone to different places, like specialist jobs in the community, that are just easier for them or their families, if they can do a nine to five kind of job rather than doing night shifts. They’re still doubling up patients in ITU [intensive therapy units] – one nurse to two patients, as they were in October. We haven’t really seen many flu patients, which is odd for this time of year, it does just seem to be Covid patients. There’s a lot of patients that are classed as “wardable”, but the wards are so busy that they can’t really facilitate it. We say that we’re struggling, but then when we hear how the ward is, they actually do sound worse than us. They barely have a bed free. The trauma patients who are coming in now, because of a head injury or a cardiac arrest or whatever it is, are often Covid positive as well. So even if they’re admitted for something else, we have to put them in the Covid pod. A few people are slowly giving up because [the pressure] is still quite heavy, and I think we were hoping it would be easier by now. A lot of people are going to agencies. At an agency, they’ll pay me about £60 an hour for being a critical care nurse, whereas on average, I’ll get paid £18 an hour at my hospital. So a lot of nurses are reducing their hours at my hospital, so they can work more hours elsewhere. That’s probably what I’m going to do. We’re trying not to leave our hospital because we feel bad about it, but we can add more money on the side. Paediatrician, east of England You come to accept these levels of staffing Red levels of staffing have become the norm – we’ve become used to running on minimum staffing now, the issue has moved on to ‘can you run safely at all’. You come to accept these levels of staffing. We’re seeing people who are getting Covid for a second time, including among staff who had it in the first wave. They’re mostly less unwell this time, whether due to the variant, vaccine, and prior immunity. Everyone is grateful they’re less unwell this time, but they’re still off – it doesn’t make any difference to your staffing numbers. Fortunately, the number of presentations of children with respiratory illness wasn’t as bad as expected – it tailed off a bit before Christmas in terms of numbers. Schools have just gone back so we’re waiting to see what happens next. Respiratory illnesses continued but didn’t spike – we’ve seen numbers of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) fall in recent weeks, which is reassuring, but we don’t know yet if there’ll be another peak. We test all admissions, and last week, for the first time, the most commonly isolated virus in the children’s emergency department was Covid. Usually it would be normal winter viruses, like rhinovirus [one of the viruses that causes the common cold]. It’s not the case that more children are unwell with Covid – they’re mostly incidental findings. This just represents the fact that community rates of Covid are so high at the moment. GP practice manager, Scotland I’m preparing to hand my notice in I wake up every morning with the dread of further staff shortages. Last week we had a number of colleagues with Covid or waiting for results. There’s always a big backlog at the start of the year, after we’ve been closed for a few days, and we had to reschedule the whole diary for the practice. Staff who are well are having to pick up extra shifts to make sure we’re covered. People are doing a lot of overtime – some are doing something like 40 more hours a month. That’s effectively an extra week’s work. Everyone is emotionally and physically drained. We’re expected to kind of get through the same workload without making any mistakes. When you’re rushing, or when people are tired and trying to get through a huge amount of work, mistakes can happen. Things are being missed – thankfully nothing serious, but it feels like it’s only a matter of time. GP practices have been getting really bad press. People seem to have this idea that nothing is happening in the practice, when everybody is running themselves ragged. You can’t help but take it home with you. And the thing is that when I leave work, I just become another person living in a pandemic. Right now, I can’t see why I’m staying. When the pandemic started, I think it felt like I was doing my bit. I’ve done my bit and now I’m tired. I’m preparing to hand my notice in and debating whether I can face going back at all or whether to admit defeat and take sick leave.Strong trading updates from Marks &amp; Spencer and Tesco on Thursday confirmed that retailers were the big winners this Christmas as the rapid spread of Omicron prompted people to eat and drink more at home instead of heading out to restaurants and pubs. Money saved on trips out was splashed on sparkling wine, luxury food, pyjamas and other clothing thanks to a loosening of restrictions on high street shopping. However, Tesco and M&amp;S joined the likes of Sainsbury’s and Next inwarning of rising prices for shoppers in the months ahead, as costs of shipping and raw ingredients were increasing and supply chain difficulties expected to continue for some months. “We will continue to see lumps and bumps through the next quarter,” said Steve Rowe, the chief executive of M&amp;S, who said some price rises were inevitable later in the year. “The pressures have come down slightly as we have passed the peak but there are still some issues with shortages of labour and continuing [staff] absence.” Tesco said cost inflation was running at about 5%, but it was working closely with suppliers to make efficiencies so that not all of this would be passed on to shoppers. Increases in pay for workers in stores, warehouses and delivery networks are also expected to rise as staffing shortages prompted by Brexit are made worse by absences related to the pandemic. Tesco and M&amp;S said they would be negotiating with unions and expected to increase pay as rivals including Sainsbury’s, Aldi and Lidl have already pledged to pay more than £10 an hour from this spring. M&amp;S, which is recovering from years in the doldrums, booked its highest ever sales of food and a surge in clothing. Food sales jumped 10% in the three months to 1 January, compared with a year earlier, making it the fastest growing food retailer in the UK. Strong sales of bras, pyjamas, jeans and activewear spurred on clothing sales, while food sales were boosted by shoppers buying a wider array of everyday items, including tea, easy peeler citrus fruit, milk and cheese. Demand for special items including rosé prosecco also lifted trade. The strong rise in sales fat M&amp;S came despite fears of product shortages caused by supply chain difficulties including driver shortages and hold-ups at ports. Clothing sales jumped almost 40% in the UK and more than 17% overseas as shoppers were able to return to stores after last year’s widespread lockdowns. Rowe said: “Trading over the Christmas period has been strong, demonstrating the continued improvements we’ve made to product and value. “Food has maintained its momentum, outperforming the market over both 12 and 24 months. The market continues to be impacted by the headwinds and tailwinds that we reported in the first half, but I remain encouraged that our transformation plan is now driving improved performance. The other side of that equation was reflected at online specialist Asos where UK sales growth slowed to 13% from more than 30% reported in the summer. Profits were hit by higher levels of discounting to clear stock, greater use of air freight to transport goods and more normal levels of returns than early in the pandemic when shoppers favoured loose fitting clothing. The boost to food retailers from the Omicron wave was also confirmed by Tesco. The UK’s biggest supermarket said sales rose 0.6% in the three months to 8 January – compared with the same period a year before. Tesco increased sales on 2020 when supermarket sales were boosted by the closure of hospitality businesses for many weeks across the UK. Ken Murphy, the chief executive of Tesco, saidthe supermarket continued to invest to protect availability of goods. “This put us in a strong position to meet customers’ needs as, once again, Covid-19 led to a greater focus on celebrating at home. As a result, we outperformed the market, growing market share and strengthening our value position.” Both companies nudged up their forecasts for the full year but investors were underwhelmed. Disappointment about a lack of big profit upgrades andfears over inflation led Tesco shares to fall 2% in early trading on Thursday, while M&amp;S was down 4%.On a January night in the tiny Herefordshire village of Eardisland, a crowd of hundreds is being led to an orchard down a muddy country lane. Their leaders wear tall hats, garlanded with fruit, feathers and flowers; their faces are a damp, mossy, green; their ankles jingle with bells. It is very dark: the only light comes from a crisp, crescent moon and the flaming torches that men, women and children hold in their hands. The scene may sound sinister, but there is joy in the air at this crop-blessing wassail, a midwinter folklore ceremony, usually in apple-producing counties, involving singing, dancing and other folk customs. At Eardisland, the Leominster morris – they in the extravagant hats, plus flowery jackets made from old bedsheets and curtains – pour cider made from last year’s apples on to tree roots, hang toasted bread on tree branches to tempt the spirits, and light fires to represent renewal and the coming spring sun. The mood is jolly. “I’ll hopefully not set my leg on fire,” says the announcer, Josh Johnson, to laughter, before stamping flames out. This wassail isn’t an oddity either, says Jon Wilks, musician and the founder/editor of Tradfolk, a new website that aims to bring together different iterations of traditional folk culture today. Wilks decided to put together a wassailing directory for 2022, assuming it would be a quick job. “I thought there’d be 15 or so wassails in the West Country. Nine hours and close to 50 entries later, I was still going.” (His tally currently sits at 61.) The list combines long-established groups and new starters, who came together via Instagram and TikTok – Wilks wonders whether the Wellerman craze of a year ago took people from sea shanties to wassails, and, of course, this is a relatively low-risk way to enjoy live music in the Covid era. He is a late starter himself: a former magazine editor in Dubai and Tokyo who returned to the UK in his late 30s, he found out about his morris-dancing grandfather after his father died. “Most people have an affair or buy a sports car for their midlife crisis,” he laughs. “I fell for traditional music, then fell down the rabbit hole.” He has found many others like him who are not from a folk background or family drawn in what he calls “the idea of shared traditions, folk memory and a collective unconscious”. Wassails in the dark of winter seem to hold a particular appeal, he says. “Standing in a field lighting fires or making noise with other people at the toughest time of year, feels like what we all need, especially when we all live digital lives, being constantly bombarded with bad news.” He mentions one of his interviews on Tradfolk with the artist Ben Edge, sometime video director for Fat White Family and Raf Rundell, and curator of last year’s Ritual Britain exhibition at the Museum of British Folklore. Edge thought there was “no coincidence that we are dealing with the climate crisis and people are looking for immediate ways to reconnect with nature and have a sincere concern for the land”. People often found these rituals peculiar at first, Edge explained, then spotted something “profoundly human and universal” in them. “And when you think about how we haven’t spent time together with strangers in recent years, doing something celebratory with them, safely, outside, becomes even more powerful,” says Wilks. But wassails have changed in their nature a lot, says the folk historian Steve Roud, creator of the Roud folk song index and writer of The English Year. They were first recorded as an activity in the middle ages, and although many claim ancient or pagan origins for them, there “is no evidence for this – it could only be pure speculation or guesswork”, says Roud. The word wassail comes from “waes hael”, a phrase in Old English and Old Norse meaning “be healthy”, although this meaning gained intimations of celebration through time (the songs sung at these rituals are also known as wassails). Wassails have become subject to “a kind of touristification”, Roud says, “and that means things might be changed about customs to please other people – not that this is good or bad. It’s just the way the modern world is.” But he does warn against people trying to “project their present preoccupations backwards in time to explain the way things were”. For him, wassailing was less a spiritual activity in agricultural communities than something that served an earthier purpose. “Wassails were basically excuses for men to get drunk,” he says brightly. “They were also very local, not at all about attracting outsiders into a community.” People often ignore that wassailing was also about poverty and begging for money; in agricultural communities, after all, there was little work in the winter. Wassailing also used to come in two kinds: the crop-blessing form and the house-visiting wassail (often involving women, going house to house with a wassail bowl to share a drink, usually cider, giving luck for the year). Some elements have thankfully been evolved out: morris men still wear face paint, but blackface is much less common. In June 2020, the Joint Morris Organisation, comprising members from different morris federations, said it would bar from its events any sides that wore blackface. “Morris is a living tradition,” it said in a statement, “and it is right that it has always adapted and evolved to reflect society.” Some still claim its use was innocent and divorced from issues of race, but Nicholas Wall of the English Folk Dance and Song Society has persuasively argued that this part of the tradition had strong ties to minstrelsy. Similar customs to wassailing, such as the Mari Lwyd in south Wales, first recorded in the early 19th century, added mischief to the mix. A man draped in a cloak carried a horse’s skull on a stick, creating a terrifying creature. Going door to door with friends, he would engage in a ritual with homeowners called pwnco, exchanging rude rhymes. “These rituals were also often threatening, as trick or treating used to be,” Roud adds. “And they always ended with money being given before the wassailers went away.” Mari Lwyds have been revived in recent years at festivals in Chepstow, and at local celebrations in Newport and Llanwrtyd Wells; many wassailing traditions today still play to folklore’s eerie underbelly. At Eardisland, we are told to shout, at a safe distance, to get rid of evil spirits. The spectre of Covid is not far from these incantations. “Everybody shout to scare this thing away!” Johnson bellows. Newer sides, such as Blackthorn Border morris, formed in 2019, present a darker, more gothic exploration of folklore. In Wilks’ assessment, they’re “thrillingly aggressive … the heavy metal of morris!” Comprised of long-time dancers and newcomers, and performing under character names such as Raven and Death’s Head Hawkmoth, they dance in local sacred sites on the Welsh borders, such as Hay Bluff and Arthur’s Stone. Herefordshire born-and-bred member Nyssa Ebert – AKA recorder player and singer Hare – joined in early 2020. She has long been a Wiccan practitioner, a world she describes “as very underground 20 years ago, but it’s now very open and accepting and present on social media”. This is also how she found and joined Blackthorn Border morris. But she does not claim wassailing as a pagan activity. “We’ll never know whether its roots are pagan or Christian, but I don’t think that matters – to me, a wassail’s an ultimate expression of folk magic, and of bringing the idea of blessings into your community, for families, and the nature around you.” She wonders whether pandemic lockdowns have heightened this connection, she says, helping to explain why they’re prospering now. “Suddenly, last year we weren’t waylaid by the drive to work or the madness of the school run. We were noticing snowdrops coming up and the blossoms of the hawthorn. We were looking around us again, having reverence and respect for the seasons of the year.” The wassail was once about escape from punishing impoverishment; perhaps it is now about escape from the onslaught of modernity, and how folk traditions adapt to our world as living, breathing things. It is also, Wilks says, “about thinking about the people who went before us, and about our hope for the future – and how we express that in the coldest, darkest months”. As the light lengthens on another tough winter, it’s hard not to lift your bowl of cider to that.The most significant goals Philippe Coutinho scored as a Barcelona player were against them, which pretty much sums it up. On loan at Bayern Munich, where he had his most successful season since leaving Liverpool for €160m, he got two in the 8-2 humiliation of the club that owned him then and despite all their efforts to the contrary still own him now. That night in August 2020 he raised a hand to apologise for what he had done. Seventeen months later, he has left again. As for what he has done, most supporters would say: “Nothing much.” The only thing anyone in Catalonia regrets about Coutinho’s departure to Aston Villa this week is that it took too long. Actually, that’s not entirely true: they also regret that there will be no return, except his. At the end of the season, he will probably be back. At which point, they will try to get him to leave again. It was hard enough to bring him in; it proved equally hard to move him out. He has gone only on loan, Villa – who are at home to Manchester United on Saturday – paying 65% of his salary, but at least he has gone. The most expensive signing in Barcelona’s history may have been the worst. All of which might sound unfair, even cruel. And it probably is: there has been something uncomfortable in watching the treatment of him at times, in that glimpse of vulnerability and rejection; in the feeling that while there is certainly culpability, circumstance, culture and context conspired against him; in watching the good moments slip from view, lost to some collective amnesia. Because there have been goals for Barcelona too: 26 of them plus 14 assists in 106 games is not a terrible return. He scored the opener in a clásico, setting Barcelona on course for a 5-1 demolition of Madrid. He scored in a Copa del Rey semi-final and provided a goal and an assist in the final, helping them complete a double in his first season. He was not playing when they collapsed and were knocked out the Champions League in Rome, so that could hardly be held against him. Had he been there, who knows, maybe they would have won a treble. Which he did with Bayern. There was something about him scoring in Lisbon that expressed that the mess is not of his making. And yet those two Bayern goals may well be the most telling image of his time as a Barcelona player, precisely because they were symbolic of how damaging the whole thing has been: self-inflicted, literally and metaphorically an own goal. A portrait of the regime of the former president Josep Maria Bartomeu, a metaphor for the whole crisis and how they got into a situation like this. None of the goals Coutinho scored for Barcelona, forgotten too fast, leave an impression as lasting. Which may be unfair, but a sort of melancholy clings to his story, to him. This ending, which may not even be the end, expresses it. Barcelona were so desperate to sign Coutinho that having failed to get him in the summer of 2017 they came back again at Christmas, and for a combined cost with Ousmane Dembélé that the club’s finance director had said would be “irresponsible”, a sackable offence. Their most expensive player leaves for nothing, and even managing that ended up feeling like an achievement. Above all, it was a necessity. When Coutinho signed Barcelona made much of how he had made a “financial effort” to come, which is what clubs too often say and which proved ironic. Tied to a salary of about €15m a year after tax, for the past three years they have been as desperate to give him away, but the same salary that made moving him on so important, pushing him towards the door before other players equally deserving, also trapped him. Everyone knew that they had overspent when he arrived, which is rarely a good start, but the signing made sense. Xavi Hernández, Barça’s current manager, was among those who thought his style compatible with the Camp Nou. But if he said so then, from the outside, four years on, now inside, he doesn’t entirely see it. The sporting director judged him the “ideal replacement” for Andrés Iniesta, which may have been part of the problem just as the price was. Iniesta’s position was not his, nor exactly was Neymar’s. The technical quality was there though, as was the physical capacity brought from England, at least for a while. So too was the welcome – Luis Suárez collected him from the airport – and the first six months were good, a point that at this juncture feels worth making in his defence: he got nine goals and seven assists in his first 22 games. Yet he could not play in Europe and when he arrived Barcelona were a long way clear in the league, their success not really seen as his. By the end it felt almost as if he wasn’t really there. He was hit by injury and, it seemed, insecurity. Ernesto Valverde had to find a place for him, which wasn’t easy. There was little point in someone else “being Messi” when they had Lionel Messi. Messi and Suárez were relieved of some responsibility to press; accommodating another one wouldn’t work. Attempts to find another role were not always reciprocated. Instead of a determination to rebel against his fate, fight for that role, there was a hint of inhibition. Coutinho was well-liked and those who trained with him saw things – just not often on match days. The club’s culture did not help either. The second season started with four goals and an assist in the opening 10 league games, including that strike against Madrid, without Messi in the team. But there was just one of each in his next 26 La Liga appearances. Frustration grew among fans; whistles followed to which he was not impervious. When he scored against Manchester United in the Champions League quarter-final, he put his fingers in his ears, vulnerability revealed. Which of course made it worse. Suárez said, tellingly: “The smallest thing you do – tiny, like Philippe did – is made bigger. The manager said it: ‘I’m surprised you’re talking about the gesture and not the great goal he scored,’ a goal that would have given him confidence. Sometimes you have to understand him. If fans want a player to perform, support him, because a player out on the pitch isn’t stupid. He hears it when he loses a ball and there’s this ‘zzzzzhhhhhiiii’.” The following season Coutinho was in Munich, the first rejection but maybe a chance for a return when Bayern decided not to exercise their right to buy, itself a comment on confidence in him. Sales were sought but not found, so he was stuck. That said, if bound by circumstance, there was support back at Barcelona. Ronald Koeman, a new manager, called and said he wanted to play him in his position: as a No 10 behind Messi. There were two assists and a goal in the opening three league games. He scored in his first Champions League match too. And then there was … well, not much, Coutinho fading again. A meniscus injury meant he didn’t play a game after the turn of the year. He underwent three operations and spent nine months out. He was too expensive for this, for a club forced to lose the best player they have had. And, yes, Coutinho still being there while Messi wasn’t played its part in his public portrayal, however unjust that was. Again, they tried to move him on. Again, they failed. He talked about working to make people look upon him with “other eyes”. Messi’s departure offered opportunity too. Asked about Coutinho after an impressive display early this season, Koeman replied: “He’s a good footballer. It’s my job to get the best out of them and that starts with putting them in their position.” “I have always believed in Coutinho,” Koeman had insisted but others didn’t – and, it sometimes felt, that might have included Coutinho himself. When he scored against Valencia in October, his first goal in a year, he said he had a “scar that makes me stronger” and a “desire to be the best I can be”. But at Barcelona, he never really was. Ten days later, Koeman was gone. Now Coutinho has gone, for a second time. “Since I came back I never had a run of four or five starts in a row to be able to be at my best level,” he said. Now, he may get them, another chance to have an impact in someone else’s shirt.Amid the jaw-dropping stories of horrific abuse in Ronnie Spector’s 1990 autobiography Be My Baby, there’s a fascinating passage about her singing voice. She says she felt cowed by the other female singers in Phil Spector’s stable of stars: she didn’t have the kind of big, gospel-trained voice that Darlene Love or Fanita James possessed. But the producer had singled her out for special treatment. Veronica Bennett, as she was then, had “exactly what he needed to fill the centre of this enormous sound”, she said. Phil Spector was famous for rounding up whoever was in the studio to sing backing vocals, but he demurred when Ronnie offered. You could see that as an early example of the controlling behaviour with which he made her life a misery after their marriage, but his explanation was pretty convincing: “Your voice is too distinctive – it comes right though.” He was right. Phil Spector worked with a succession of fantastic singers – not just Love and James, but the Righteous Brothers, Tina Turner and LaLa Brooks of the Crystals – but none of them sounded like Ronnie, a state of affairs that makes a mockery of the notion that Phil Spector was the solitary artist at work on his records, his vocalists interchangeable puppets. There’s something immediately recognisable about her voice, a combination of street toughness and tenderness, a trademark vibrato, a raw, unschooled power. It didn’t matter how dense and unyielding Phil Spector’s arrangements got, Ronnie Spector’s voice always cut through. Even Tina Turner sounds like she’s fighting for space with the umpteen instruments on River Deep Mountain High, but listen to the Ronettes’ Is This What I Get for Loving You? or I Wish I Never Saw the Sunshine – singles that exist in the shade of their biggest hits Be My Baby and Baby, I Love You – recorded in 1965 and 1966, by which point Spector’s production style had become increasingly OTT. Even when I Wish I Never Saw the Sunshine reaches its emotional height – the moment just before the chorus when the drums crash in – you, metaphorically speaking, can’t take your eyes off Ronnie Spector. Everything else is (an admittedly elaborate) background to her wracked cries of “oh baby!” It made it all the more unfair that she struggled to establish herself outside the context of Philles Records and her appalling husband. When Phil Spector decided to pull up the drawbridge and withdraw from making records, Ronnie Spector had to go with him: the barbed wire on top of the walls, the guard dogs and the threats to kill her and display her body in a glass coffin if she tried to leave saw to that. When he re-emerged, towards the end of their marriage, as George Harrison and John Lennon’s producer of choice, she re-emerged too, but luck wasn’t on her side. She cut a fabulous, mandolin-bedecked version of the former’s Try Some, Buy Some for Apple records, but it flopped: perhaps the melody was too cyclical and hypnotic for pop radio, perhaps the lyrics – which contrasted drug use with spiritual awakening – were too oblique. There was supposed to be an album, with a crack backing band involving Harrison, Leon Russell and various members of Eric Clapton’s Derek and the Dominos, but like a lot of things that were supposed to happen at Apple, it never materialised. By all accounts, the sessions were torture for Ronnie Spector, who sat silently in the vocal booth waiting for her cue while her husband ignored her in favour of chatting to Harrison: according to engineer Ken Scott, she was visibly too terrified to speak up. In the end, Harrison simply took the backing track of Try Some, Buy Some and recorded his own vocal over it for his 1973 album Living in the Material World: if you want to hear how good Ronnie Spector’s performance of the song is, it’s worth contrasting the two versions. Finally divorced, she formed a new version of the Ronettes, but to little avail: it didn’t help that the best song they recorded, the funky Go Out and Get It, ended up as a B-side. She made a great disco single, You’d Be Good For Me, before working with Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band. It was an arrangement that suited both parties perfectly. The influence of Phil Spector’s 60s singles on the E Street Band’s sound was obvious; furthermore they were at a loose end, broke and trapped in recording limbo by Springsteen’s legal struggle with an ex-manager. The resulting single, a cover of Billy Joel’s Say Goodbye to Hollywood, was stunning, its commercial failure baffling, although Steve Van Zandt later suggested the money the musicians made stopped the E Street Band from breaking up entirely. Next, she was embraced by New York’s punk scene, making a new wave-ish solo album, Siren, with members of the Dead Boys and the Heartbreakers. If nothing else, the sheer diversity of musicians she worked with post-divorce told you both something about how widely revered she was, and something about her voice, which managed to be both incredibly adaptable – it fitted over the strings and dancefloor rhythms of You’d Be Good to Me just as well as it did over a cover of the Ramones’ Here Today, Gone Tomorrow – and utterly unique: it didn’t matter whether she was singing soul or punk, you always knew immediately that you were listening to Ronnie Spector. Both facts were underlined when she finally scored a hit in 1986, albeit in a supporting role. Eddie Money’s Take Me Home Tonight was shiny, be-mulleted stadium AOR, entirely of its era. When she appears midway through, singing the refrain from Be My Baby, the contrast between the grit in her voice and the gloss that surrounds her is really striking. Without wishing to sound sniffy – Take Me Home Tonight is a perfectly good example of a certain strain of 80s rock, which has its own charm – it’s the difference between soulful emotion and an over-inflated, chest-beating simulacrum of emotion. Its MTV-fuelled success – along with her autobiography, and an eventually successful court process against her ex-husband that saw the Ronettes awarded back royalties – helped set Ronnie Spector up for the rest of her career. She never had a hit in her own right, but she toured relentlessly and started playing Christmas shows in New York that became a staple part of the city’s musical calendar. As before, the range of musicians who queued up to work with her told its own story: she could go from performing with Nick Zinner of Yeah Yeah Yeahs to Whitney Houston and Aretha Franklin producer Narada Michael Walden to Keith Richards to horror punk pioneers Misfits without missing a beat. You only had to glance at Amy Winehouse to see Ronnie Spector’s influence: the beehive and the thick eyeliner were a dissolute take on her 60s look; the sound of the Ronettes was in Back to Black’s DNA. You’re never too far from a new single that knowingly sounds like Be My Baby or Baby, I Love You, and you probably never will be: they cast as long a shadow over pop as anything made in the 60s. The big difference is that, as ever, whoever’s singing them won’t sound like Ronnie Spector.The Czech doubles player Renata Voracova, who was deported from Australia after her visa was cancelled, has spoken of how she “felt like a criminal” and was made to undress by the Australia Border Force during questioning. Voracova had initially been allowed to enter Australia on a medical exemption granted after she had an adverse reaction to a Covid infection and even played in a tournament in Melbourne. However, in the fallout from the cancellation of Novak Djokovic’s visa on the basis of a similar exemption, Voracova was ordered to leave the country and was deported on Saturday. Voracova, who has said she hopes Tennis Australia does the right thing so she is not forced to sue for compensation, told BBC News Russian: “I felt a little bit like a criminal, but there was no reason why I should feel like that. I sent all the documents. They were approved. If I knew there would be even a 1% chance of something not being right, I wouldn’t go.” The 38-year-old, who has won 11 WTA doubles titles and reached the semi-finals of the women’s doubles at Wimbledon in 2017, still intends to get vaccinated against Covid-19 in the future and said that she had suffered medical complications after contracting the virus that prevented her getting the jab before the Australian Open. She told the Russian publication Denik of being made to undress during her detention and interrogation by immigration officials before leaving Australia. “I was worried. I didn’t feel safe until I was back home, nothing was certain,” she said. “It was as if I were watching a film – a long interrogation with instructions such as ‘undress, get dressed’. Yuck, I don’t even want to think about it, let alone live it again.” While Voracova said that she was not aware that she was able to appeal against the cancellation of her visa, Djokovic successfully overturned the decision against him in court and now waits to see if the Australia immigration minister, Alex Hawke, will exercise his reserved powers to cancel the visa again, and deport him before the Australian Open begins on Monday. In a statement on Wednesday, Voracova gained support from the Women’s Tennis Association which said that she had done nothing wrong. “The complications experienced over the past few days … are unfortunate,” it said. “Renata Voracova followed these rules and procedures, was cleared for entry upon her arrival, competed in an event and then suddenly had her visa cancelled when she had done nothing wrong. “We will continue to work with all authorities on addressing this unfortunate situation in an appropriate manner.” The WTA said, despite its concerns over Voracova’s case, it believed “all players should be vaccinated” and it was “in full support of the immigration policies that have been put in place” in Australia for the early part of the 2022 season.A married same-sex couple have become the first in Taiwan to legally adopt a child neither of them are related to, after they challenged local laws in court. Wang Chen-wei, Chen Chun-ju, and their daughter, nicknamed Joujou, were surrounded by press at the Taipei household registration office, as the couple formally signed adoption paperwork after a long battle. Clutching Joujou, her face hidden behind a hoodie, face mask and sunglasses, Wang and Chen told of their bittersweet victory. “I have everything now. I am married and just like heterosexual couples, we can have our own children,” Wang said. “But we were born to have and enjoy all of this, we are not a charity case. We shouldn’t have had to fight for it.” Taiwan legalised same-sex marriage in 2019, becoming the first jurisdiction in Asia to do so, but did not remove all inequalities for LGBTQI people. Full legislation rather than an amendment was passed. It includes a provision that allows someone to adopt a spouse’s biological child, but says nothing about adoption rights if neither partner is the biological parent. The provision does not exist in other marriage laws. The result is that in Taiwan any single person can apply to adopt a child, and any married heterosexual couple can apply together. But for married same-sex couple, the only option is to divorce and one of the couple adopts as a single person. They can then remarry, but current law does not allow the partner to adopt and be registered as a parent, leaving them without equal rights. “Gay adoptive families are forced to choose between children and spouses, and between adoption and marriage,” Chen and Wang wrote on Facebook shortly after signing the adoption papers. Wang and Chen have been together for more than 16 years, and embarked on the adoption journey together. They delayed their marriage in order to complete Wang’s adoption of Joujou, and then took the case to court to have Chen recognised as a parent. On 25 December, the Kaohsiung juvenile and family court ruled that a child should not be discriminated against because of their parents status, and that the law did not expressly prohibit the adoption of adopted children. The ruling allowed Chen to adopt Joujou and be registered as a parent alongside Wang. Chu Chiajong, the director of advocacy organisation Taiwan LGBT Family Rights Advocacy, said the ruling was “brave”, in that the judge found his legal obligation was governed by the child’s best interest, and upon assessing Wang and Chen’s case, it meant the two parents were seen as equal under the law. “At the end of the day, someone finally acknowledged it’s all about a child’s best interests, not just about the rights of an LGBTI couple,” Chu said. “Now their daughter’s ID shows both parents name on it. It means she finally is legally under the protection of both parents, of both dads.” While the case has brought hope to LGBTQI couples hoping to start a family, it did not set a precedent and legal change is still needed, said Chu. But the solution is simple, Chu added: “We just need to fix one word in the same-sex marriage law, just the word ‘genetic’. If we get rid of that word it would allow LGBTQI couples to adopt.” A bill proposed by the legislator Fan Yun has been stalled in Taiwan’s parliament for more than a year. “We are waiting for the submission … from the Ministry of Justice,” Fan told media on Thursday. Wang and Chen have always wanted two children but that is off limits until the law changes. Now they are married they cannot adopt, and if they divorced they would still have to go to court again to fight for dual adoption. “I hope that our first story of victory as a gay couple will serve as a foundation for the full practice of fair, equal treatment for other LGBT families,” said Chen. Additional reporting by Xiaoqian Zhu and Daniel Shou Yi CengProf Jonathan Van-Tam’s colourful metaphors were often a highlight of the Downing Street coronavirus briefings, turning him into something of a household name, and winning praise for the way they translated scientific concepts into laypeople’s language. A Boston United season ticket holder, he often turned to sport – and football in particular – in his choice of analogies. Here are some of his most famous Van-Tam-isms. On the development of the Pfizer vaccine, Downing Street coronavirus briefing, November 2020 So this is like getting to the end of the play-off final. It’s gone to penalties, the first player goes up and scores the goal. You haven’t won the cup yet, but what it does, it tells you that the goalkeeper can be beaten. On plans for the vaccine rollout, Downing Street press briefing, November 2020 I do believe that we are now on the glide path to landing this plane. Yes I do. Do I accept that sometimes when you are on the glide path, you can have a side wind and the landing is not totally straightforward, totally textbook? Of course I do. On MHRA approval of the Pfizer vaccine, Downing Street press briefing, December 2020 The train has now slowed down safely. It has now stopped in the station. And the doors have opened – that was the authorisation by the MHRA. What we need now is for people to get on that train and travel safely to their destinations. On the vaccine rollout, BBC News channel, December 2020 It’s clear in the first half, the away team gave us an absolute battering, and what we’ve done now is it’s the 70th minute, they got a goal, and in the 70th minute we’ve now got an equaliser. OK, we’ve got to hold our nerve now, see if we can get another goal and nick it. On storing the Pfizer vaccine, Downing Street press briefing, December 2020 This is a complex product. It’s not yoghurt that can be taken out of the fridge and put back in multiple times. On the need for booster jabs, Downing Street press briefing, November 2021 Omicron is like now picking up a couple of yellow cards to key players on top. We are maybe OK, but we’re kind of starting to feel at risk that we might go down to 10 players, and if that happens – or it’s a risk that’s going to happen – then we need everyone on the pitch to up their game in the meantime. We’re not going to wait for the red card to happen, we are going to act decisively now …” On the vaccine effects, in the Sun, January 2021 We are probably in the last few furlongs of this race – like in the Grand National. We just have a couple more fences, we have just got to stick with it.The health secretary, Sajid Javid, has confirmed that the minimum time people with Covid in England have to spend in self-isolation is to be cut to five full days. From Monday, people would be able to leave isolation on day six if they tested negative on days five and six, Javid told the Commons. Javid was updating MPs on Thursday, a day after Boris Johnson said a decision would be made on the issue “as fast as possible”. The government has been under pressure to bring the situation in England into line with the US, where the isolation period has been cut to five days. The current UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) guidance is for people with Covid to isolate for at least six full days from the point at which they have symptoms or get a positive test, whichever is first, with release from self-isolation after two negative lateral flow test results on days six and seven. People can leave self-isolation on day seven. At prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, Johnson said: “We are certainly looking at reducing the isolation period, and we hope to bring you more about that ... as fast as possible.” Javid told MPs that UKHSA data showed about two-thirds of Covid cases were no longer infectious by the end of their fifth day in isolation. “We want to use the testing capacity that we’ve built up to help these people leave isolation safely,” he said. “After reviewing all of the evidence, we’ve made the decision to reduce the minimum self-isolation period to five full days in England. From Monday, people can test twice before they go – leaving isolation at the start of day six. “These two tests are critical to these balanced and proportional plans and I’d like everyone to take advantage of the capacity we have built up in tests, so that we can restore the freedoms to this country while we are keeping everyone safe.” The decision is likely to be welcomed by Tories who have called for the change, and could help ease pressure on the embattled prime minister. It will also help address staff shortages by allowing people to return to work earlier. UKHSA modelling based on data before the rise of Omicron suggests that 31% of people remain infectious five days after the onset of Covid symptoms or a positive Covid test. Further work by the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine found the risk of being infectious after two negative tests was very low. “We estimate that the chance you are still infectious after two negative tests is small,” said Billy Quilty, a research fellow in infectious disease epidemiology at LSHTM. “However, a reduction to the time waited until resuming testing – as has effectively occurred – will likely result in more tests used, as many individuals are still likely to have high viral loads at this point in their infection. “Based on what we know pre-Omicron, it will take a few more days for many individuals to produce their string of negatives. It remains to be seen how long people will be infectious for and test positive for Omicron.” Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said: “This is a pragmatic move which leaders will welcome if it can mean more health and care workers who are well enough can return to the frontline, providing it does not significantly add to the risk of the virus spreading. “The number of people in hospital is still high, with admissions still rising in the north of England and, alongside that, the NHS faces a huge care backlog and significant vacancies.” The health service has come under strain in the Omicron wave, with hospital admissions rising at the same time as more staff have been off work with the virus. More than 40,000 NHS staff at hospital trusts in England were absent for Covid-19 reasons on 9 January, more than three times the number at the start of December.Italian police have detained two men accused of involvement in a series of sexual assaults during New Year’s Eve celebrations in Milan. Abdallah Bouguedra, 21, and Abdelrahman Ahmed Mahmoud Ibrahim, 18, are accused of “serious sexual assault accompanied by the robbery of mobile phones and handbags”, Milan’s acting prosecutor, Riccardo Targetti said. The pair have been held in custody as there is a “concrete danger” of them trying to escape, given the serious allegations against them, Targetti added. They are alleged to have been among a gang who sexually assaulted at least nine women during during celebrations in front of Milan’s cathedral on Piazza del Duomo. Ibrahim’s lawyer said his client had told police he was at the square but denied any involvement. Police raided the homes of 18 suspects, including three under the age of 18, on Tuesday. Twelve people are currently being investigated. Police said the suspects are foreign or Italian of north African origin. The case prompted comparisons with the mass sexual attacks and muggings that took place in the German city of Cologne on New Year’s Eve in 2015-16. Several women, including two Germans who had been visiting Milan, came forward with their reports in the days after New Year’s Eve, with the number rising to nine by Tuesday. Police believe more women were assaulted. The women shared similar stories of being dragged into the crowd, shoved and groped during the fireworks display. A 19-year-old woman alleged that she was set upon by a gang of youths at about 1.30am and attacked for about a minute before help arrived. Her friend managed to get away. A Milan investigator told Corriere della Sera that the women were “passed around like rag dolls” and in one incident “one [suspect] held the victim while the other abused her”. The two German women said they were pushed up against barriers and sexually assaulted. They filed their reports after returning to Germany. One young woman suffered scrapes when her jumper was torn and trousers pulled down. She was taken to hospital by police for examination. Another was attacked on a street close to the square. Police identified the suspects based on CCTV images, the accounts of the victims and witnesses, as well as via the analysis of social media posts. Milan’s mayor, Giuseppe “Beppe” Sala, has apologised to the women, “also on behalf of the city”.Boris Johnson is unlikely to be seen in public for the next week after a member of his immediate family tested positive for Covid, Downing Street has said. While self-isolation for contacts of coronavirus cases is no longer mandatory, Johnson’s spokesman said the prime minister would heed guidance to limit outside contacts as much as possible for seven days after the test. The spokesman declined to say whether it was Johnson’s wife, Carrie, or one of the couple’s two young children who had tested positive, saying only that it was an immediate family member with whom the PM lived. The period stuck inside No 10 comes at an arguably fortuitous time for Johnson, who faces intense scrutiny over his attendance at a social event in the No 10 garden during the first lockdown in May 2020. The prime minister had been scheduled to visit a vaccination centre in Lancashire on Thursday, where he would have been expected to face his first media questions about his apology for attending the event, and his excuse that he believed the bring-your-own-drinks gathering had been a work meeting. Johnson’s spokesman said: “The PM is following guidance to do daily tests and limit contact with others. The positive test was Wednesday, so the PM will continue in this guidance up until and including Tuesday of next week. “In line with the guidance, he’s reducing contact. He’ll be working from No 10, doing daily tests and limiting contact with others both outside No 10 and indeed inside No 10 as well, having limited contact with others in the building, and conducting meetings online.” Asked if this meant Johnson would not be spotted for the next week, the spokesman said: “In line with the guidance, which is to limit close contact as much as possible and to work from home as much as possible, you wouldn’t expect the prime minister to go outside of that guidance. But that doesn’t necessarily preclude him doing any media interviews.” Government guidance says immediate contacts of people who test positive are “strongly advised” to take daily tests, and to “limit close contact with other people outside your household”. Johnson usually films a brief, pooled broadcast interview on visits such as the one scheduled for Thursday, and would inevitably have faced questions both about the alleged party and about calls for him to resign from some of his MPs after he admitted attending it. In a statement before prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, Johnson accepted for the first time that he had been at the 20 May 2020 gathering and that this was a mistake, while also attempting to defend his actions. Saying the No 10 garden was at the time routinely used as “an extension of the office”, Johnson argued that he had believed the event was a work gathering, and that the event “could be said, technically, to fall within the guidance”. While the prime minister and a series of cabinet ministers said people should now wait for an inquiry into the 20 May event and other alleged lockdown parties, being led by the senior civil servant Sue Gray, Johnson has faced calls to quit now. After Johnson’s statement, one of the Conservatives’ most senior backbenchers, William Wragg, and Douglas Ross, the leader of the party in Scotland, publicly called for Johnson to resign, saying his position had become untenable.Pubs, bars and restaurants missed out on £3bn in sales over the festive period as the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant kept the public at home, resulting in a second “lost Christmas” for financially embattled proprietors. Sales slumped 60% on Christmas Day, 31% on Boxing Day and 27% on New Year’s Eve, compared with 2019, pushing pubs, clubs and restaurants from healthy trading at the start of December to “painful losses” by year end. “December is a vital period for hospitality businesses, equal to three months’ worth of trading for many,” said Kate Nicholls, chief executive of UKHospitality, which compiled the figures with consultancy CGA. “These new figures are crippling for an industry already struggling but also spell disaster for the wider UK economic recovery.” UKHospitality said in the run-up to December sales had returned to 98% of pre-pandemic levels, but the spread of Omicron and government guidance to work from home was once again stretching the financial viability of pubs, bars and restaurants. “Cash reserves are severely depleted, and some businesses will struggle to survive the first quarter,” said Nicholls. “These drops in sales versus 2019, and also against our members’ projections before the onset of the new Omicron variant, will have taken most businesses from healthy trading for the month to painful losses, delaying the sector’s recovery and extending hospitality’s long Covid.” The plight of proprietors was highlighted in a trading update from the pub and restaurant group Mitchells &amp; Butlers, the owner of chains including O’Neills, Harvester, All Bar One, Toby Carvery and Miller &amp; Carter, which reported a 10.2% sales slump in the four weeks to 8 January compared with 2019. The company had reported sales running at 2.7% ahead of 2019 levels in the eight weeks to 20 November, before Omicron emerged. M&amp;B also said that costs were set to rise from the pre-Covid £60m to £65m annually, “due particularly to high levels of statutory wage rate increases and persistent historic high prices in energy markets”. “The group is in a reasonable position for when things start to get back to normal,” said Sophie Lund-Yates, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown. “Although the amount of times that has been said in the last couple of years is best left uncounted.” Nicholls said hospitality businesses were facing severe headwinds this year, as well as inflationary pressures as the “cliff edge” approaches when the government raises VAT on the sector from 12.5% back to 20% as well as a rise in business rates. On Friday, the Office for National Statistics said that 40% of all hospitality businesses say they have less than three months of cash reserves, including 11% with none at all. Also, 17% of these hospitality firms have low or no confidence of surviving the next three months, the gloomiest outlook across the economy.Team GB chiefs have set their sights on their greatest ever Winter Olympics medal haul in Beijing next month – and reiterated their support for British athletes who want to protest against human rights abuses in China. With just over three weeks to go before the Games begin, the British Olympic Association and UK Sport are targeting between three and seven medals, a tally that could take the team past the record of five set in Sochi in 2014 and equalled in Pyeongchang in 2018. While conceding the Olympics in China will be “extraordinarily challenging”, due to a range of factors including Covid and human rights issues, UK Sport’s chief executive, Sally Munday, said that Team GB was determined to become “an even greater force in winter sports”. “Our intelligence tells us that British athletes have the potential to win between three and seven medals at the Olympics, and between five and nine medals at the Paralympics,” she added. “We have a young, dynamic, motivated team with real potential to excite and inspire the public.” Around 50 athletes are expected to be selected for the Winter Olympics, with the BOA also confirming that all will be vaccinated. Those challenging for medals will include the snowboarder Charlotte Bankes, the three curling teams and the men’s two- and four-man bobsleigh. Andy Anson, the chief executive of the BOA, confirmed that officials would support British athletes who wanted to use the Games to take a stand over human rights abuses or to raise awareness of the Peng Shuai case, although he urged them to alert officials beforehand. He said: “We’ve told the athletes all along that we’re very happy for them to express themselves but to be sensible and to ideally touch base with those if they feel that they’re doing anything at all controversial . “We are not the ones who are going to stop our athletes expressing opinions. But equally, we are the ones who are going to give them sensible guidance about local laws and what’s expected locally so that they don’t come up against difficult situations. So it’s a fine balance.” Anson also indicated that he expected fans to attend the Winter Olympics – something that Chinese organisers are yet to confirm even though the Games open on 4 February. “I’m really pleased for the athletes that there will be spectators in China,” he said. “I think that will add a dimension over and above what we had in Tokyo that will make the Games exciting. I’m lucky enough, with Manchester United and as CEO of the ATP Tennis tour, to have been at live events out in China and to see the enthusiasm of the Chinese fans so that is a positive for the Games.”Mitch McConnell has been attacked by a key Trump ally and told to repair his relationship with the former president or face failure as Senate Republican leader. The move by Lindsey Graham comes amid a rumbling dispute between McConnell and Donald Trump, whose grip on the party remains near-total despite his impeachment for inciting the deadly Capitol attack in service of his lie that his defeat by Joe Biden was caused by electoral fraud. In the most recent round of the contest, McConnell sided with Mike Rounds, a South Dakota senator who said Biden won the election. “If you want to be a Republican leader in the House or the Senate, you have to have a working relationship with Donald Trump,” Graham, of South Carolina, told Fox News on Wednesday night. Acquitted in his second impeachment trial, Trump remains free to run for office. “He’s the most consequential Republican since Ronald Reagan,” Graham said. “It is his nomination if he wants it, and I think he’ll get re-elected in 2024. “I like Senator McConnell, he worked well with President Trump to get a bunch of judges including three supreme court justices on the bench, they got the tax cuts passed working together. “But here’s the question: can Senator McConnell effectively work with the leader the Republican party, Donald Trump? “I’m not gonna vote for anybody that can’t have a working relationship with President Trump, to be a team to come up with an America First agenda, to show the difference between us and liberal Democrats, to prosecute the case for Trump policies … because if you can’t do that, you will fail. I will tell you that.” Graham’s comment prompted criticism, one columnist calling it “a spineless cop-out”. It is a year since Graham apparently broke with Trump – a man he once said would “destroy” the Republican party and who relentlessly abused Senator John McCain, Graham’s close friend who died in 2018. After the Capitol attack, Graham seemed ready to abandon his idol. “I’m out,” he said. But he was soon back in, telling Axios: “Donald Trump was my friend before the riot. I’m trying to keep a relationship with him after the riot. I still consider him a friend. What happened was a dark day in American history. And we’re going to move forward.” He also called Trump “sort of a cross between Jesse Helms, Ronald Reagan and PT Barnum”. Helms, a North Carolina senator, was a segregationist and “unabashed racist”. PT Barnum was a controversialist and circus impresario. McConnell and Trump have been at odds for some time. Their latest spat began after Trump called Rounds “crazy or just stupid” for saying Biden won. McConnell joined Mitt Romney of Utah and others in defending Rounds, telling CNN: “I think Senator Rounds told the truth about what happened in the 2020 election. And I agree with him.” John Thune of South Dakota – a contender to replace McConnell should it come to a vote – welcomed Rounds to “the club” of Republicans abused by Trump.On 4 August 2020, a catastrophic explosion ripped through Beirut’s main port and into the city. In total, 218 people were killed. At the time, around 6pm, the artist and film-maker Joana Hadjithomas was in a cafe with a friend, around the corner from the studio she shares with her husband. The first thing she heard was a strange sound. “My friend and I just looked at each other. Instinctively, we went underneath the table. I curled up and protected my face.” As a teenager, she had lived through Lebanon’s civil war; taking cover was second nature, a survival reflex. Then came the massive blast. Afterwards, walking back to her apartment, she had no idea what was happening. An attack? An explosion? It was beyond comprehension. People were covered in blood; there was dust and rubble everywhere. “Wherever you looked, everything was destroyed. The scale was terrifying,” she says. In a state of shock, Hadjithomas had left her phone behind. When her husband, Khalil Joreige – frantic with worry – telephoned a couple of minutes later and a police officer answered, he feared the worst. Joreige tells the story with a shrug of helplessness, his face crumpling at the memory. The couple met as teenagers and have been working together ever since. Living between Beirut and Paris, they make feature films, documentaries, video projects and photographic installations (their art is in the permanent collections of the V&amp;A in London and the Guggenheim in New York City). He seems serious, intellectual. She is warm, with a gift for intimacy; happy to chat about art, kids, anything. They have two children, Alya, 21, and Ramzi, 11. When we meet, it is a little more than a year since the blast. The buzzy creative neighbourhood where they live and work, Gemmayzeh, was directly in the path of destruction. They lost friends and colleagues. Hadjithomas had minor injuries; her back was studded with little shards of glass. It is Joreige who tells me this: “It took months for the glass to leave her body.” Later, he explains that people of their generation snapped into survival mode during the explosion – moving away from windows, ducking under tables – just as they had learned as kids during the civil war. “Younger people went to the windows to film it; the young were hurt.” It is a horrible detail. But there were miracles, too. That afternoon, Joreige had wanted to stay late to work at the studio, which overlooks the port. But their kids pestered him into playing tennis in the mountains – “for the first time in 30 years”, he says with an expression somewhere between a grin and a grimace. Alya had recently flown back from England, where she is a student at University College London. She was meant to be quarantining; it was her last day, but she had snuck out of the apartment to play tennis. “They were lucky,” says Joreige. They left 30 minutes before the explosion. If he had stayed in the studio, if Alya had stayed at home … it doesn’t bear thinking about. “It’s not possible that nothing would have happened.” Hadjithomas and Joreige are in London for a screening of Memory Box, their first feature film in nine years, shot before the blast. It is a gem, full of thoughtfulness and quiet intensity, following three generations of women in Canada. Maia (played beautifully by Rim Turki), a psychoanalyst, left Lebanon at the end of the 80s and never went back. She lives in Montreal with her mother (Clémence Sabbagh) and her teenage daughter Alex (Paloma Vauthier). The film opens on Christmas Eve, when a large box arrives from Paris, full of notebooks that Maia wrote, during the civil war, to a friend, who has recently died. Her daughter reads the notebooks in secret; her mother is terrified that they will unearth a dark family secret. There are also flashbacks to Lebanon in the 80s, where Maia (played as a teenager by Manal Issa) is rebelling against her parents, living each day with intensity, as if it were her last – which, of course, it might be. The film tells a personal story. In 1982, during the civil war, when Hadjithomas was 13, her best friend moved to Paris. “We were devastated. We promised to write to each other every day.” She smiles gently. “It was a very teenage promise.” But they kept it up. For six years, she wrote daily, filling notebooks, sometimes 40 pages in one sitting, and recording voice memos on cassette tapes. “It was like a diary. I told her everything. I think it kept me alive in a way, emotionally.” After the war, she lost contact with her friend. Then, in 2013, the two women met for coffee in Paris and exchanged notebooks. Hadjithomas had the unnerving experience of meeting herself as a teenager. “This?!” she exclaims, burying her face in her hands. “This is who I was?” She didn’t recognise the girl on the page. Memory Box explores this gap between memory and history. The film has a beautiful, handcrafted feel, full of photos and art from the couple’s archive. Much of it is now gone. “Our artistic work is completely gone, blown away,” says Hadjithomas. Her husband nods: “Completely destroyed.” For weeks after the blast, they would come across their photos that had fluttered across the neighbourhood in the street, one time in a car park. Alya was 13 when the notebooks arrived, exactly the same age as her mum when she started writing. She begged to be allowed to read them. But the couple were adamant: no. It didn’t feel healthy. Especially not the bits about when they met, at 19. “No! No!” says Hadjithomas with mock-horror. But these conversations gave them a good idea for a plot: a daughter learning about her mother, who has always been a distant figure to her. “Here, but not present,” is how Hadjithomas describes Maia. She has met many people like that, living with trauma. As parents, Hadjithomas and Joreige have agonised about how to explain their experiences growing up in wartime to their kids. But they were never traumatised, Hadjithomas insists. Art and films saved them: “We lived violent things, but art led us out of it. We didn’t let the ghosts fill our life.” • Memory Box is released in UK and Irish cinemas and through virtual cinema platforms from 21 JanuaryThe low-tax, free-market country that Lord Frost and other Tories aspire to (PM must commit to low taxes or risk losing next election, says David Frost, 9 Janurary) would be one where raw sewage continues to pollute rivers and coastline; where the NHS is starved of sufficient funding to ensure a high-quality health service for every citizen; where rough sleepers abound in our cities; where public transport is expensive and patchy in its coverage, forcing many extra car trips into our car-blighted towns, cities and countryside; where plastic pollution continues unabated; where state-funded schools are grossly underfunded; where councils are unable to carry out essential quality assurance for building works; where private building companies build houses for maximum profit rather than those needed by ordinary people; and where the environment is just a word having little significance compared with the need to ensure maximum profits for private companies. In reality, we need higher levels of taxation for individuals and businesses (especially foreign-owned online businesses) that can afford them. We also need European-dominated markets to minimise transport miles and their environmental impact. Chris Osman Oxford • So yet another leading Conservative demonstrates how out of touch they are with the electorate. I spent several days knocking on doors in the North Shropshire byelection. On “true blue” doorstep after doorstep, the concern expressed was not about too much public spending, but about too little: long before partygate hit the headlines, the insistent complaint was about the removal of most ambulance stations and the severe scarcity of GP services. The last time a sitting government suffered a swing to the Liberal Democrats comparable to that at North Shropshire was in 1993 (at Christchurch). Lord Frost and others like him might usefully reflect on what happened nationally at the next general election. His lordship’s obsession with low-tax policies may be shared by his new friends in the various self-important Tory ginger groups, but the mass of ordinary Conservative voters are far more interested in a properly funded and fully functioning NHS. Peter Geall CoventryMajor figures from the world of film, including Susan Sarandon, Mark Ruffalo, Peter Capaldi and Charles Dance have issued a statement in support of Emma Watson and Palestinian solidarity. Last week, Watson, best known for playing Hermione Granger in the Harry Potter franchise, was accused of antisemitism after she posted an image on Instagram showing a photograph of a pro-Palestinian protest with the banner “solidarity is a verb” written across it. It was accompanied with a quote about the meaning of solidarity from the intersectional feminist scholar Sara Ahmed. The post drew strong criticism from Israeli officials, including Danny Danon, a former science minister in Benjamin Netanyahu’s government and Israeli ambassador to the United Nations, who said: “Ten points from Gryffindor for being an antisemite.” Israel’s current ambassador to the UN, Gilad Erdan, said: “Fiction may work in Harry Potter but it does not work in reality. If it did, the magic used in the wizarding world could eliminate the evils of Hamas (which oppresses women and seeks the annihilation of Israel) and the PA (which supports terror).” In a letter organised by Artists for Palestine UK, a cultural network “standing together for Palestinian rights”, more than 40 named people, including Gael García Bernal, Jim Jarmusch, Maxine Peake, Viggo Mortensen and Steve Coogan, said: “We join Emma Watson in support of the simple statement that ‘solidarity is a verb’, including meaningful solidarity with Palestinians struggling for their human rights under international law.” Citing a report by Human Rights Watch claiming Israel is committing the crimes of apartheid and persecution, the artists, including Watson’s Harry Potter co-stars Miriam Margolyes and Julie Christie, continued: “We recognise the underlying power imbalance between Israel, the occupying power, and the Palestinians, the people under a system of military occupation and apartheid. “We stand against ongoing Israeli attempts to forcibly displace Palestinian families from their homes in the East Jerusalem neighbourhoods of Sheikh Jarrah, Silwan and elsewhere in the occupied Palestinian territory.” The artists added that they condemned all forms of racism, including antisemitism and Islamophobia. “Opposition to a political system or policy is distinct from bigotry, hatred and discrimination targeting any group of humans based on their identity,” they said. Other signatories include the screenwriter and producer James Schamus and the directors Asif Kapadia, Mira Nair and Ken Loach. Loach was recently expelled from the Labour party. • This article was amended on 14 January 2022. An earlier version of the last sentence said that Ken Loach was recently expelled from the Labour party “over the issue”. For avoidance of doubt, that predated Emma Watson’s action.Boris Johnson’s appearance at a Downing Street party during lockdown could mark his downfall, European media have concluded, painting a devastating picture of a “vain, fickle, hypocritical opportunist” with an “elastic relationship to the truth” who only ever “played at being prime minister”. Germany’s Süddeutsche Zeitung said in a brutal editorial that it had “only ever been a matter of time” before the British prime minister was exposed to one and all as the emperor with no clothes. “Boris Johnson has never really changed,” the paper said. “He’s always been a seducer and a loudmouth. Always lied when it’s in his interest. He is the great illusionist of British politics.” Johnson’s “remorseful confessions” and “submissive contrition” would do little to change things, the paper said. He may have “posed as Churchill” and looked like “the saviour of the kingdom” after his election victory in 2019, but unlike his historical hero, “Johnson has himself led Britain into an existential crisis, for which he bears full responsibility. “He has not given up his frivolous, unserious nature. His fickleness is revealed in his government’s absence of strategy. Snobbery explains his lack of interest in the state of the country. Boris Johnson doesn’t govern, he plays at being prime minister.” Another German paper, Die Welt, said few options remain open. With polls showing 66% of voters want him to step down, Johnson “could voluntarily and immediately resign, as all three opposition leaders urged him to do. But that has never happened in British parliamentary history.” He intended to wait for the outcome of the official investigation, the paper said, and assured the Commons on Wednesday he would accept its conclusion. If Sue Gray’s verdict allowed, however, the prime minister would probably try to hang on. “But that won’t be easy,” the paper said. “The public view that there is ‘one rule for those up there, and another for everyone else’ has taken root.” Johnson may even have to go before local elections: “Partygate has made the Joker a burden.” Handelsblatt, another German publication, agreed. “Johnson has weathered many storms,” it said. “But this time, it looks bad. Even if the investigation exonerates him, he has tough weeks ahead: soaring inflation, a cost of living crisis … His overthrow looks likely before May.” For France’s Le Monde, the last couple of months have proved “calamitous” for a “bumbling politician” whose faults – “opportunism, no attention to detail, an elastic relationship with the truth” – everyone seemed ready to forgive, until now. The prime minister’s fall in popularity has been “so brutal that his immediate future appears to be in jeopardy”, the paper said, with many Tory MPs “now doubting his ability to lead the party to a fourth consecutive victory” and the rightwing press turning on him. “Johnson should not be underestimated: he has political flair, charisma and, so far, he has been very lucky,” the paper said. But if he survives partygate, he still has to act on the cost of living, and “satisfy impatient Brexiters with more than chimeras”. Having ousted the party’s “most reasonable members”, Johnson, caught between “a young guard demanding more public spending for the disadvantaged, and Thatcherites eschewing all state intervention”, has no moderate Tory support left, it said. For Libération, too, “gone are the days of arrogant victories, electoral landslides and spicy slogans. Two and a half years after his election, prime minister Boris Johnson is up against the wall. The party is over – and so are the jokes.” After multiple previous revelations, the “spring aperitif” mid-lockdown could prove fatal, the French paper said. At prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, Tory MPs said little about the scandal – “but behind the thick curtains of the tearooms, things are on the move”. Spain’s El País said the prime minister’s ability to surprise “has much to do with how he shuns conventional thinking. He does what no one would expect, and acts as if he is exempt from the rules that apply to other mortals,” the paper said. “Until Wednesday, when he had no choice but to take the obvious course and say sorry.” Typically, however, even his apology was “an attempt to cover his back”, the paper said: “He admitted his presence – but said he thought it was a work gathering.” In the Netherlands, NRC Handelsblad said the scandal was “just one of the many difficult developments Johnson has to contend with”, citing soaring living costs due to “inflation, high energy prices and the negative consequences of Brexit”. Add in the coming tax and social security hike in April and despite “Johnson’s proven ability to squeeze out of a tight spot like nobody else”, his prospects for survival look slim, “particularly when 65% of the electorate consider him incompetent”. De Volksrant said Johnson’s “clownish appearance conceals a man long engaged on a ruthless drive for the top – but one who needs to be loved. That may explain why he couldn’t say no to a drink with his staff.” It was not voters or the opposition that could topple Johnson this time, the Dutch paper said, but his own party. “Hugely popular at the time of his election victory, he has since made enemies in his own circle. That distaste becomes dangerous when the prime minister’s popularity with voters is plunging.”A good apology can work wonders in improving relations between individuals and between groups. In acknowledging the wrong, taking responsibility for it, and doing something about it, one can repair the identities of both the offender and the offended. The person apologising is no longer a threat, and the one receiving the apology is no longer denigrated, allowing the two to come together in a new and more positive way. The problem is that yesterday’s statement offered by Boris Johnson was not a good apology. It was full of justifications and it offered nothing in the way of actions. Indeed it was not an apology at all, for it didn’t accept that an offence had been committed in the first place. Rather it was a classic example of the political non-apology, which takes the rhetorical form of saying sorry (and indeed prominently includes words like “I am sorry” and “I apologise”), but which ultimately attributes blame to the other rather than taking it upon oneself. Far from repairing relations, it compounds the original offence and makes things still worse. We are all familiar with non-apologies of the “I’m sorry if you were offended” sort, where the import is that you were unreasonable in taking offence, rather than that I was unreasonable in what I said or did. This logic is usually implicit and rarely spelled out, although the Texas Republican congressman Joe Barton famously apologised for his defence of BP during the Deepwater Horizon oil spill disaster, saying: “If anything I said this morning has been misconstrued to the opposite effect, I want to apologise for that misconstruction.” Johnson’s offering may be somewhat more camouflaged, but it is equally brazen in its attribution of blame. As ever with non-apologies, he starts by saying “I want to apologise”. Then, after acknowledging the rage of those who “think” that Covid regulations were broken by Downing St, Johnson insists that “when I went into that garden just after six on 20 May 2020 … I believed implicitly that this was a work event”. He further insists that he was right since “it could be said technically to fall within the guidance”. However, “there are millions and millions of people who would not see it that way”. People, he added, who have “suffered terribly”. Finally, Johnson offers his “heartfelt apologies” to these people (and to the House of Commons). According to this statement, the problem does not lie in anything Johnson did. The problem lies in the inability of the public to appreciate the facts – and if Johnson erred in any way, it was in not appreciating just how wrong the public can be. To add insult to injury, even the suffering of the public is weaponised against them to imply that this was associated with their inability to think straight. Ultimately, then, when Johnson mouths the words “heartfelt apologies”, he is actually saying sorry for the flaws of others. Not only is this the opposite of a genuine apology – it has the opposite effect to a genuine apology in terms of its impact on social relations. The sense that there is “one law for them and another for us” has resulted in a catastrophic and enduring lack of trust. The creation of in- and outgroups becomes particularly toxic when the outgroup is seen as a threat to ingroup members. Nothing signifies threat quite like the sense that others view you with contempt. And the prime minister’s non-apology communicates contempt for the public in at least three ways. There is direct contempt in the claim that the public is incapable of understanding the guidance. Then, there is indirect contempt in assuming that anyone might be gullible enough to believe that Johnson went into his garden and didn’t realise a party was going on, especially when his own principal private secretary had emailed staff to tell them about the party. To compound it all, there is contempt in the notion that Johnson’s statement constitutes any sort of apology and that we should now accept it, shut up, and let the internal inquiry run its course. All in all, this tawdry episode does nothing to improve relations. On the contrary, it serves only to confirm Johnson as someone who stands apart from and against the public. That isn’t good for the Conservatives. But nor is it good for our democracy in the face of such an acute crisis. Stephen Reicher is a member of the Sage subcommittee advising on behavioural science Join our journalists for a Guardian Live online event on the No 10 lockdown party and Boris Johnson’s future on Wednesday 19 January. Book herePrivate hospital operators including Spire Healthcare and Circle Health will receive between £225m and £525m from NHS England under a deal struck this week to maintain services and ensure the health service does not become overwhelmed as cases of the Omicron Covid variant surge. NHS hospitals in England will be able to use private hospitals and staff if Covid-19 admissions soar to avoid delays in treatment for patients with serious illnesses such as cancer. The financial details of the three-month deal, announced on Monday, have emerged in a letter from the NHS England chief executive, Amanda Pritchard, to the health secretary, Sajid Javid, dated 7 January. The letter sets out that private hospital groups will receive a minimum of £75m to £90m a month between January and March in return for the NHS reserving capacity at their hospitals. This could rise to £175m a month if there is a big increase in hospital admissions. Private hospital groups have indicated they could provide about 5,600 beds if required, the letter says. It is estimated that 2,000 to 3,000 of these beds could be staffed, subject to staff absence levels, although the firms could not confirm this to the NHS. The companies also include Nuffield Health, Ramsay Health Care UK and Aspen Healthcare. Pritchard warned in the letter that the NHS would be “exposed financially, particularly if surge arrangements are triggered”. “On a per-bed basis, this is significantly more expensive than the equivalent cost of an NHS site with much less certainty on the potential staffed capacity,” she wrote. “The NHS would normally only pay for activity actually delivered. In giving a minimum income guarantee there is a material risk that the NHS pays for activity that is not performed.” But, in seeking approval for the deal from the health secretary, Pritchard went on to say: “You may also take the view that if we do nothing or delay, the risk that pressure will grow on the NHS leading to Omicron overwhelming local systems is unacceptable. “Such risks manifesting would result in significant cancellation of elective care, where we have started to address the impact of earlier waves of the pandemic. You may therefore take the view that agreeing the contract now is lower risk in terms of tackling Omicron and the higher value for money risk is acceptable.” The letter shows that NHS England has agreed a 10% premium to the standard NHS tariff for all work above the value of the minimum income guarantee, and further premiums for more complex work such as cancer treatments “to incentivise the relevant independent sector providers (ISPs) to deliver activity that would not normally be done by ISPs because they deem it not profitable at standard NHS tariffs”. The deal, which expires on 31 March, comes after the Covid-19 outbreak prompted NHS England in March 2020 to strike a similar deal with the private sector, which cost about £400m a month. It block-booked all 7,956 beds in England’s 187 private hospitals along with their almost 20,000 staff to help the NHS as it battled Covid-19.Ahead of her Guardian Masterclass, Visual storytelling with data, Valentina D’Efilippo shares this data-driven film, narrating the first year of the pandemic in London, commissioned by the Museum of London.The family of Jalani Lovett, a 27-year-old who died in a Los Angeles jail last year, is demanding that the county sheriff’s department be held accountable and authorities release more information about the final moments of his life. Lovett died in solitary confinement in Men’s Central jail in downtown LA on 22 September. The county coroner released an autopsy report on Tuesday saying Lovett’s death was “accidental” and that he had fentanyl and heroin in his system. But Lovett’s mother and siblings, who have been fighting for months to get basic information from authorities about what led to his death, are left with major questions about the case. If Lovett died from an overdose, how did he access fentanyl while in solitary confinement? What were the actions of guards on duty that night, in a jail with a history of mistreatment? And why did it take so long for the coroner to produce the autopsy report, which the county sent to a reporter this week before the family obtained it? “I’m a grieving mother, but I’m also an angry mother,” Terry Lovett, 65, told the Guardian this week in an interview from her home in Oakland. She said the sheriff’s department, which runs the jail, had repeatedly ignored her family’s pleas for answers: “They have no regard for human life.” “I want the truth to come out,” she added. “To me, this was murder. They killed my son.” Christian Contreras, a local civil rights attorney, filed a claim against the county on behalf of the family on Wednesday, the first step in a lawsuit, alleging “negligence causing wrongful death”, “deliberate indifference” in violation of the 14th amendment, an “inhumane killing” and more. A long wait for answers: ‘What are they hiding?’ Jalani Lovett, one of six siblings, grew up in east Oakland. He excelled at basketball and baseball as a teenager and won a poetry medal in school, his mother said. He was an aspiring rapper and a family man who was close with his nieces and nephews. He ended up at Men’s Central jail in September 2019 for a second-degree robbery charge, and his mother said he had been held in solitary confinement in the months before his death. A sheriff’s spokesperson told the Guardian he was in a “one-man cell” and was not there for disciplinary reasons. Terry Lovett said a detective in the sheriff’s homicide bureau informed her on the morning of 23 September that her son “was found dead” in his cell at 10pm the previous night. The official added that authorities had found “drug paraphernalia” in her son’s cell, she recalled, but said the investigation was ongoing. The family received little information from officials in the following weeks, they said. One investigator initially told Terry it could take eight months for her to get an official report, she recalled. About a month after the death, the family obtained photos from the coroner’s office showing Jalani’s body shortly after he died, which they believed showed signs of bruising and other possible injuries. Fueling their concerns further was a long history of scandals at the Men’s Central jail, with controversies including corruption and obstruction of justice cases and documented evidence of widespread abuse of incarcerated people. Jalani was housed in a section of the jail, the 3000 block, where guards have long been accused of being part of a “deputy gang” called the 3000 Boys, known for allegedly using excessive force. Vanessa Carter, one of Jalani’s sisters, said she talked had with her brother hours before his death and overheard him get into an argument with a guard, which also made the family suspicious. Combined with the photos and lack of information, the family questioned whether guards had beaten Jalani. Jalani’s official death certificate, issued a month after his death, listed his cause of death as “deferred”, meaning the medical examiner’s investigation was ongoing. It also listed the time of death as four hours earlier than what Terry was initially told, according to her records. The coroner’s report, released this week, noted he had a bruise on his neck and abrasions on his arms, but said there was “no external trauma” or “life-threatening injuries”. The report said deputies had found him unresponsive in his cell and issued Narcan and CPR. Lt Brandon Dean of the sheriff’s department told the Guardian that there were no signs Jalani had an altercation with guards, and that there was “nothing out of the ordinary” in his death. He declined to answer questions about how Jalani could have accessed fentanyl. Asked about the 3000 Boys, Dean declined to comment, saying it was not relevant to the case. The coroner’s report said the autopsy had been conducted on 28 September, one week after Jalani’s death. Contreras said he had filed a request for records in November, seeking footage, reports and the identity of the involved deputies, but had received no response. The coroner’s office sent the Guardian a copy of the autopsy on Tuesday before the attorney or Terry Lovett had seen it. The family said they were skeptical of the coroner’s report. “There are too many inconsistencies. What is being hidden?” Lovett said after receiving the report. She said she planned to have an independent medical examiner review the records. ‘I want to stop this from happening to others’ Contreras lamented the lack of transparency in the case, which he said was common in jail deaths: “When someone in their own custody dies in highly suspicious circumstances, as opposed to meeting with the family and providing answers, the sheriff’s department advances further secrecy.” Carter, Jalani’s sister, said she believed deputies should face charges for her brother’s death: “They are supposed to ‘protect and serve’ and take care of people. We should not be scared of them, and they should be accountable for their actions, just like we are for ours.” She added that she wanted her brother to be remembered as a loyal family man who taught her son, now 14, how to walk and play basketball. Ladell Dickerson, Jalani’s older brother, said that regardless of the cause of death, the county was to blame: “This is negligence. He was in their custody. He was under the authority of the sheriff. He was not in jail with a death sentence, but somebody in that jail either killed him or allowed him to die.” At a protest outside the jail on what would have been Jalani’s 28th birthday this week, Michelle Lovett, another sister, wished her brother a happy birthday, adding: “The system took my brother, but they will not take our right to know the truth.” Terry Lovett also lodged a complaint with the office of inspector general in November, but has not heard back. She said she was not confident that she would get justice for her son in LA county, but that she would keep fighting. She said she now spent most days trying to get information on the case: “I know I can’t bring my son back, but I want to stop this from happening to somebody else’s child.” In Terry’s final call with her son, Jalani was in a good mood, she said. He heard he would be transferring soon to state prison to finish his sentence. He was looking forward to leaving the jail, she said, and getting one step closer to coming home.Hello, and Happy Thursday, For the last few years, I’ve wanted to write about the way Mississippi disenfranchises certain felony convictions. Every state in the country has slightly different felon disenfranchisement laws, but the one in Mississippi is especially harsh. More than 235,000 people in the state can’t vote because of a felony conviction, according to an estimate by the Sentencing Project, a criminal justice non-profit organization. That’s more than 10% of the voting age population, and nearly 16% of Black people of voting age can’t vote because of a felony conviction. Mississippi has the highest felon disenfranchisement rate in the country as states around the country have recently loosened such statutes, many of which are rooted in the explicit racism of the Jim Crow era. Alabama, Florida, Kentucky, Iowa, Virginia, Louisiana and New York have all taken steps to make it easier for people convicted of felonies to vote again. Mississippi’s law has remained untouched and unchanged. Over the last few months, I’ve been speaking with Roy Harness and Dennis Hopkins, two Mississippi men who are permanently blocked from voting in Mississippi because of crimes they committed decades ago. Last weekend, we published a story explaining how both men feel the consequences of a racist law that continues to block thousands from voting today. In 1890, delegates at the state’s constitutional convention picked a handful of crimes that would cause someone to lose their right to vote forever. At first glance, that list appears random – bribery, burglary, theft, arson, perjury, forgery, embezzlement and bigamy – were all included. Murder and rape were not. But a few years later, the Mississippi supreme court explained that the delegates deliberately chose crimes they thought Black people were more likely to commit. It was part of a broader scheme to block Black people from voting after the passage of the 15th amendment, which says no citizen can be denied the right to vote based on their race. There is a process today for people convicted of felonies to get their voting rights back, but it’s nearly impossible to navigate. Someone with a disqualifying felony must first convince a lawmaker to introduce an individualized bill on their behalf to regain suffrage. Both chambers of the Mississippi legislature must approve it by a two-thirds majority, and then the governor must approve it. There’s no state data tracking how many people apply and get approved each year. But Blake Feldman, a criminal justice researcher in Mississippi began tracking these bills in 2018. Scraping data from the Mississippi legislature’s website, he gathered every suffrage bill that’s been introduced since 1997. And what he found was staggering. Since 1997, just 185 people have been able to successfully use the process to get their voting rights back, his data shows. Some years, no people have made it through the process. On average, just seven people get their voting rights back per year. “It’s disturbing,” Feldman told me. When he began looking at the bills, Feldman told me he was surprised to see how many were introduced on behalf of people who had not committed one of the specific disqualifying crimes. Hannah Williams, a research and policy analyst at MS Votes, which works to expand voting access, told me there’s widespread confusion over how the law works. Her organization has been helping people get their data in. “There really isn’t a way to guarantee anything because the process doesn’t really make sense. There’s no information. You can’t go to a website. And to be honest, you can’t even call the capitol to get information, because they don’t really know what the process is,” she said. Both Harness and Hopkins are lead plaintiffs in two federal lawsuits challenging the Mississippi law. Both of them told me they didn’t even know there was a process for them to get their voting rights back. “It makes me feel bad. I’ve served my country, nation … got a degree and [I] still can’t vote, no matter what you do to prove yourself,” Harness told me. Also worth watching … Joe Biden on Tuesday gave the speech voting rights activists have been wanting to hear for months, calling for changing the Senate filibuster to pass voting rights legislation. But it still doesn’t seem like Democrats have the votes to change the filibuster. Days ahead of a vote, the Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, called it an “uphill battle”. Candidates for secretary of state are raising unprecedented amounts of money so far, according to a new Brennan Center report, a reflection of the battle for control of election administration that is shaping up across the country, A three-judge panel in North Carolina upheld the state’s new congressional districts, which were drawn to heavily favor Republicans. Plaintiffs have already said they will appeal the decision to the North Carolina supreme court. Many fewer used mail-in drop boxes in some of Georgia’s most populous counties last year after Republicans restricted their availability, according to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution.Like Novak Djokovic, I tested positive for Covid-19 in December (Novak Djokovic blames agent for Australian paperwork ‘mistake’ and admits not isolating after positive Covid result, 12 January). Unlike him I was fully immunised and away from home (in a New York hotel). To comply with US regulations, my wife and I isolated for 10 days over Christmas and New Year. In compliance with UK regulations, we took negative rapid antigen tests before flying home and day 2 PCR tests on our return: mine was positive. Subsequently, I have spoken to five test-and-trace agents (a sixth hung up on my wife) and have been emailed and messaged repeatedly to complete the online contact-tracing form. Despite persisting PCR positivity after recovery being well recognised, apparently there is no way to register this “on the system”. One agent told me to contest the result on 119, but I could not find out how; that is unsurprising as the call-directing algorithm has at least five layers and up to six choices at each layer, giving hundreds of possible choice combinations. The next agent I reached denied that an option to contest exists. As regards the contact form, the section asking where you have been in the previous five days accepts only UK addresses, making it impossible for me to complete truthfully. A final twist is that the complaints form (which does not allow “special characters” such as colons, inverted commas and question marks) promises a reply within 25 working days. One consolation is that, unlike Mr Djokovic, as a UK citizen I am not threatened with deportation. This might all have been a bit of a joke if test and trace hadn’t cost the exchequer £37bn. Dr David Fine Bridford, DevonI was struck by a sad parallel between your article on the Deepwater Horizon blaze (Life after Deepwater Horizon: the hidden toll of surviving disaster on an oil rig, 6 January) and the articles on the overwhelming of ambulance services and other parts of the NHS (Ministers must act now on NHS staffing crisis, health chiefs warn, 5 January). In both cases employees have been subject to “moral injury”. The imperatives of cost pressures imposed either by BP or by the government mean that suffering is caused to employees through being required to do things which transgress the values at the core of their identity or being betrayed by their employers violating their sense of “what’s right”. While members of the government appear to be comfortable with the idea that parts of the health service will be overwhelmed, they forget that the service is made up of committed and hard-working people dedicated to relieving the suffering of others. Not only are many healthcare workers physically, mentally and emotionally exhausted, but they are also suffering moral injury: unable to do what is right for their patients in the current situation, forced by circumstance to do things which transgress their core values. While some may recover from exhaustion of all kinds, even from the well- documented post-traumatic stress disorder with which many have been diagnosed, moral injury can cause distress and disillusion that cuts to the core and cannot be healed. Not only are these workers being harmed by the government’s stance, but also by the patients who, suffering from reduced services, are venting their fear, frustration and anger on these same staff members. How can it be acceptable that while patients, staff and their families are harmed, politicians appear to escape scot-free? Philippa Merrill Downton, WiltshireThere have been many changes to isolation rules in England but the science of how Covid-19 spreads has remained the same. During the first waves of the pandemic, people were required to isolate for 10 days after testing positive. This was subsequently changed to seven days, so long as the person had a negative lateral flow test on days six and seven. Although data is still being collected on the impact of this change, the isolation period has been cut again: today, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, announced that people with Covid will only need to isolate for five days, so long as they show two negative lateral flow tests by day six. I’m deeply concerned about this. There is little scientific evidence to justify these reduced measures. Yes, some would argue that Omicron is mild compared to other variants, and does not result in massive hospitalisations. But a comprehensive review of research into 5,340 infected people around the world showed that the times at which these people were shedding the most virus, and were therefore most infectious to others, was between days three to six. The amount of virus each person shedded tailed off at days seven to nine. By day 10, no viable virus could be recovered from their respiratory tracts. This was why scientists originally recommended a 10-day period of isolation. A limited number of studies have suggested that people who are asymptomatic may shed the virus for a slightly shorter period, but decisions on national policy should be based on all infections, not just a subsection of asymptomatic cases. The government’s previous decision to cut isolation to seven days so long as a person had two negative lateral flow tests was a compromise, made when there was significant pressure to keep the country going while slowing the spread of Omicron. But ending isolation on day five will mean that some people come out of isolation during the peak of viral shedding. Two negative lateral flows are still required for a person to leave isolation after five days. These tests are a quick, user-friendly and practical way of gauging infectiousness, but they aren’t as accurate as PCR tests. Taking a swab sample correctly is crucial to the test results. Pressures such as a lack of paid sick leave may tempt some users to report their test results as negative. In laboratory settings, lateral flow tests have been shown to be accurate, with very few false positives, but they are not as sensitive as PCR tests, meaning that some results might falsely appear negative, particularly at the start and end of the infectious period. Despite these limitations, lateral flow tests are still one of the best ways to reduce community transmission, so long as they’re used correctly. Reports that free lateral flow tests may be phased out in the coming months are concerning – it’s vital that they continue to be offered for free. Making people pay for lateral flows would lead to a rapid decline in testing. In cutting the isolation period again, the government seems to be more concerned with the impact of absenteeism in workplaces, particularly in essential services and schools, than with reducing the spread of Omicron. Releasing infected people back into the community when they may still be shedding the virus and therefore infecting others is both foolhardy and dangerous. I strongly urge our policymakers to look at the scientific data and draw sensible conclusions from this. It’s only by following the science of how Covid-19 spreads that we can keep people safe as we go about our daily lives. Sally Cutler is professor in medical microbiology at the University of East LondonFor survivors of Syria’s brutal detention system, the landmark conviction of a former Syrian intelligence official for crimes against humanity represents a vital step towards justice. “We initially hoped for a trial at the international criminal court, but nevertheless this is an important step,” said Hussein Ghrer, one of 24 former detainees of Branch 251, a military intelligence unit with its own prison in Damascus, who testified against Anwar Raslan. “Finally, we have an official conviction saying that these individuals have committed crimes in the context of mass attacks on Syrians and systematic crimes against humanity. I believe this is the most important thing to build on in future.” Raslan, a former colonel with the Syrian intelligence service, was convicted by a court in Koblenz, Germany, of crimes against humanity, including 27 counts of murder. He was accused by prosecutors of overseeing abuse, sexual assault and the torture of more than 4,000 people at Branch 251. The site became synonymous with brutal abuse by security officials after the government of Bashar al-Assad used maximum force to quell protests. Raslan is the highest-ranking Syrian official to stand trial for atrocities committed in Syria. He was charged under the principle of universal jurisdiction, which allows the prosecution of serious crimes against international law, such as genocide and torture, in one country even if they happened elsewhere. At least 100,000 people are recorded as detained or missing in Syria, the United Nations said in 2019, although activists say the true number may be far higher. The Syrian Network for Human Rights puts the figure at about 150,000 and estimates that nearly 15,000 people have died from torture in Syria since March 2011. Human Rights Watch described this as “violence that is not readily visible: the hidden prisons and torture centres into which tens of thousands of Syrians have disappeared – sometimes to re-emerge years later, sometimes never to be heard from again”. Raslan is the second person to be convicted in Koblenz for activities related to Branch 251, after the conviction last year of Eyad al-Gharib, a former intelligence officer, for his role in transporting detainees to the prison. The trial represented the first opportunity of its kind for former detainees such as Ghrer to testify about their treatment in detention. “I was interrogated and beaten all over my body, but the worst was seeing others being brutally tortured, because you don’t know what could happen next,” he said. Ghrer also described the experience of seeing Raslan – the man who directed his torture and that of his fellow detainees – in the dock, a decade after he was arrested in Damascus for filming protests. “We were powerless, we were mistreated. [Raslan] was not mistreated, and he has a right to lawyers and translators,” he said. “I wouldn’t want to be in his shoes, of course,” Ghrer added, “but to be in a place where we are holding him accountable, it feels good. Finally, we were able to pursue a kind of justice. “I don’t believe in full justice – I believe in a journey towards justice and this is the first step.” In a statement read out by his defence lawyers during the hearing, Raslan claimed he was not associated with torture and denied that it had taken place under his watch. Martin Holsky, a chief inspector with the Baden-Württemberg state police, later testified that Raslan told him: “With this many interrogations in one day, you can’t always be polite. With armed groups, you sometimes need to be stricter.” “He doesn’t believe he did anything wrong,” said Ghrer. “I was in court many times, watching his expressions. He looks at us with disgust. As if he doesn’t believe he’s being held accountable, or he believes he’s not like other members of the regime.” Other survivors agreed. “In my testimony, I said that I wish for him to spend a lot of time in prison so he could think about all of us,” said Ruham Hawash, who was detained at Branch 251 in 2012. “I want him to think about all the people who testified against him in court, all the people that he tortured and whose torture he was responsible for during his career. I think with enough time he will not be able to run from these thoughts.” Hawash said the trial in Koblenz represented an opportunity for justice she had not expected. “I was tortured at Branch 251. I felt like, at that time, a part of my dignity was taken from me. So another thing about this trial is that I feel like, for me personally, I’m getting some of my dignity back that I lost in 2012,” she said. She also pointed to the body of evidence used to convicted Raslan, including thousands of photos of detainees tortured to death in prison, provided by a Syrian military photographer known only as Caesar. “This verdict is a tool to demonstrate that this regime uses systematic torture,” she said. The verdict carries wider implications for countries across Europe, including the UK and Denmark, where governments have voiced proposals to return Syrian asylum seekers. “I see this trial not just as justice but as a sign to the world that this regime uses torture systematically – which also means we can’t send people back,” she said. Raslan’s conviction also comes amid efforts by some governments across the Middle East to re-establish relations with Assad’s government, despite previously backing his overthrow. The verdict in Koblenz, as well as multiple ongoing trials against former regime officials in Germany and elsewhere across Europe, present opportunities for accountability alongside the risk that such trials might dissuade higher-level officials from within the Syrian regime from providing information, or being brought to justice outside Syria. “Other perpetrators might see that they can’t get away with their crimes, but it also means they won’t leave Syria, or people who worked for the regime might not leave their posts,” said Hawash. “It’s complicated. But it’s still sending a strong message to them that we will strive for justice to hold those perpetrators accountable for their crimes against us and humanity.” Yet for campaigners and the families of thousands of those still missing inside Syrian detention centres, Raslan’s conviction represents an important step to providing vital information about their fate. “There are still more than 100,000 people in prison – we have no idea where they are and if they’re alive or dead. Justice cannot truly come while there are still people in jail,” said Lamis al-Khateeb, a member of the group Families for Freedom, who gathered outside court to witness Raslan’s sentencing.The work of Richard Leakey was brought to London in a huge exhibition on human origins, The Human Story, at the Commonwealth Institute, Kensington, in 1985. It was seen by hundreds of thousands, with queues snaking into Kensington High Street. Richard was enthusiastic, faith leaders declared that it should be acceptable to their followers, and James Porter, the institute’s director, toured it to museums round the world. It was a high point in a late 80s flowering of the institute, which focused on the cultures of Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific, before the Foreign and Commonwealth Office closed it. • The byline on this article was updated on 14 January 2022. While Rowland Bourne wrote the letter, as indicated in an earlier version, he has long been known as Richard Bourne.We’ve all got our teas?” checks Daniel Hay-Gordon, looking around the circle of people sitting in a rehearsal space in Brixton, south London. Mugs clutched, things can start, and the discussion is about the early 20th-century poet Edith Sitwell. Hay-Gordon and fellow dancer-choreographer Eleanor Perry set about describing Sitwell to the gathered group: her unhappy childhood, her distinctive appearance, “wonderful slightly hooked nose and big, hooded, very beautiful eyes”, says Perry. Sitwell had Marfan syndrome, a genetic disorder that caused her to have unusually long limbs and fingers, Perry explains. “She felt her hands were as expressive as her face.” This chat is not just cultural history, it is preparation for a performance. In a few weeks’ time, the dancers in the circle will be embodying the poet, transforming on stage into eight Edith Sitwells, complete with headdresses, rings, robes and mannerisms. Sitwell, Perry tells the group, overcame her challenges, and other people’s judgments of her, “by being extremely singular and very proud of who she was”, and that strikes a chord with the assembled dancers, who all come from Corali, a company of performers with learning disabilities. They know what it’s like to subvert expectations and be unashamed of their own difference. “I do relate to that,” says Corali’s Jackie Ryan, a quietly spoken woman who will be playing one of the piece’s imagined versions of Sitwell and who turns out to be a confident communicator with a talent for one-liners. “I like performing to show people what I can do. My personality comes out on stage,” she says. “I like to see how the audience reacts.” Corali has been running for more than 30 years. Originally founded by a social services worker in Southwark, south London, it has become a pioneering organisation for artists with learning disabilities. They perform and run workshops in hospitals, schools and community centres, but have also collaborated with the Tate galleries and Sadler’s Wells theatre. The partnership with Hay-Gordon and Perry might seem an unlikely one. Known on stage as Thick &amp; Tight, the idiosyncratic duo came through the dance conservatoire system but now make surreal work that sits between cabaret, dance and lip-sync, delving into queer history. Thick &amp; Tight reanimate characters from the past, whether it’s Barbara Cartland, Marlene Dietrich, Diana, Princess of Wales or Marilyn Monroe, in vignettes that traverse high camp and deep pathos. The two companies seem to occupy different spheres, but the way Hay-Gordon sees it, both are on the fringes, championing outsiders. And working together has enriched everyone’s creative life. “They are all amazing performers,” says Perry of Corali, “and they’re so supportive of each other and welcoming to us that it’s just a total joy every time to come back and think of new ways we can work together and what they can bring.” “We gel so well,” says Housni “DJ” Hassan, another of the show’s Sitwells, who brings an infectious buzz to the room. He is constantly moving. When Hay-Gordon describes Sitwell’s expressive hands, Hassan’s fingers immediately start to twirl. He talks about the alchemy between the two companies: “The formula comes together and … Bam! Look what has happened, incredible energy!” Thick &amp; Tight previously made a piece with Corali about the last years of Derek Jarman’s life, set to the music of Stockhausen. “It was to challenge some preconceptions about the sort of work that we could do and the music that we could use,” says Hay-Gordon. Corali’s longtime artistic director is Sarah Archdeacon, who loves how confident her performers are. “Teaming up with Thick &amp; Tight, the audiences are surprised by what they see, but in a really positive way. We can be confident in the difference that we’re celebrating, and we have strength in doing that alongside each other.” As well as the pleasure and pride of performing, Corali’s work offers its members chances to forge relationships they might not otherwise make. “It’s a good opportunity [to work] with people who haven’t got disabilities,” says Ryan. “To trust and help one another as a team. Because you don’t [often] get a chance to work with other people.” To that end, Perry and Hay-Gordon have also invited friends from their network to work with Corali. “There’s a glass ceiling above a lot of artists, and what we can do is shatter that a bit,” says Hay-Gordon. “I think that’s where dance is going; big companies are going to have to start employing artists with disabilities. It’s too separate [now] and it doesn’t work.” Corali stands out as a company that doesn’t put any limits on the kinds of performances it can make, and also for the commitment of the dancers, most of whom have been performing together for nearly 20 years. The secret, Hassan says, is that: “We’re unique, we’re powerful, we understand each other. We know how to do things properly in a fun, creative way, and we’re never negative,” he says. For Hassan, dance is second nature. “I love to transform the way I move,” he says. “It opens up my vocabulary, it transforms my body, I just love moving in a completely different way to what I normally do.” People with disabilities who come to see Corali perform are inspired by seeing people like themselves on stage, notes Ryan. “Some people do get surprised because they don’t know what to expect.” she says. “If someone in the audience is shy or nervous, I make them laugh so they feel comfortable.” Sitwell was the subject of Thick &amp; Tight’s first piece a decade ago (she had tea with Schubert), and they thought she was the perfect subject to revisit with Corali. “Everyone here can do such amazing comedy work,” says Hay-Gordon, “but can also be incredibly touching and make audiences cry. There’s something about that balance … everyone’s going to show a different Edith Sitwell in this work.” “I can’t wait,” says Hassan. “I want to get to know her. I like going back through time, and there are people out there who’ve got so many stories to tell, just like us, and we want to understand where they’re coming from.” The Sitwell piece will be one of nine in Thick &amp; Tight’s new show. Others include encounters with Sid Vicious, Rasputin, Twiggy, and – that famous avant-garde duo – John Cage and Elaine Paige. Their performances are reliably outre – in an early piece, Hitler and Cath Kidston tyrannised the world with their imagined ideals – but Thick &amp; Tight don’t tone down their ideas for their Corali collaborations. “Absolutely not,” says Hay-Gordon, who is frequently found in drag. “If anything, it challenges us to make something even more interesting and explain it properly.” Being honest about who they are means everyone becomes more open-minded. “You see Danny doing these performances, wearing women’s shoes, and there’s nothing wrong with that,” says Ryan. “Give people respect.” She leans over to Hay-Gordon: “Well, you have got a nice pair of legs,” and the room erupts with laughter. Perry says that, through working with Corali, they’ve been learning about social models of disability, the way external factors prevent people from doing things, rather than their own abilities. “There can be an assumption that we want to not be disabled,” says Archdeacon, “that we want to be the same as other people.” But that’s not the case. Corali are not trying to ape non-disabled dancers, they’re bringing their unique selves to the stage. “We’re doing something that’s about difference, and, as Danny said, the dance world is waking up to how brilliant that difference can be.” “We are blessed for who we actually are,” says Hassan. “The experience, the knowledge, the importance, the value. What everyone has been saying here, we’re even more.” Thick &amp; Tight: Short &amp; Sweet is at the Barbican Centre: The Pit, London, 25 to 29 January.The Tories woke this morning to survey the wreckage in their own press, where they find the state of their party and its leader as trashed as No 10’s garden was reported to be after that 20 May bash. The few stalwarts praising the prime minister’s non-remorse today will be of small comfort to him, given their ranks include Ann Widdecombe and Patrick O’Flynn of the Express, while another of their ilk, the Telegraph’s Allison Pearson, has jumped ship altogether. “Never again will these idiots take us for fools,” she writes. However passionately some editors have backed Boris Johnson as their Brexit champion, even they realise that whatever outrageous untruths they have sold their readers in the past, there is a limit to how far they dare take them for fools. They know their readers balk at Johnson expecting us to believe he thought a party with booze, crisps and sausage rolls was a work event. The rage and pain of bereaved families gets full throttle across their pages because editors know that’s how their readers feel: each one of them remembers the emotional deprivations of their own lockdown. Editors dare not say it’s absurd that a 25-minute appearance at a boring office party should bring down a prime minister: they know this is personal to all of us. They don’t yet call for his head on a platter, but warn that’s where his blond mop will be if he doesn’t do whatever list of things they want: get a grip, cut tax, use Brexit to deregulate everything, abolish all Covid rules and so on. Like the party’s MPs, the Tory press weighs up the pros and cons of keeping Johnson, but the mood is tipping perilously against him. The jaw-dropping duplicity of the rightwing press matches the Tory MPs in their comically sudden discovery that Johnson is a rule-breaking sociopath. Who knew? Here’s the Mail with great acres of space given over to his “litany of lies” over all the years of his life, reprising his every (well-known) public and private disgrace. Well, wow! Watch the scramble as everyone tries to dissociate themselves from everything they always knew in the mealy-mouthed and long-delayed tweets of half-hearted support from his ministers. But Johnson was never the problem. He was only the symptom of what had become of the Conservative world that selected and boosted him. This is what the political poison of Brexit did to them, as the old party morphed into Ukip. A Tory Rip Van Winkle waking from decades of sleep to look round that cabinet table now would be aghast. An extraordinary, pinch-yourself moment came last night on Newsnight with the bizarre spectacle of Jacob Rees-Mogg, leader of the house (Rip would be agape), telling Kirsty Wark that the leader of the Scottish Tories, Douglas Ross, was only “a lightweight figure”. Ross calling for Johnson to resign is backed by the great majority of his Tory MSPs, facing May’s elections with the Westminster cabinet anathema north of the border. Since the Ukip take-over, the Conservatives stopped being the unionist party, cavalierly throwing the Scots and the Northern Irish under the wheels of their Brexit bus. This is save-our-skins time for each Tory MP facing local Labour and Liberal Democrat leaflets listing which sins they have voted for. Rees-Mogg may reckon no one but Johnson would give him a job. Rishi Sunak vanishing into deepest Devon, cancelling local press interviews yesterday, ranks with Johnson’s attempt to escape journalists by hiding in a fridge during the last election campaign. It may show Sunak’s political greenness that his disloyalty marked him down, splashed over a Tory press inclined to prefer Liz Truss. The Mail gives her a lovely story of her own today: “Liz: Let’s unleash the true potential of Brexit.” How little this ship of fools has learned from their last disastrous leadership selections. Brexit still boils their blood, though it no longer ranks as highly among voters, who are now more concerned with the pandemic and the economy. Johnson’s further plunges in ratings and a 10-point lead for Labour may concentrate their minds; Sunak’s polling has plummeted below zero, too – with his April cost-of-living crunch still to come. The Teflon is permanently scratched off the prime minister, leaving a pan where everything now sticks. Labour hopes he stays in the job for the next election, as Wes Streeting told Newsnight. He described Johnson as “unfit to govern” and called for his resignation, despite saying it was in Labour’s political interests for him to stay. Indeed, a damaged, untrusted and now ridiculed opponent could in theory be a better prospect than the Tory party yet again remodelling itself with a new leader. But a fresh start isn’t in them. Tory MPs and members are destined by their Ukip DNA to select one of their own kind. They are no wiser than they were when they made the disgracefully unpatriotic decision to foist a lying, cheating, self-obsessed scoundrel on the country, knowing his every fault and his full unfitness for office. They are most to blame. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistIt is one of the most inaccessible guesthouses in Britain, sitting on a tiny Hebridean island that is home to 15 people and a two-hour sail from the mainland. Undaunted, more than 100 people have inquired about running the place. Interest in taking over Tighard guesthouse on Canna, an island south-west of Skye that is 4.5 miles long and 1 mile wide, came from around the world. The island’s owners, the National Trust for Scotland (NTS), are now whittling those down to a longlist of 10 applicants. Meaning high house in Gaelic, Tighard sits on a hill with a commanding view over Canna’s shallow bay, a natural harbour that in the summer months can be crowded by yachts touring the inner Hebrides. The guesthouse has picture-postcard views of Rùm, framed in the distance by the mountains of Skye and the western Highlands, its skies patrolled by eagles and seabirds. But applicants have also been warned that living on Canna, which is part of the Small Isles archipelago that includes Eigg, can be challenging and lonely. Canna’s isolation, its small and close-knit Gaelic-speaking community, long winters and tempestuous weather means incomers need to be resilient and adaptable. Tighard, an Edwardian villa built in 1904, has only one private bedroom, ruling out couples with children. With only three ferries a week in the winter and four in summer – a service dependent on weather and the reliability of CalMac’s ageing ferry fleet – and three guest rooms to service in high season, the new leaseholders will be expected to provide breakfasts and dinners and share their living room with guests. Jim Whyteside, a spokesperson for NTS, said the trust had been “thrilled by the quality and diversity” of the applicants. “It comes down to two things. Firstly, the reality of island life, from getting supplies to getting a break from work, fitting in with the community and helping the community meet its aspirations,” he said. “People have to understand what they’re taking on. It is not an escape. You’re going to be working very hard. “Second, what can you bring to that community? There may be skills and other attributes it will value, because that’s very much part of becoming one with the community. Everyone is very serious about making sure that that can happen.” The 10 applicants have each been asked to produce a business case which will be scrutinised by NTS staff, before a shortlist is selected. Those shortlisted will then be taken to Canna for a tour and to meet the island’s community development trust, before hopefully moving in around Easter, in time for the summer season. The testing recruitment process was introduced after NTS oversaw disastrous attempts a decade ago to find new islanders to bolster Canna’s declining population, including one worldwide competition that attracted 350 applicants. Annoyed by strict rules restricting housebuilding on the island, previous incomers had been ill-prepared and had quit the island in anger, alleging they were misled about what was involved. In 2017, NTS changed tack and gave islanders a greater say over how Canna was run and its services were modernised. The island’s development trust is now building new homes for rent, has installed solar panels and a wind turbine, and hopes to double its population to about 30 permanent residents. It hopes, in time, to reopen its tiny school. In 2006, the school was the smallest in the UK, with just one pupil.The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack formally asked the Republican House minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, on Wednesday to cooperate with its inquiry into the 6 January insurrection, escalating the pressure on Donald Trump’s top allies in Congress. The select committee said in a letter to McCarthy that the panel was seeking details about his conversations with the Trump White House and the former president in the days leading up to and during the Capitol attack, as well as discussions in its aftermath. McCarthy quickly announced that he would not cooperate with the investigation, but the select committee’s request demonstrated its resolve to pursue testimony from the highest-ranking Republican in Congress as it examines potential criminal conduct by Trump. The denial of the select committee’s request also set the stage for a bitter political showdown. Congresswoman Liz Cheney, the Republican vice-chair of the panel, later refused to rule out issuing a subpoena for McCarthy to compel his testimony. “I wish that he were a brave and honorable man,” Cheney said of McCarthy to CNN. “He’s clearly trying to cover up what happened. He has an obligation to come forward and we’ll get to the truth.” Congressman Bennie Thompson, the chair of the select committee, said that McCarthy was of particular interest to investigators as he spoke to Trump directly while the former president’s supporters stormed the Capitol to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election win. The committee wrote to McCarthy on Tuesday as it seeks to understand Trump’s involvement in, and response to, the Capitol riots, a moment seen as the committee members demonstrating their resolve to examine potential criminal conduct by the former president. Thompson had said that the committee was, in the first instance, interested in McCarthy’s phone call to Trump on 6 January, during which he unsuccessfully begged the former president to call off the pro-Trump mob as they stormed the Capitol in his name. According to an account of that call presented at Trump’s second impeachment last year, Trump sided with the rioters and in refusing to take action, told McCarthy that they were evidently more upset about the election than the House Republican leader. “You have acknowledged speaking directly with the former president while the violence was underway on January 6,” Thompson wrote. “This information bears directly on Trump’s state of mind during the January 6 attack as the violence was underway.” The chairman said that House investigators wanted to ask McCarthy about why he still objected to Biden’s election certification even after the Capitol attack took place, and even though he appeared to recognize that Trump was responsible for the insurrection. “The select committee wishes to question you regarding communications you may have had with President Trump, President Trump’s legal team, Representative [Jim] Jordan, and others at the time on that topic,” Thompson wrote. The select committee’s request to McCarthy about his contacts with Jordan comes days after Jordan, another of Trump’s top allies on Capitol Hill, suggested that he would ignore a request for an interview he received from the panel in December. Thompson said that the committee was also seeking details about McCarthy’s conversations with Trump and Trump’s former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows before 6 January, suggesting an inquiry into what McCarthy knew of plans to stop Biden’s certification. Having already established that McCarthy had informed Trump and Meadows before 6 January that the plan to stop Biden’s certification would not work, investigators want to learn why they were still “so confident the election result would be overturned”, Thompson said. The Guardian first reported last week that the committee has in its possession messages turned over by Meadows and others suggesting the Trump White House coordinated with Republican lawmakers to stop Biden’s certification, according to sources familiar with the matter. Thompson said that the committee was also interested in McCarthy’s communications with Trump in the week after the Capitol attack, including the possibility that Trump could have faced a censure resolution, impeachment and removal under the 25th amendment. Thompson added that the panel was not interested in McCarthy’s political conversations with Trump when he visited the former president at Mar-a-Lago on 28 January, but was taking an interest in why his characterization of Trump’s culpability changed so dramatically. “Did President Trump or his representatives discuss or suggest what you should say publicly, during the impeachment trial (if called as a witness), or in any later investigation about your conversations with him on January 6?” Thompson said in the letter. The chairman also revealed for the first time that the select committee has contemporaneous messages showing McCarthy talked to Trump about his immediate resignation, among a number of other potential consequences he may have faced for inciting the Capitol attack. ‘The American people deserve to understand all the relevant details,” Thompson said, suggesting an interview in the first week of February.It used to be a rule of thumb that the less time someone had to wait for an online delivery, the more likely they were to commit to buying. But new ways of living and working mean that online norms are changing. For instance, next day delivery isn’t always optimum in a world of hybrid working that combines some days in the office and some days working from home. Assumptions and practices have been upended by the growth of online shopping as a result of the Covid pandemic. Research by Barclaycard found that shopping online proved popular throughout 2021, growing 63% since 2019 compared with face-to-face retail spending, which saw a smaller rise of 0.6%. As a leading global payment business, Barclaycard processes nearly £1 in every £3 spent using credit and debit cards in the UK. “Quick delivery is a modern expectation of shopping online,” says Nick Carroll, associate director of grocery and e-commerce research at Mintel. “This is something that the pandemic has only served to intensify.” But retailers increasingly need to consider when shoppers would really like their order, which isn’t the same as assuming they would like it as soon as possible. “Speed is important, but equally as important is choice,” says Carroll. “Not all products are required immediately, but all deliveries are desired when the customer is available to receive them. That is why alongside speed efficiencies we are seeing more businesses look to provide more accurate delivery information, from real time updates to shortened delivery windows. Indeed, 30% of shoppers now say that exact delivery slots would encourage them to shop with one retailer over another.” Paul Martin, head of retail at KPMG, says the key thing is to get better at knowing your customer: “It’s really important to understand who the customer is and why they are making a purchase decision. The big challenge is that most retailers don’t know enough about you as an individual consumer, and even if they do, they don’t always understand your shopping mission. That will be a big area of future investment, with all of the caveats around data protection.” One way to potentially gain more insights is through the digitisation of receipts, with products such as Barclays Digital Receipts. According to one survey, more than 11bn receipts are produced in the UK each year, but more than 90% are lost, damaged or discarded. As well as being costly and environmentally damaging, these receipts are a missed opportunity for businesses to gain valuable data and insight about who their customers are and how they shop. Once you better understand your customers, delivering on a customer’s specified date and during their desired time slot still requires speed – after all, efficiency begets timeliness. For an order to turn up quickly, every aspect of the transaction needs to run seamlessly: from the payment process via a gateway to locating the stock in the warehouse and getting it out for delivery. Or to use retailer parlance: first mile, which involves getting hold of the stock from factories; middle mile, the bit in the warehouse, where orders are picked; and last mile, when the goods are on their way to someone’s home. One way for retailers to speed up the process is to automate their warehouses and invest in robotics to get orders ready to ship more quickly, says Miya Knights, publisher of Retail Technology magazine. “We’re seeing robotic supply chain providers get lots of funding and grow incredibly quickly.” Ultimately, however, speedy deliveries are all about being efficient, especially during the crucial last-mile stage. “We are seeing greater investment in smaller, but closer-to-shopper fulfilment centres, cutting down last-mile times,” says Carroll. “Stores are also increasingly being used as ways to shorten last-mile delivery times, with grocery in particular embracing courier-based platform partners to achieve this since the pandemic hit.” Martin warns that the biggest challenges are usually expected in the final mile. “[Retailers] still need a delivery vehicle and a driver, and that is a fixed cost that is comparatively expensive. Using a third-party logistics fulfilment provider to service that final mile means handing over a very significant chunk of margin.” Pioneering online retailers have shaped customer expectations when it comes to online shopping. For example, “Amazon raised expectations, and rapid delivery has become a competitive differentiator,” says Knights. Another aspect retailers can get right more easily is to ensure the buying experience is simple for customers. A payment gateway should offer customers low-friction, user-friendly pathways to make easy, quick and secure payments. And this will ultimately help avoid abandoned shopping carts. As many as 70% are abandoned, according to research by the Baymard Institute, which analyses online user experiences. Not all of those will be lost purchases as some will be from people who were simply browsing or doing price comparisons. But a significant chunk of abandoned carts will still represent lost sales. Since the start of 2021, almost 4 million UK consumers have actively used open banking-enabled products, such as Barclays Bank Pay, which lets customers pay straight from their bank account, instead of using card details. The product can help to simplify the payment journey and reduce cart abandonment, by making it easy for shoppers to access their online bank account from either their mobile or their desktop computer to finish their transaction. Whether it’s the payment process or the logistics that lie behind delivery slots, it all comes back to tailoring your service to the customer. To find out how Barclaycard could help your business, click hereIt can sometimes feel as though shopping was simpler in the past. There were goods; there was cash; and – voilà! – a transaction. Now, with myriad ways to pay for something – from your smartphone to your smartwatch – having more choice can seem complicated. And it’s not just shoppers who feel bemused. According to the Office for National Statistics, online sales hit a record high of 38% of all retail spending last January, up from 20% in January 2020 before the first pandemic-related lockdowns. So it’s no surprise that businesses are thinking about payment systems – and how to make the process smoother. All businesses accepting electronic payments online, no matter how small, require the virtual equivalent of a credit and debit card reader to make that happen – a one-stop solution to handling virtual transactions, from online grocery shopping to selling a round in a pub via an app. In other words, they need what’s known as a payment gateway. As consumers who increasingly shop online, we’re mostly blissfully ignorant of the technology that makes this possible. However, for businesses it’s crucial to understand the importance of what’s going on behind the scenes of each transaction. “People don’t actually take much interest in the technology behind what’s happening,” says Jackie Allen, director of gateway product management at Barclaycard Business. “In the simplest terms, payment gateways are the technology that captures payment data from the cardholder and authorises that payment through the acquirer to the issuer. It all happens in milliseconds.” In essence, a payment gateway authorises credit card or direct payments processing for businesses, and ensures enough funds are available for the retailer to get paid. “As cardholders, we’re looking for convenience,” says Allen. “Payment gateways are important to [the retailer] because they have to make it easy for the cardholder to pay: whether that’s on a mobile phone, getting in and out of a taxi, shopping online or going into a store. Having a payment gateway enables merchants to provide a unified experience.” Research by Barclaycard shows that 44% of UK consumers will abandon a purchase if their preferred payment method isn’t available, and 58% say they would stop a purchase altogether if the checkout process is complicated. “If merchants [retailers] haven’t got a gateway or a webpage that is seamless to the consumer, you get cart abandonment – when a customer puts everything in their shopping basket and then goes: ‘I’ll go back to that later’,” says Allen. “Then you have a merchant that was expecting to sell goods and doesn’t.” Luckily, a range of associated products in the Barclaycard commerce platform can help merchants get a better handle on these problems, and can provide them with data that tells them what percentage of people abandon their online shopping carts. Sometimes, Allen says, merchants can be too cautious when it comes to fraud, which risks them losing business. “If the merchant has overly stringent fraud rules, we could give them the analysis that shows that this is resulting in declining genuine purchasers unnecessarily.” Transact, a product in the Barclaycard commerce platform, can help merchants fine tune their payments and filter out the fraud. It helps to confirm someone is who they say they are when inputting their card details, and can conduct a risk analysis to check if the shopper can pay. If the risk level is low, the transaction will skip strong customer authentication (SCA) checks, which can require customers to take extra steps to confirm their identity, and authorise the purchase. This can help to create a frictionless payment journey and reduce the risk of the shopping cart being abandoned. In March, retailers will have to implement SCA for card-based e-commerce transactions under rules from the Financial Conduct Authority. Tools like this are essential to merchants – but ultimately you need a payment gateway in order to benefit from them. Now that people aren’t just buying goods but are also buying “experiences”, payment gateways are more important than ever, says Allen. “If you go to the pub, you can order at the table with an app. That’s changing the online shopping experience. Paying with a stored card makes it easier and quicker to get your drinks served. It can potentially drive more loyalty to [the establishment] as well.” For both merchant and shopper, payment gateways really are as simple as opening your wallet to pay for something. “A merchant’s day job is selling goods,” says Allen. “They shouldn’t be worried about fraud or compliance or regulations. Payment gateways take a lot of pain away from the merchant.” To find out more about how payment gateways can create a frictionless experience for your customers, click hereIn retrospect, the first season of Cheer felt a little like the last good thing to happen to humanity. It blazed in out of nowhere in January 2020; a scrubbed-up, more accessible version of American football series Last Chance U, and effortlessly won over a world that didn’t know what was about to hit it. A documentary series about the world of competitive college cheerleading, it was not only spectacular to watch – brimming with sequences of young women being pinged miles into the air without a safety net – but packed full of heart. There was a joy to Cheer, and the grab bag of underdog stories it chose to tell. This week, the second series of Cheer dropped on Netflix and, well, the first season of Cheer still feels like the last good thing to happen to humanity. What a weird, unbalanced, curdled few hours of television this is. Just like the rest of the world, Cheer has spent the past two years growing shapeless and morose. It still qualifies as appointment TV, just don’t expect to actually enjoy any of it. Part of the issue is that world events conspired to break Cheer apart. You can get a sense of what the show was supposed to be like by sitting through its first four episodes. They begin where the last season ended, in a cavalcade of life-changing success. The Navarro College cheer squad has won the prestigious nationals at Daytona Beach and dominate all they survey. What’s more, their Netflix show has turned the entire squad into overnight celebrities, and everyone wants a piece of them. They meet Ellen! They hang out with Oprah! They spend every free moment recording Cameo videos for $50 a pop! The message seems to be: these kids have reached the top, but can they retain their focus long enough to stay there? Here’s the thing: we never find out. And that’s because – after watching the squad train and fight and sweat and vomit in preparation for the next set of nationals – Covid comes sweeping into town and everything gets shut down. Daytona Beach. Navarro. Cheer production. Everything. It all comes screeching to a halt, robbing the show of any semblance of a neat arc. And so, for the season’s final four episodes, we begin anew. We have skipped a year and Navarro are in training for the 2021 nationals. By necessity, this involves a heavy personnel change. Some of the show’s best-loved characters have now finished college and left without a proper goodbye, and in their place are a clutch of bright young things who never quite get the time to properly familiarise themselves. To offset this, the producers smartly devote a portion of time to Trinity Valley Community College, the raggedy neighbouring upstarts who see themselves as Rocky Balboa to Navarro’s Netflix-bloated Ivan Drago. It means that, when the nationals do finally take place, you find yourself with torn allegiances. It isn’t the neatest way to go about things, but as a necessary workaround it is pretty effective. But the reason you’ll watch Cheer this year is the episode that sits between these two halves. Entitled Jerry, it is as gut-wrenching an hour of television as you are ever likely to see. If you happened to follow the news at the time, you will know that season one’s breakout star Jerry Harris – a joyful effervescent figure whose charismatic interjections on Cheer made him a prime candidate for mainstream fame – was arrested in September 2020, accused of production of child pornography; then, when more teens came forward, soliciting sex and explicit photos from minors. He has pleaded not guilty to the charges. This is the episode where the show attempts to deal with it all. For the most part, it succeeds. Much of the hour is handed over to the alleged victims; two twins who were 13 years old when they first met Harris. They, and their devastated mother, patiently detail how Harris introduced himself to them, what he asked them to do, and the uphill struggle they faced getting anybody to believe them. It is a profoundly upsetting thing to watch, due to the predatory nature of the allegations and the culture of silence when it comes to child abuse in the sport. This is where the episode falls down. It is long on testimonies from Navarro alumni who are shocked that a bad apple like Harris could have slipped through the cracks, but the most rudimentary Googling will reveal that he is far from alone. Just months after his arrest, two more Navarro figures were also arrested. One of them, Robert Joseph Scianna Jr, pleaded guilty to charges of indecency with a child. This hints at something grotesquely institutional, and the episode could have had much more impact by digging just that bit deeper. And, in viewing terms, the episode wildly unbalances the season. By not dealing with Jerry Harris upfront, you feel as though Cheer wants to spend four hours ignoring the elephant in the room. And then, once it’s done, diving straight back into the trivial world of cheerleading can’t help but feel crass. Should it return, we can hope that season three of Cheer will stay on the tracks and recover some of its old magic. But for now, it has given us a dark and knotty show for a dark and knotty time. It isn’t particularly pleasant, but there’s still value in it.Chris Wood has readily admitted he never envisaged a club triggering the £25m release clause in his contract at Burnley but, once Newcastle United activated it, he felt powerless to say no to the Saudi Arabian-controlled club. “I knew the clause was sitting there but I don’t think anyone ever thought it would ever be triggered,” said the New Zealand striker, hours after becoming the most expensive 30-year-old signing in Premier League history. “But that’s the way football can be sometimes … You never know, in six months’ time you might look back and say: ‘That was a great deal.’” Burnley, and their manager Sean Dyche, most definitely did not want to sell Wood to a key Premier League relegation rival and, judging by the current mood at Turf Moor, he may not receive the warmest of welcomes when Newcastle visit on the final day of the season. “For me, there’s no bad blood,” Wood said. “It wasn’t an easy decision and, to be honest, I wish I’d left when Burnley were further up the league but that’s just how football is sometimes. I spent four and a half years great years at Burnley. Every single year I really enjoyed myself there. My teammates, the staff and the club as a whole were fantastic. “I have nothing but great memories of Burnley but it was a case that this was a massive opportunity at a massive club and something I couldn’t turn down. It’s a great opportunity for me.” Burnley and Newcastle are level on 11 points in 18th and 19th place respectively but Dyche’s team hold two games in hand. “I’m only thinking about one thing and and that’s fighting hard to stay in this league with Newcastle,” said Wood after signing a two-and-a-half year deal. “I think we’ve got more than enough quality but we need to start showing that on the pitch and getting [positive] results sooner rather than later. “I’m under no illusions Newcastle is going to be a big challenge for me but I know it can be potentially great for the club and for me. I’m a firm believer that you have to get out of your comfort zone to achieve greatness – or some sort of great footballing talent.” Wood becomes Eddie Howe’s second signing behind Kieran Trippier, and the Newcastle manager is now hoping Sevilla accept his board’s renewed bid for their Brazilian central defender Diego Carlos. Newcastle are planning to fly to Saudi Arabia for a warm-weather training camp after their game at Leeds 22 January because they have a break until their next game at home to Everton on 8 February.Some people refer to it as the “new flex”. Others liken it to “shapeshifting”. Whatever you call it, the retail industry has had to take the standard notions of business agility to a whole new level – with many having to reinvent themselves virtually overnight as a result of the lockdowns. At the start of a new year, how can businesses capitalise on what they’ve learned? In an era where change often feels like it’s the only constant, retailers have come to realise that they require more resilient systems that enable their organisations to shapeshift without unravelling – whether it’s accelerating their digital transformation, adopting rapidly scalable logistics, flicking between local and global sales, or offering goods and services across different platforms in-person or digitally. For instance, having access to a mixture of small and large suppliers means businesses can be more responsive to changes in supply and demand. Likewise, having a robust and flexible payment system is essential. “[During the pandemic], we saw unprecedented change for our businesses, and many of them have had to evolve their business models significantly to continue to survive,” says Linda Weston, head of core product at Barclaycard Business. “For many customers, that has been about transitioning their businesses from being bricks and mortar, face-to-face type organisations to transacting more in a digital environment.” She notes that these transformations aren’t just about striving to maintain revenues in the midst of a crisis, but also about growing your customer base. Thanks to the acceleration of e-commerce, retailers have been able to look beyond their prior horizons, entering overseas markets and expanding into new territories. “There has been a huge growth of businesses moving online and also looking to attract new customers outside of their existing customer base – whether that’s different sectors or different geographies,” says Weston. “It can be a real eye-opener once you’re in that e-commerce environment. Especially if you sell something unique, you can attract customers from such a broad demographic, and the world is your oyster.” Expanding horizons and upping your online game Small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), in particular, have much to gain from upping their online game. “Business owners have realised that generating an e-commerce business is easier than they thought, and it allows them to consider their cross-border capability,” says Weston. However, while it’s exciting to realise the new possibilities and potentials of cross-border e-commerce trade, it can be perilous without good advice and knowhow. Nick Maynard, head of research at financial and payment technologies analysts Juniper Research, urges those making the leap to cross-border trading to “take the time to understand their target markets”. He says: “Payment methods vary drastically across different geographies, so ensuring that they accept the methods popular in these areas is essential. “Also, an understanding of fraud trends will ensure that sellers can mitigate the most common fraud methods in the target market. A robust gateway with local experience can help resolve these issues and is increasingly vital as e-commerce becomes more globalised.” Mastering foreign exchange and improving transparency The UK e-commerce trade association IMRG reported a 57% year-on-year increase in outbound e-commerce sales from the UK in 2020. But it can be all too easy for businesses to lose revenue from cross-border card payments because of currency fluctuations. To assist, Barclaycard Business has introduced Multicurrency: an integrated foreign exchange (FX) solution that enables customers to accept payments quickly and efficiently in more than 100 currencies. “One of the key things businesses need to manage if they are selling abroad is currency fluctuation, so they don’t end up out of pocket,” says Weston. “If the FX suddenly changes, they could potentially be operating at a loss. “Barclaycard Multicurrency provides our customers, all of whom depend on cashflow, with greater financial certainty. For example, it allows them to accept payments in the cardholder’s local currency and settle in pound sterling. Moreover, they can fix the exchange rate for one or seven days, so they have clarity of what funds they will receive for sales and adjust their price accordingly.” Weston points out that Barclaycard Multicurrency doesn’t require any additional integration on the merchant’s side and says that Barclaycard payment gateway customers could also take advantage of e-commerce dynamic currency conversion (eDDC). This product enables purchasers with cards issued overseas to choose whether they’d prefer to pay you in their local currency – with the listed price automatically applying relevant foreign exchange rates and fees. “Transparency for online consumers is hugely important,” Weston adds. “The earlier you can give transparency of the transaction cost in the customer checkout journey, the higher the conversion rate.” In a world where businesses use both bricks and clicks – and also need to shapeshift to keep pace with change and consumer expectations – offering transparency and having the confidence of an innovative, trusted and secure payment partner such as Barclaycard is business-critical. To find out how Barclaycard could help your business with a range of physical and virtual payment solutions, click hereAs consumers, we have increasingly grown more accustomed to shopping online – but we’ve also become more adept at it. Which means it isn’t enough for retailers to just cater for e-commerce consumers – they also need to take into account their savviness. “What the pandemic has done is accelerate the journey that we were already on,” says Kirsty Morris, managing director of specialist sales at Barclaycard Business. “If you look at the past 10 years, it’s not hard to see a shift in consumer behaviour toward being much more comfortable shopping online.” For businesses, keeping both new and old e-commerce customers happy is vital for retaining their custom. As such, the e-commerce space has become a “real battleground” over the past 18 months, says Morris, as it is “forcing retailers to create even better online experiences”. Clunky websites are likely to make online shoppers run a virtual mile, whereas slick user experiences could win their loyalty. “There is genuine value, for a consumer, in having a really nice experience,” says Morris. “If I have a positive experience when I first come to a website, I might not even bother looking elsewhere.” Fast, frictionless payments – one-click payment processes that minimise purchase barriers, such as the need to enter card details – are also a must for increasingly demanding e-commerce customers. “The most successful retailers, going back over the past five or 10 years, are the ones where payment is slick,” says Morris. Payment solutions need to create a simple checkout experience for customers by storing card details securely for future frictionless payments. Morris says: “Mobile handset manufacturers have done a massive amount in this space as well to make the handset better and the interface better, so that it stores your card details in a secure way.” Consumers also expect delivery options that will suit their lifestyle – such as home delivery for home workers, or click and collect for those working from the office. It’s all part of the personalised experience people now want from online retailers. “If I’ve shopped with you before, I expect to be able to come back and you should know me, you should know what I want, and you should know how I want to pay,” says Morris. It doesn’t matter what sales channel a customer uses; they’ll expect the same high-quality, personalised experience regardless. That’s because, from a consumer’s perspective: “I don’t care if I’m shopping with you online on a desktop computer or on my phone, or if I’m on a phone shopping with you in a store,” says Morris. “It’s just my shopping experience with you, Mr Retailer, and you should be able to handle that.” As well as nudging more people to shop online, the pandemic also encouraged manufacturers to offer direct-to-consumer sales. In fact, research by Barclays shows that 57% of consumers are now choosing to buy directly from manufacturers, citing better prices and better service as factors in their decision. The most frequently bought items through the “direct approach” are clothes (39%), electronics (30%), and food and drink (27%), as well as larger items such as household appliances (24%) and furniture (22%). Shoppers are increasingly comfortable buying goods from overseas, too, providing they know they will receive them in a reasonable time frame and delivery doesn’t cost a small fortune. Solutions such as Barclaycard Multicurrency have helped to enable this shift by allowing more businesses to accept payments from cardholders in their local currency. “Regardless of Brexit, the online transacting space is easier in many ways than it’s ever been,” says Morris. Savvy online shoppers are also using comparison sites and other tools to nab the best deals. Thanks to the wealth of reviews and product videos now available, customers are increasingly comfortable researching and buying big-ticket items too – though they may want the option to view something in store before making a purchase. However, retailers shouldn’t bank on a mass return to the high street. “It’s not like stores reopened and everybody rushed back in,” says Morris. “We saw people wanting to go shopping in a physical environment, definitely. But it wasn’t a cliff-edge ‘I’m done with online, it was rubbish, I can’t wait to go back in-store’.” So, in a more competitive online space, how else can retailers further differentiate themselves from their rivals? One way is through their loyalty schemes, says Morris. Barclaycard’s commerce platform helps to build other digital connections between consumers and retailers. Retailers could, for example, offer discounts via the Barclays mobile banking app, or add digital receipts and loyalty points to a customer’s Barclays wallet. These integrations will ultimately make life easier for online shoppers and, together with slicker, more personalised experiences, ensure that even the savviest of them become loyal customers. To find out more about how Barclaycard could help your business with online payment solutions, click hereThe retail industry has undergone a radical transformation. Even before the Covid pandemic, the shift to e-commerce was completely reshaping how the industry operates and how customers shop. But lockdowns made these shifts more rapid and seismic, forcing businesses and consumers to shop online at record levels. The pandemic also expedited the adoption of in-store contactless payments. Research from UK Finance, which represents the banking and finance industry, found that 27% of all payments in 2020 were contactless, up from 7% five years ago. While people have been talking about the shift to e-commerce for decades, we are now getting a much more definitive and enduring sense of what that transformation actually looks like, and what it means for retail businesses. “Finally, cash is no longer king,” says Jacob Rider, senior programme manager at Projective, a financial business, technology and innovation consulting firm. “Notes and coins went out of widespread use during the pandemic, while payments innovation in the contactless space – and the relaxing of regulations allowing the upping of limits – means digital and contactless payment with card or phone, or wear[able] tech, is now the preferred method of payment for many.” This means that trust is now of paramount importance – for both retailers and consumers alike. “Businesses are frantically working on recovering from the pandemic disruption, and they need to instil trust,” says Harshna Cayley, managing director, gateway products at Barclaycard Business. “Comfort and security is top of mind for a range of businesses, whether large or small.” Another effect of these trends is the way physical and online retail shopping have increasingly blended into one experience. However customers choose to shop, they expect the benefits of both approaches. For instance, some might wish to order online and then pick up in store, or they want to try out products in store and then have the purchase fulfilled online. Alternatively, they might expect their in-person shopping experiences to be more personalised. Retailers have often found themselves having to shapeshift in response to this demand for seamlessness and ease – and key to this are so-called omnichannel payments systems, which allow retailers to offer near-frictionless online payments regardless of whether customers are shopping in person, online or via mobile. Analysts suggest that the ability to offer frictionless payments is critical in business. “A flawless digital experience is now required to compete,” says Rider. “Brands need to innovate again if they want a customer payments experience advantage.” For example, regardless of how smoothly a customer progresses on their e-commerce purchasing journey – browsing, comparing and choosing an item – it is likely to come to a shuddering halt if the payment experience is challenging. According to Barclaycard research, £39bn worth of online shopping baskets have been abandoned since the start of the pandemic. Typical reasons for customers abandoning their cart include delivery fees, concerns about cybersecurity, and the absence of their chosen payment method. These stats don’t surprise Nick Maynard, head of research at Juniper Research, which specialises in financial and payment technologies. “Generally, friction is the main reason for cart abandonment,” he says. “This can come in many shapes or forms, including the inability to use a preferred payment method, poor design, or onerous security steps.” According to Cayley, a robust payment gateway is crucial for online retailers. A payment gateway is essentially a communication layer that sends payment information securely from the acquirer to the customer’s issuing bank, and back again. “Barclaycard payment gateway seamlessly connects the customer’s website with our payment system,” she says. “Then it securely captures and encrypts transactions, passing the necessary information between the end customer, the merchant, and the acquiring bank.” She notes that Barclaycard payment gateway is easy to integrate and scales depending on business needs, adding that it can improve the customer experience while helping companies comply with regulations and meet their legal obligations. Recent global events have brought into focus other shifts in the e-commerce landscape, such as the entry of more manufacturers into the direct-to-consumer retail space. Likewise, international sales have become an increasingly important way for retailers to plug the gaps left by supply chain problems and the decline of bricks and mortar trading. In a sense, omnichannel payments are evolving into omnipresent experiences and, as such, we can expect further rapid developments in this space, according to Jeroen Hölscher, head of global payments and cards practice at Capgemini, an IT services and consulting company. “Customers and businesses are undergoing a radical shift to digital wallets, mobile payments, virtual cards and other advanced payment solutions, which offer feature-rich, hyper-personalised digital payments experience,” he says. “Already, digital wallets are one of the most preferred payment methods for e-commerce purchases. Global e-commerce market sales are predicted to surpass $7tn (£5tn) by 2024, and digital wallets are expected to account for more than 50% of all the e-commerce payments.” More recently, e-commerce merchants were once again buoyed up by Black Friday last year, with the number of payments made via Barclaycard up by 23% between midnight and 5pm compared with the same period in 2020, and up 2.4% on 2019. “The prize for retailers is huge, with the bounce-back of the economy and consumers looking to spend,” says Cayley. “There is a massive opportunity to drive e-commerce.” Find out how your business can benefit from quick and frictionless online payments hereThe end of last year was instructive for retailers. The months of October to December have traditionally been retail’s golden quarter, covering the shopping periods of Black Friday and Christmas. But due to the pandemic, the last two golden quarters have been like no other. As well as facing a raft of new practical issues when it came to shopping, consumers and merchants alike re-evaluated how they wanted to live, work and shop in the future. There are valuable lessons for merchants to learn from the experience. Rob Cameron, CEO of Barclaycard Business, is ideally placed to offer insights into the consumer trends that have emerged and how they will continue to evolve. Digital is here to stay The biggest retail trend of the past 18 months has been the huge conversion to digital. “I’ve heard people say it moved us up five years,” says Cameron. “But it’s more than that.” In fact, according to a report by PwC, we saw “seven years of online growth in seven weeks”. The widespread closure of physical stores – and health concerns around using those that remained open – went beyond just accelerating the growth of e-commerce by changing the behaviour of consumers who were otherwise dragging their heels with the move to digital. “There was a set of the population who were never going to order online groceries, groups who were never going to get used to shopping online, and those who are used to using cash,” says Cameron. “But some changes that were brought about during the pandemic lasted long enough to permanently change behaviour. “It has structurally changed how consumers will shop, made them more digitally savvy, more aware of their online options.” Contactless payment is essential Now more digitally savvy consumers increasingly expect a seamless experience and frictionless transactions – and retailers who are not agile enough to respond will lose out. According to a 2020 report by Barclaycard Business, 58% of UK consumers will abandon a purchase if the online checkout process is complicated, while 44% will ditch buying something if they’re not able to use their preferred payment method. The demand for a seamless experience when paying, and for more payment options, extends to bricks and mortar retail, too. Contactless payments – which were introduced in the UK by Barclaycard in 2007 – have soared since spring 2020, accounting for 80% of eligible consumer transactions up to the value of £45 passing through the Barclaycard payment system. But why is contactless so popular? Well, it offers faster transactions as well as being more hygienic – crucial during the height of the pandemic. As Cameron points out, tapping a card is “better than touching a physical pin pad after 50 people before you” – despite best efforts to keep card readers clean, it gives customers peace of mind. Cameron is encouraging retailers to embrace the higher contactless payment limit of £100 that replaced the £45 limit. “It’s a great opportunity to take friction out of the purchase experience,” he says. This is especially the case in busy stores where queues can quickly build up – contactless payments are, on average, seven seconds faster compared with chip and pin and 15 seconds faster compared with cash. Imagine it from a customer’s perspective: “The faster that line moves through, the more likely you are to have a good experience and want to come back.” Speed at the checkout will often avoid shoppers going elsewhere. Offer payment choices at checkout Contactless is not the only payment technology that has become more important since the pandemic began. “What we’ve seen is that merchants and consumers want choice at the checkout,” says Cameron. “And open banking is one of the choices.” Open banking offers benefits to both parties in a transaction. It’s essentially akin to a customer transferring the money directly from their current account, which provides potential savings to merchants and offers the consumer more protection than a bank transfer. “You don’t have to exchange sort code and account details,” says Cameron, and the consumer protection levels are similar to those governing payments by card. Barclaycard’s open banking system is called Barclays Bank Pay, which was designed in partnership with a group of diverse UK merchants and through customer testing – the first merchants are just starting to turn it on. Cameron explains: “There’s an element of consumer protection if a retailer becomes insolvent and does not fulfil the order.” Understand the benefits for your business For the merchant, the rewards for open banking are even greater. Using this system, businesses avoid card processing fees, which makes a noticeable difference to margins, particularly on big-ticket items. “In larger transaction size, there is a price advantage to the retailer,” says Cameron. “[It’s a] lower-cost payment method that offers a robust experience.” The boom in e-commerce that was accelerated by the pandemic encouraged shrewd retailers to explore different payment choices. “Merchants have become a lot savvier. With so much business moving online, they started looking at their checkout pages and really optimising,” says Cameron. “They’re also now taking into account cost and conversion rates.” The result is a rise in the number of retailers accepting digital wallets as a payment method. “We’ve seen Apple Pay, in particular, grow in leaps and bounds from a lower base than some of the other more established wallets,” says Cameron. “It has grown quickly because there’s no cost to retailers. “Consumers will notice they’re increasingly being offered the option of Apple Pay or Google Pay, and that’s because retailers realise they deliver a great customer experience, and are no more expensive to them than accepting a card payment.” Create a bridge between online and in-store Retailers can accept digital wallets for payments online and in-store. Finding more ways to link these spheres is “definitely a trend”, says Cameron. “That bridging is going to be really critical for smart retailers.” Rather than treating digital and physical as separate siloes, merchants who operate in the two environments “need [solutions] for encouraging customers to remain loyal by opting for the omnichannel experience”, he continues. “Their most profitable customers will shop through both. Click and collect is a terrific way for retailers to get consumers that understand their website and web inventory to then go into the store and experience the store environment and the merchandising in the store, because they can attract different elements of spend.” To create this bridge, retailers need data – and data is something that Barclaycard Business can provide. “Our access to data is unique in the market,” says Cameron, attributing the company’s success in the payments field to “having great technical capabilities in combination with our data to optimise transactions. We have this amazing pool of data as a result of being the largest payment processor in the country.” Indeed, Barclaycard processes £1 in every £3 spent on cards in the UK. Meanwhile, the number of payments via Barclaycard on Black Friday last year were up by 23% between midnight and 5pm compared with the same period in 2020, and up 2.4% on 2019. The kinds of insights that can be gleaned from these volumes are increasingly essential to give retailers the edge they need in a world where retail norms are changing so rapidly. Find out how Barclaycard could help your business benefit from these digital trends hereHumanitarian organisations in the Tigray region of northern Ethiopia are running perilously low on food and fuel stocks as an intensified wave of airstrikes further hampers a threadbare aid effort already stymied by lack of access. In what it calls a de facto blockade, the UN says fighting between Tigrayan rebels and forces loyal to the Ethiopian government has rendered the main supply route into the war-torn region unusable since mid-December. Diminishing supplies of fuel are causing particular concern as, without sufficient supplies, humanitarian workers are unable to distribute already meagre food stocks to a region where hundreds of thousands of people are thought to be living in famine-like conditions. The UN says it needs to distribute basic food supplies to 870,000 people in Tigray every week to reach 5.2 million in a six-week cycle. It says, however, that it only has enough food in the region for 200,000 people, and there is not enough fuel to deliver even that. As of Monday, the UN said its food partners had less than 7,000 litres of fuel left in Tigray, excluding contingency stock. To deliver the food supplies it would require 60,000 litres. An aid worker said: “We need 90 trucks of food every day and another 10 trucks of other supplies every day. So that’s 100 trucks every day. We haven’t had that since July.” Since mid-December, when the road from Semera in the neighbouring Afar region to the Tigrayan capital, Mekelle, became unusable, even that trickle of supplies has dried up. Claire Nevill, WFP’s spokesperson in Ethiopia, said: “WFP hasn’t been able to get humanitarian supplies into Tigray since mid-December and our food and fuel stocks are running perilously low. We’ve already had to scale down food distributions to the communities and prioritise remaining fuel stocks for delivering urgently needed nutrition treatment for children. “We need guarantees from all parties to the conflict of safe and secure humanitarian corridors via all routes into the region immediately, so supplies can flow in and reach millions in need of life-saving assistance at scale.” Aid workers say the shortage of fuel is also further impeding healthcare services, which are already extremely stretched because of a lack of supplies. A measles vaccination programme for children under five, for example, will have severe limitations, one humanitarian worker said, because staff will be unable to travel to rural areas. Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director general of the World Health Organization, said on Wednesday he was deeply concerned about the deadly combined effect of airstrikes and a lack of medicine and food on the civilian population of Tigray. “There is a blatant measure that’s being taken – a blockade and siege – for more than a year, [affecting] 7 million people, and since especially July, no medication was allowed from WHO. None whatsoever,” said Tedros, himself from the northern Ethiopian region. “Nowhere in the world are we witnessing hell like in Tigray,” he said. Dr Mike Ryan, executive director of the WHO health emergencies programme, said it was an “insult to our humanity, to allow a situation like this to continue, to allow no access, zero access”. Since the prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, ordered military action in Tigray in November 2020, the conflict has been marked by accusations of widespread human rights abuses, some of which the UN has said may amount to war crimes. On Thursday the Norwegian committee that awards the Nobel peace prize issued a very rare admonition to Abiy, who won in 2019 in part for making peace with neighbouring Eritrea. “Abiy Ahmed has a special responsibility to end the conflict and contribute to peace,” the committee said. “It is unacceptable that humanitarian aid is not emerging to a sufficient degree.” As the fighting has spread, so too has the humanitarian strife, with the number of people classed as “food insecure” in the region of Amhara, south-west of Tigray, doubling, from 1.5 million in June to an estimated 3.7 million now. In recent days repeated airstrikes are believed to have resulted in the highest civilian casualties since October, with more than 70 people killed in multiple strikes so far this year, according to medical and aid workers. A strike on a refugee camp on 5 January reportedly killed three Eritreans, two of them children, while a strike on a flour mill in Mai Tsebri on Monday killed 17, mostly women. On 7 January a night-time drone strike on a camp for internally displaced people in Dedebit killed at least 56 people, injuring dozens more, aid workers and medical staff said. The Ethiopian government has previously denied targeting civilians. The Dedebit airstrike came just hours after Abiy was credited with making a gesture towards peace by releasing several Tigrayan political prisoners. Gezahegn Kebede Gebrehana, the country director of Oxfam in Ethiopia, said: “We are alarmed by the continued reported deaths of unarmed people in the northern Ethiopia conflict. The continued violence means that humanitarian agencies in northern Ethiopia are unable to provide lifesaving assistance to the best of their abilities. “Oxfam calls on all parties to de-escalate the conflict, prioritise the safety of civilians, re-establish basic and adequate public services, and allow communities in affected areas to safely access available assistance and resources to survive and rebuild their lives.” • This article was amended on 14 January 2022 to replace a recently taken picture of displaced people encamped in the Afar region of Ethiopia, with one showing people in the Tigray region, the subject of the story. The Tigray photo dates from March 2021 because access to this area is severely limited.TURF WOR Newcastle United unveiled their second purchase of the January transfer window on Thursday morning and for the many fans hoping to see the club – who recently swapped one tyrannical ownership regime for a far more unsavoury one – slide out of the Premier League it must seem disappointingly shrewd. In signing Chris Wood for £25m from Burnley, Newcastle have not only got themselves a grafter who is generally good for 10 or more goals a season, but also weakened direct relegation rivals who are believed to be spitting feathers at the loss of a striker who still has at least seven goals left in his account for the current campaign. While we can only speculate as to how apoplectic with spittle-flecked rage most Newcastle fans would have been if Steve Bruce had spent this much to bring somebody as unfashionable as Wood to St James’ Park under the previous administration, many seem to be reserving their ire for the naysayers on social media disgraces who say the 30-year-old could scarcely be less box-office if he changed his name by deed poll to Hudson Hawk. As things stand, the transfer certainly constitutes “a good signing” in so far as Newcastle wanted Wood and have now got Wood, and with that half of the battle won, only time and results will tell if he was worth a fee that might seem a lot of money to your cash-strapped Fiver. While Burnley manager Sean Dyche is understood to be furious that Wood has not only left Burnley but signed for fellow strugglers, it had been widely reported the club had no option but to sell because a release clause in his contract had been triggered by their canny rivals. In the past two days, however, TalkSport sidekick Simon Jordan has claimed he has it on good authority said clause only related to summer transfers, a state of affairs that – if true – would leave Burnley’s hierarchy facing potentially tricky questions from their fans. “I don’t actually know the wording or anything like that,” knocked Wood. “I knew it had been sitting in there from the day that we agreed a new deal two-and-a-half years ago, but my agents know more about that and that side of it. I just get on playing football. I don’t really worry about what’s in the contract and that sort of thing.” It was the correct answer from a man who may receive a less-than-warm welcome when he returns to Turf Moor for what could prove to be quite the crucial final game of the season. For now though, Wood will be rapturously received as the latest in a long line of potential new messiahs when he runs out to face Watford at St James’ Park in another six-pointer on Saturday afternoon. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Paul Doyle from 7.45pm for hot Milk Cup MBM coverage of Liverpool 3-1 Arsenal. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I’ll not enter a war of words with anyone. The club don’t deserve that, the fans don’t deserve that and to be honest, I don’t feel I deserve that … Sometimes it only takes one person from outside to destroy a beautiful love affair” – Lucas Digne joins Aston Villa from Everton, but can’t quite heed his own advice with a dig at Rafa Benítez. FIVER LETTERS “Sad to see the farcical scenes in the Afcon match between Tunisia and Mali, with the referee accidentally blowing for an early finish to proceedings, but presumably this creates mixed feelings for The Fiver? On the one hand this is sub-standard officiating which is creating more column inches than the actual football. But conversely, The Fiver will appreciate its contribution to Stop Football and probably admit to having halted proceedings early itself (ie submitting a half-baked Fiver to The Man at 1.45pm) in order to get down the boozer by mid-afternoon?” – Paul Richmond [it was a work event – Fiver Ed]. “Now, hold on. A rampant Fulham just put seven goals past Reading, becoming the first English team since 1895-96 (yes, that’s an eight) to win two away games by seven or more goals in the same season, and the video you’re linking to is … two disallowed goals from 2011’s Andy Carroll, one of them so plainly offside the keeper didn’t even bother with it (yesterday’s News, Bits and Bobs)? What gives, Fiver?” – Josh Herman [let’s just see what Sue Gray says – Fiver Ed]. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Paul Richmond. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Tunisia have well and truly got the funk on after ref Janny Sikazwe twice managed to blow early for full-time against Mali. “The players were taking ice baths for 35 minutes before they were called back,” sniffed Tunisia’s coach, Mondher Kebaier. “I’ve been coaching for a long time [and] never seen anything like it. Even the fourth official was preparing to lift the board [to show how many minutes of injury time] and then the whistle was blown … The referee’s decision is inexplicable; I can’t understand how he reached it. We’ll see what comes of it.” Barcelona are trying to work out how they let slip a place in the $panish $uper Cup final, staged in Saudi Arabia for purely benevolent reasons, after losing 3-2 against Real Madrid. “We had it in our hands,” sighed Xavi. “We dominated for most of the game but we still lack experience, patience and effectiveness.” Arsenal fancy a loan of Juventus midfielder Arthur Melo. Steph Houghton is staying at Manchester City after extending her contract for an undisclosed period. And booted by Norwich in November, Daniel Farke has bounced back as manager of Russian outfit Krasnodar. “Many decisions we have accepted in the past by relying on instinct, this time a positive feeling came from the beginning,” he cheered. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get your listening gear around the latest Football Weekly Extra podcast. STILL WANT MORE? Philippe Coutinho has endured a miserable few years since leaving Liverpool, but can he rediscover himself at Villa? Sid Lowe shares his thoughts on the matter. Cambridge United not only struck a blow for League One last weekend, but also made Max Rushden very happy. Here he is on the experience of watching your team from the other side of the world. People can’t be trusted to behave at the best of times, never mind when they’re on a pitch, and as a result, finding people to referee is becoming increasingly difficult. Jacob Tate shares his experiences. “I am a monster,” says Alexis Sánchez to the unanimous agreement of Manchester United fans. Here’s Nicky Bandini on his decisive goal in Inter’s Supercoppa win. Kyogo Furuhashi has been a Queen’s Celtic revelation, and Ange Postecoglu has signed three more Japanese stars. John Duerden wonders if we’re seeing the beginning of a trend. Chelsea are into the Carling Cup final after easily seeing off Spurs. Here’s Barney Ronay on Jorginho and Matteo Kovacic, the frictionless axis that made it happen. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! LIVE NOW!Geva Mentor has warned England’s Roses not to read too much into Australia’s lack of international action or their new-look squad before the start of the Netball Quad Series this weekend. Excitement has been rising in the buildup to the first Quad Series for three years with the Diamonds travelling to the UK with a new head coach, Stacey Marinkovich, alongside a handful of new caps and a lack of international gametime over the past two years. But Mentor, the 37-year-old former England captain who has played in Australia for nearly a decade, believes this could make the Australians even more dangerous when the five-day, four-nation tournament gets under way at London’s Copper Box on Saturday. “The team that’s unexpected is a lethal team,” she says. “Every single player in the Diamond side are elite at what they do. This is probably the first time the Diamonds have brought a team that has got so much versatility.” However, Mentor does add a caveat. “Yes, individually their team is really strong but together, how does that fit gel?” England, New Zealand and South Africa will all be wondering. Usually, Australia would be a sure bet to win the Quad Series; even though they have lost the Commonwealth and World Cup titles in the past four years, they did so by just one goal each time. They are a relatively unknown quantity this time out, so it is the hosts who find themselves going into the tournament as favourites thanks to their recent wins over Jamaica and New Zealand. It is a position unfamiliar not only to the Roses, who until their breakthrough gold at the 2018 Commonwealth Games were regularly thrashed by the teams either side of the Tasman, but also to Mentor, who first donned England colours back in 2001. How the Roses will fare with the pressure of being top pick is another of the key questions waiting to be answered in the series. The Silver Ferns, the reigning world champions, will look to show what they have learned since England’s historic win on their turf in September last year, while South Africa are dogged on the court even without their star players Karla Pretorius, Lenize Potgeiter and Shadine van der Merwe, and will no doubt be thinking about next year’s World Cup hosting duties. Over the five days, the four teams will face a round of head-to-heads culminating in a final and a third/fourth-place play-off. The format is physically gruelling and will be an ideal barometer of progress for the world’s best in the lead-up to this summer’s Commonwealth Games in Birmingham. “The quick transitions playing four games in five days and every single nation is going to be bloody tough,” says Mentor. “How do we debrief quickly? How do we learn from what we put out there to then move forward and take it into a different style?” England do have to contend with an unplanned player absence following shooter Jo Harten’s positive Covid-19 test result. However, under Jess Thirlby England can now turn to the likes of Jamaica series standout Eleanor Cardwell or Georgia Fisher to replace Harten, and that depth, for Mentor, is what distinguishes this Roses side from previous squads. “This is probably one of the toughest teams to pick,” she says. “I’ve been in England sides before where you can pretty much name your starting eight, maybe nine and then there’s a few others you can put in there. Now we’ve got 15, 16, almost up to 20 athletes that you could actually put in and bring something different into the squad, which is great.” The final question worth asking is: to what standard should the Roses be held come the conclusion of the series? The answer for the defending Commonwealth champions can only be: the highest. “We want go out and win,” says Mentor. “How great would it be to have this practice at being a favourite and actually coming through with the goods to back it up for Comm Games?” Should the Roses walk away first-time winners of this year’s Quad Series then their campaign in July will truly be bolstered. Anything less and tough questions will follow.A judge in western Illinois who found an 18-year-old man guilty of sexually assaulting a 16-year-old girl has come under fire after he later threw out the conviction, saying the 148 days the man spent in jail was punishment enough. Judge Robert Adrian of Adam county, Illinois, said Drew Clinton, who was convicted last October for raping a 16-year-old girl at a graduation party last May, had received “plenty of punishment”. “Mr Clinton has served almost five months in the county jail,” Adrian said on 3 January, according to court transcripts. “For what happened in this case, that is plenty of punishment. That would be a just sentence.” In Illinois, a person convicted of rape is handed the mandatory minimum sentence of four years in prison. During the trial, the judge heard evidence that the girl had told police she had attended a graduation party, where she drank alcohol and swam in a pool in her underwear before she eventually passed out. She said she woke up to a pillow pushed on her face and Clinton sexually assaulting her. “I asked him to stop multiple times and he wouldn’t. I finally got off the couch and pushed him off of me and he jumped up and just started playing video games as if nothing had happened,” the teenager said. According to the police report, the teenager was able to push Clinton off her and then told a friend what happened. She later told her father, who called the police. In court, Judge Adrian said: “There is no way … for what happened in this case that this teenager should go to the department of corrections. I will not do that.” But the judge said if he were to rule that the sentencing statute he was bound to follow was unconstitutional, his decision would be overturned and Clinton would be ordered to prison. In order to avoid an appeal he believed would be successful, Adrian said what he could do was determine that prosecutors had failed to “prove their case” and dismiss the sexual assault charge. Upon hearing the decision, “I immediately had to leave the courtroom and go to the bathroom. I was crying,” the teenager said. Anita Rodriguez, the prosecutor in the case, said she had never in her 40-year career seen anything like Judge Adrian’s ruling. According to her, the trial “did a lot for [the teenager’s] healing process, but now she’s back to where we were at.” In a statement released on Tuesday, the Quincy Area Network Against Domestic Abuse asked survivors to avoid Adrian’s courtroom. “Women in Adams county should be angry and afraid. One message is clear: If you are raped, avoid Judge Adrian’s courtroom,” it said. The organization went on to add that the verdict and Adrian’s comments sent “a chilling message to other rape victims that their behavior, not the rapists’, will be judged. Shame the victims, free the rapists.” The Associated Press contributed to this report • Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlCommercial debt management companies are placing Facebook adverts that could give the impression they are linked to official government schemes, Guardian analysis has found. Debt management companies help people consolidate and restructure their debts, charging customers fees for a solution or earning commission on referrals to debt advisers. Debt advice charities can arrange management plans and other support for free. One such company, Stepchange, has described ads that promote debt write-off schemes containing logos similar to the government crest, placed by Facebook pages called WiseoldMary and Mums In Debt, as “deeply misleading”. Another Facebook page named itself Debt Respite Scheme UK, the same name as a government scheme that gives legal protection from creditor action for 60 days. Several Facebook pages also used images of Boris Johnson to promote their services. WiseoldMary and Debt Respite Scheme UK are “lead generators” for other companies and do not offer debt advice themselves but earn commission on referrals, according to their privacy policies. The cost-of-living crisis is likely to exacerbate the issue of problem debt in the UK, with Citizens Advice warning in November that one in ten families were at risk of serious financial hardship this winter. The Advertising Standards Authority ruled in 2020 that a series of adverts placed by TFLI Limited, which runs WiseoldMary, did not make sufficiently clear that they passed leads on to a third party and did not clearly state the potential fees and risks associated with solutions offered. A spokesperson for TFLI said internal processes had been changed after the rulings by the ICO and ASA and that running a credit broker did not prevent the company helping people in debt. The Facebook page and associated website for Debt Respite Scheme UK were taken down shortly after the Guardian approached Trifik Ltd, listed on the website as the data controller, for comment. A spokesperson for Trifik said: “The assets were removed at our client’s request as unfortunately they are no longer trading. “Facebook Ads guidelines were followed when running promotional ads on behalf of our client and the website stated that it was an independent website working with regulated advisers.” Guardian analysis of data from Facebook’s ad library found 35 pages offering debt management services advertising on Facebook, spending up to £100,000 a month in total. The Guardian also found two companies that advertised debt support while also running credit brokers and payday loan companies. While this is not illegal, customers may not be clear that the companies managing these pages are also credit brokers. Debt Solvo, which offers customers “an easy and stress-free way to finally solve that debt problem”, is a trading name of Nouveau Finance Limited, which runs a number of payday loan brokers. Payday SOS loans, Bizzy loans, and others owned by Nouveau Finance advertise an APR of up to 1721%. WiseoldMary is a trading name of TFLI Limited, which also runs a credit broker called “cheaploans.co.uk”. In 2018, the company was fined £80,000 by the Information Commissioner’s Office for sending more than 1m spam texts. A spokesperson for Stepchange said: “It’s a real problem working out which companies really sit behind the ads. Often these firms are lead generators at several removes from the firms who might actually set up a product for the client. “If you give your personal details over to one of these companies you may not know where the information is going or who’s going to then get in touch with you about that solution.” A number of the ads analysed by the Guardian claimed customers could write off “up to 85%” of their debts. A spokesperson for StepChange said: “It’s clearly an advertiser dangle – we do think it can be deeply misleading.” A spokesperson for TFLI Limited said: “We have worked consistently with the ASA to ensure that all our advertisements are clear and transparent. “We clearly inform customers that the average debt write-off using our service, based on actual data from our partners, and drawn from direct ASA advice, is 67% although it is absolutely possible to write off up to 81%. “With regards to your accusation that we are implying a direct affiliation with the government, we absolutely refute this claim. TFLI are simply referring to the fact that IVAs are a result of government debt legislation.” Mums in Debt and Nouveau Finance Limited did not respond to requests for comment.The folk musician Eliza Carthy has asked fans for financial support to aid her parents, celebrated musicians Martin Carthy and Norma Waterson, after their income from live performances “dried up” during the Covid-19 crisis. Waterson has long been unable to perform owing to illness, Eliza wrote on the fundraising website Ko-Fi, and is currently hospitalised with pneumonia. “Right now the Carthy family, as many others, is struggling to survive the pandemic,” wrote Eliza, who moved closer to her parents 11 years ago in order to help care for Waterson. “They urgently need funds to tide them over until the pandemic lifts and Martin and Eliza can return to touring and again become self-sufficient.” Martin Carthy, 80, is one of the most influential musicians in British folk. He has released more than 40 albums as a solo artist, a member of Steeleye Span and the Albion Country Band, in collaboration with the late fiddle player Dave Swarbrick and with his wife and daughter as Waterson-Carthy. In 2014, he received the lifetime achievement award at the BBC Radio 2 Folk Awards. He was named “arguably the greatest English folk song performer, writer, collector and editor of them all” by Q magazine, and inspired peers such as Bob Dylan and Paul Simon. Waterson, 82, is one of the original members of traditional group the Watersons and a collaborator with Richard Thompson and members of Pentangle along with her family members. She received the BBC Radio 2 Folk Awards lifetime achievement prize in 2016. In December, UK Music chief executive Jamie Njoku-Goodwin wrote to chancellor Rishi Sunak about “the devastating impact the growth of the omicron variant is having on the UK music industry”. Many musicians have felt no choice but to postpone their immediate forthcoming tours given uncertainty over safety, including UK bands Wolf Alice and Blossoms, despite a lack of government support for cancelled events. A UK Music report published in October said that one in three jobs in the UK music industry were lost during the preceding 18 months of the Covid-19 pandemic. Martin and Eliza Carthy are due to play live throughout the UK this winter, with an intermittent run of dates kicking off in Durham on 27 January. Eliza wrote that she had recorded a new album during the pandemic, proceeds from which would also help the family. More than 2,500 people had supported the Carthy campaign at the time of publication. “I am a long-standing folk traditionalist,” wrote supporter Stephen Lyons. “Where would we be without these two? Eh? Love to them.” The famed producer Van Dyke Parks also voiced his support on Twitter: “I am asking all who can help to contribute. These two are the key to what’s left of Celtic culture –and innocence – in the UK. I admire Martin so … Let’s make this an end-game victory, as a folk dynasty appeals for financial support.”Marks &amp; Spencer may have once looked on the ropes but it has bounced back with its strongest festive period for years. The 138-year-old chain had its best ever Christmas on food and claimed its highest market share in full-price clothing since 2013 as shoppers emerging from last year’s lockdowns sought out the retailer. On food, M&amp;S has undoubtedly benefited from replacing Waitrose as Ocado’s retail partner. While its sales via Ocado were not included in Thursday’s trading update, the tie-up since September 2020 has raised the retailer’s profile with a younger audience and helped broaden its appeal. That deal built on and underpinned an existing effort to draw in family shoppers by cutting prices on basics, offering larger pack sizes and modernising its food ranges with more vegan and organic products. Sales of milk and cheese, for example, rose 12% this Christmas on two years ago. The food boss, Stuart Machin, has also stirred in a larger dose of fun by widening its use of in-house creations such as Percy Pig and Colin the Caterpillar, alongside new ideas such as snow globe gin and light-up shortbread biscuit tins, more than 1m of which were sold in December. However, the real turnaround is on fashion. This Christmas, M&amp;S partly benefited from a general surge in clothing sales, with fewer restrictions on socialising this year prompting a national wardrobe refresh. M&amp;S’s sales of bras rose by 13% and jeans by 12% as shoppers were able to try items in stores. Concerns about the environmental impact of fast fashion have also sparked more interest in M&amp;S, which is known for its better quality, more durable garments. “There is a trend for longer-lasting products rather than disposable fashion continues to play to our strength,” Steve Rowe, the chief executive, said. M&amp;S has also helped itself by improving its online service, after fixing serious problems at its main warehouse and tightening up its fashion ranges to offer fewer and better products, so it is less reliant on discounting. Online sales are up 50% on two years ago as M&amp;S was able to capitalise on the general shift to ordering from home with slicker deliveries, including using stores to select and send products to customers for the first time this year. A new strategy of selling other brands online, such as FatFace, White Stuff and Hobbs, as well as collaborating with adjacent brands such as Ghost and Nobody’s Child, is also likely to have drawn more shoppers to the website. Under the clothing and home boss, Katie Bickerstaffe, the retailer has concentrated on getting its everyday basics, such as nightwear and knitwear, to look more stylishly accessible. Sales of those categories rose 25% and 5% respectively, despite M&amp;S already being responsible for an enormous chunk of jumper sales each Christmas. It has also broadened its appeal by, for example, shifting the focus of its children’s clothing to affordable kit that is not just for special occasions, and introducing the successful Goodmove brand of exercise gear. Launched only two years ago, Goodmove has become M&amp;S biggest own label, selling 1.6m items annually. “While clothing and home has formerly been M&amp;S’s main handicap, it has now seemingly turned a corner in its overhaul,” said Pippa Stephens, a retail analyst at GlobalData. “As well as revamping its own-brand clothing ranges to be trendier and more inspiring, the incorporation of popular third-party brands like Nobody’s Child and Ghost has also helped it acquire new customers. These more appealing ranges will have allowed M&amp;S to significantly reduce the proportion of products being discounted.”The combination of the voice of Veronica Bennett, who has died aged 78, and Phil Spector’s studio-built Wall of Sound became one of the most potent and distinctive sounds to emerge from the fast-changing world of pop music in the early 1960s. Ronnie Spector, as she became when she and the producer married, was the lead singer of the Ronettes, a New York trio whose hits included Be My Baby, Baby I Love You, (The Best Part of) Breakin’ Up and – her own favourite – Walking in the Rain. With their towering black beehive hairdos, extravagant eye makeup and tight sheath dresses, the Ronettes brought a whiff of sex and danger to the wholesome girl-group genre of the early 60s, previously dominated by the romantic songs of the Shirelles, the Chiffons and the Cookies. The sisters Veronica and Estelle Bennett and their cousin Nedra Talley projected an image that was a long way from any parent’s idea of a perfect prom date. Among those they beguiled were the Beatles, whom they met at a party in Mayfair in 1964, and the Rolling Stones, with whom they toured the UK and hung out in New York. John Lennon took a particular shine to Ronnie as the American girls – who had begun as dancers in the Peppermint Lounge, a New York club – showed the four boys from Liverpool how to do the Pony, the Jerk and the Nitty Gritty. They dated in London, in a foursome made up by George Harrison and Estelle, sometimes accompanied by the girls’ mother, who was paying her first visit to London. Ronnie and John met again in the US, but her relationship with Spector was becoming more serious. Forty years after their heyday, the Ronettes – and Ronnie in particular – would inspire the look developed by Amy Winehouse, who piled her hair high and drew winglets at the corners of her eyes in homage to the style they created during their teenage years in Harlem. Veronica was the daughter of Louis Bennett, a subway worker, and his wife, Beatrice. He was white, she was black, and their combined ethnic heritage – African American, Native American, Irish – gave Veronica and her sister a paler skin tone and straighter hair than their fellow pupils at their Harlem school. “Hey, half-breed,” Veronica would be told, “get back on your reservation.” At one point she reacted by trying to dye her skin darker. Music was a significant presence in the family. Her father played the drums, and groups of aunts and uncles formed vocal trios and quartets. Veronica sang from an early age, accompanied Estelle, the elder by two years, to dance classes, and knew from the age of 12, when she heard Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers, another bunch of Harlem teens, singing their hit Why Do Fools Fall in Love, that she wanted to be a performer. When Lymon, a star at 15, paid a visit to the Bennett house, she found herself having to resist his advances. Her father had left the household and moved to Florida, suffering from alcoholism, by the time she enrolled at George Washington high school, where she decided that wearing nice clothes was a route to popularity. To pay for them, she took an after-school job serving meals to patients in the geriatric ward of a local hospital. At 15 she, Estelle and three girl cousins, including Nedra, and a boy cousin, Ira, performed Lymon’s hit during an amateur night at the celebrated Apollo theatre. Ira was due to take the lead part; when he froze with nerves at the microphone, Veronica stepped forward and earned applause that, she remembered, “made me feel like a star”. Singing lessons for Veronica, Estelle and Nedra at a professional studio in midtown Manhattan led to a meeting with a songwriter, Stu Phillips, who gave them a song called What’s So Sweet About Sweet Sixteen and arranged for them to make their first records for the Colpix label. Two singles were released without success, but their career took a step forward when they auditioned as dancers at the Peppermint Lounge, a mob-run joint where celebrities were dancing the Twist to the music of Joey Dee and the Starliters. Despite being under the legal age to enter night clubs, and with tissue paper supplied by her mother to pad out the bras under their yellow taffeta dresses, they were hired. Plans for them to appear alongside Dee in a movie titled Hey, Let’s Twist! foundered on the casting director’s verdict: “They’re too light to play black girls and too dark to play white girls. We can’t use them.” But the influential disc jockey Murray the K put them on his shows at the Brooklyn Fox in the spring of 1962, which was when they started teasing their hair into upward coils and applying the mascara with a more emphatic touch. It was during the following year that they made a call to Phil Spector, whose hits with the Crystals (He’s a Rebel, Da Doo Ron Ron) and Bob B Soxx and the Blue Jeans (Zip-A-Dee-Doo-Dah) on his own Philles label had made him the hottest producer in pop. The Wagnerian scale of the orchestral arrangements on his records often threatened to overwhelm his singers, but in Veronica he found the perfect figure to stand atop his mountainous soundscapes. Ronnie’s voice, marked by a slow, wide vibrato, combined the sweet optimism of adolescence with a sultry undertone that hinted at a more knowing sophistication. When Spector unleashed his echo-swathed battalions on a song called Be My Baby, it gave the Ronettes an immediate smash hit – and one that made a profound impression on other would-be hitmakers, including Brian Wilson of the Beach Boys, who listened to it endlessly. Now they were the stars they had dreamed of being, and Ronnie was falling for her svengali, who was still married to his first wife. It was not until 1968, after the string of hits had dried up and Spector’s sound had fallen out of favour, that they were married. After a first, fruitless attempt to revive her career with a single called You Came, You Saw, You Conquered on the A&amp;M label, in 1969 they adopted a son, Donté, Spector having made his wife wear a pillow under her clothes in order to convince the world that she was giving birth. Phil Spector’s old friendship with the Beatles paid off when, in 1970, he was invited to finish off their Let It Be album and to produce solo records for Lennon and Harrison. He also took the opportunity to record one of Harrison’s songs, Try Some Buy Some, with Ronnie, again to minimal response, despite its release on the Beatles’ Apple label. By now the marriage had been undermined by Phil Spector’s pathological jealousy. He locked his wife up in their Beverly Hills mansion and took away her shoes, allowed her to go out in a car alone only with a model of himself in the passenger seat to deter interest from other men, and threatened her with guns (a presentiment of the murder in 2003 of Lana Clarkson, for which he would spend the rest of his life in jail). In 1972 he surprised Ronnie by presenting her with adopted twins, Gary and Louis, but within weeks, recognising that she and her husband were both suffering from alcohol addiction, she left him, after a violent exit in which her mother fought him off. A lengthy and contested divorce eventually came through and in 1975 she began an independent solo career, which was given impetus by the attention of fans including Bruce Springsteen, his lieutenant Steve Van Zandt and Billy Joel. A duet with Eddie Money called Take Me Home Tonight returned her to the charts in 1986. At 38 she had the first of two sons with Jonathan Greenfield, a stage production manager whom she had met in 1978. He became her manager and they married in 1982. In 1988 she and her fellow Ronettes began the long process of suing Phil Spector for unpaid royalties. An initial award of $2.6m (£1.9m) was overturned, but eventually a settlement was reached in which they received an estimated $1m. In 1990 Ronnie wrote an autobiography, Be My Baby: How I Survived Mascara, Miniskirts and Madness, and in 2007 the Ronettes were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame by Keith Richards. Ronnie released her final solo album, English Heart, in 2016. Estelle died in 2009. Ronnie is survived by her husband, her sons, Jason, Austin, Donté, Gary and Louis, and her cousin Nedra, the third Ronette. • Ronnie Spector, singer, born 10 August 1943; died 12 January 2022French teachers have held one of the biggest education strikes in recent years, forcing the closure of hundreds of primary schools in protest at the government’s handling of Covid-19 measures in the education sector. Tens of thousands of teachers took part in the one-day strike. Trade unions said 75% of primary teachers walked out alongside 62% of secondary teachers. The education ministry gave much lower figures on Thursday morning, saying there was an average of 38.5% of teachers on strike in primary schools, and just under 24% in high schools. Teachers and education support staff joined a protest march through the centre of Paris to the education ministry, and others demonstrated in towns across France. The French prime minister, Jean Castex, announced he would meet teachers’ union representatives late on Thursday in an attempt to calm the anger. “We had reached such a level of exasperation, tiredness, and anger that we didn’t have any other option but to organise a strike to send a strong message to the government,” said Elisabeth Allain-Moreno, national secretary of the SE-Unsa teachers’ union. Laurent Berger, secretary general of the CFDT union, said: “This is not a strike against the virus, it’s a strike against the lack of consultation.” He said teachers had been treated with “disdain”, only informed of changing Covid protocols at the last minute, and there should be more “dialogue”. President Emmanuel Macron this week restated the government view that one of France’s greatest successes during the pandemic had been to keep schools open more than any other country in the world. “I fundamentally believe the choice that we made to keep schools open is the right choice,” he said. “France is the country that kept its schools open the most,” the education minister, Jean-Michel Blanquer, has said. But a surge in Covid infections, driven by a sharp rise in the highly contagious Omicron variant, has created major disruption in schools since they reopened at the start of January – with about 10,000 classes closed because of infections among pupils and staff. Parents and children have faced long and often bewildering queues outside pharmacies to be tested in order to keep up with the requirements for pupils in a class where there has been a positive case. Testing rules for children have changed several times since the start of January. Castex finally announced this week that a series of home tests could now be used to determine whether a student can return to school. Children over the age of six must wear masks in French schools. Teaching unions said the government was failing children with a disorganised approach that provided inadequate protection against infection for staff and students alike, and failed to ensure replacement cover for teachers falling ill while leaving schools acting as a form of test-and-trace managers. “Students cannot learn properly because attendance varies wildly, and a hybrid of in-house and distance learning is impossible to put in place,” the SNUipp-FSU said, adding that absent teachers were not being replaced. Unions are also demanding the government provides the more protective FFP2 face masks for staff, and CO2 monitors to check whether classrooms are sufficiently ventilated. “Not only does the current protocol not protect students, staff or their families, it has completely disorganised schools,” the union said, claiming that classes have effectively been turned into “daycare centres”. In a rare move, France’s largest parents’ group, the FCPE, supported the strike, encouraging parents to keep their children home on Thursday. The group said France needed more saliva testing within schools, rather than lateral flow tests at home; a proper strategy to ensure distance learning; and to replace absent teachers. “Just keeping the school’s doors open isn’t enough,” Rodrigo Arenas, the co-president of the FCPE, told Le Monde. Valérie Pécresse, a key challenger to Macron in this spring’s presidential election race from the rightwing Les Républicains party, accused the government of disorder and chaos, saying it would have been better to defer the start of the January term to allow schools to prepare and to slow transmission rates. Blanquer argued this week that the government was doing everything possible to avoid outright school closures that could cause havoc for parents and jeopardise learning for thousands of children, especially those from low-income families. “I know there is a lot of fatigue, of anxiety … but you don’t go on strike against a virus,” he said in a TV interview.The impact of Covid-19 on supply chains has begun to disrupt goods needed for PCR testing, forcing the closure of clinics in one jurisdiction. The highly contagious Omicron variant has caused widespread staff shortages and a “crisis” in transport and other supply chain businesses, leading to shortages at supermarkets, retailers and other key industries. The supply chain issues are so severe that the Australian Capital Territory on Wednesday announced it was closing three testing clinics – a significant chunk of its testing capacity – until Monday. The government said the closures were due to “unavoidable supply issues” experienced by Capital Pathology, part of the Sonic Healthcare pathology giant. The testing supplies ordered by Capital Pathology were “unable to be delivered to the ACT within the expected timeframe due to the impacts of Covid-19 on the supply chain”. “The ACT, like all jurisdictions, is working hard to manage its testing supplies, including reagents and consumables, which are in high demand across the country,” a spokesperson for ACT Health said. “The high demand for these items has been exacerbated by supply chain issues that have also been affecting other industries.” Unlike rapid tests, Australia is not currently experiencing a shortage in supplies of PCR consumables themselves. NSW, Victoria, and Queensland all confirmed that, despite huge demand, they have adequate stocks of PCR testing equipment. But NSW Health said the demand on PCR testing in the state was “enormous” and the situation was “evolving”. The high number of positive PCR tests means laboratories need to change to a more time-consuming approach to confirm each sample, a spokesperson said. Queensland Health said it had sufficient stock of test kits “to maintain current capacity”. It said it had created a strategic reserve and sourced testing instruments from a number of vendors to lessen the risk of supply shortages. “Like all jurisdictions across Australia, Queensland’s public and private testing network has been placed under significant pressure by the surge in Omicron cases and the subsequent national shortage in some PCR testing supplies,” a spokesperson said. The Morrison government has attempted to relieve pressure on supply chains by scrapping isolation requirements for close contacts of Covid cases employed in critical supply chains. Those rules were extended from the food supply sector to other industries on Thursday, including to all transport, freight and logistics workers. Workers who are a close contact of a positive Covid case will no longer have to isolate if they return a negative rapid antigen test result. “The more you try to protect your hospital system, the more people you are taking out of work, which disrupts supply chains,” Morrison said. “This is a very delicate balance that needs to be constantly recalibrated.” But Labor criticised the changes, saying they will mean nothing without greater supply of rapid tests. “These changes to isolation arrangements won’t amount to a hill of beans if Scott Morrison doesn’t fix the mess he has created around rapid tests,” the shadow health minister, Mark Butler, said. “That is clear. Business, trade unions, have made that clear. All of these changes will end up being academic if workers and businesses can’t get access to rapid tests and can’t get that access free of charge.”What is extraordinary about the last two weeks in Australia is not only the large numbers of people infected with Covid but the psychological volte-face required to withstand this new reality. The volte-face is this: going from being able to name or be aware of individual cases in the community (barbecue guy, the limo guy, the removalists) to almost everyone you know seeming to have it all at once. The disorientation is supreme. We’ve gone from nationwide surveillance, policing, punishment and public shaming in the media for having it, to this; the government saying it’s OK to go to work and be a close contact, to being sick and not being able to get tested, to shops and businesses shut because so many staff are sick, to supply chains being disrupted because of Covid. Quite suddenly we are living in a completely different reality from the previous two years. The whiplash is intense. It’s not just that there is more virus around, but we are told we have to think differently about this wave. As a result, we are having to rewire our psychological landscape on the fly, and are left scrambling for a new set of rules. But these rules are essentially private, particular, based on individual levels of comfort (do I sit indoors at the cafe, attend the wedding, self-isolate if I am ill but can’t get tested?). After two years of being told what to do, we are on our own. Even among groups of friends there are cracks appearing between those comfortable with being in the community and those who are essentially going back into lockdown this summer. Organising social events is a nightmare (that is, if you can find venues that are open), where people’s risk levels are exposed and not everyone is on the same page. Do you sit this summer out trying to keep yourself and others safe or do you try and reclaim your life back after years of being shut in? And what about that feeling you get of being judged no matter what your personal decisions around safety may be? When we look back, I suspect for many people it will be this summer they found to be the most difficult. Everything feels topsy-turvy, strange and stressful. Take where I am holidaying right now: Port Fairy, on the south-west coast of Victoria – a place I have been visiting for decades. I have never seen it like this. Last week, in the peak of tourist season, the majority of food outlets including three pubs were shut. Some of the remaining cafes that were open were doing takeaway only. The only supermarket in town was on reduced hours. The signs on the shuttered windows said a mixture of things: closed because there was not enough staff, closed because staff were awaiting test results, and in the cases of places shutting early, closed because they had run out of food. Tourists were just walking up and down the street, looking confused. There was nothing open. Usually in peak holiday season, most of the businesses in town make money that takes them through a more lean, bleak winter. And if you should wake up with a scratchy throat, it’s impossible to find a rapid antigen test here, and you have to drive to the next town for a PCR test and a long queue. During the course of the pandemic, there have been Covid cases in south-west Victoria, but nothing like this. You could see it dribbling down the Princess Highway from Melbourne during the second and third waves. But this wave has struck the entire town like a tsunami. We have shown that we are nothing if not adaptable over the last two years – but I have seen nothing from the politicians acknowledging that this part of the journey is going to be challenging for many. Many Australians got really scared for the better part of two years and the government and the media didn’t let up when it came to hammering in the fear. The fear isn’t going to go away overnight just because many people experience the virus in its mild form. You can’t freak people out for that long and that hard without expecting some residual traces of that fear to remain in the system. Predicting anything in this pandemic has been impossible, but I do sense one thing: after the fear subsides, there will be anger. Brigid Delaney is a Guardian Australia columnistRight behind Sydney’s airport, Brighton Le Sands is indistinctive for a beach; the kind you’d drive past on your way to somewhere else. But one crucial geographic quirk sets it apart: it is the closest beach to people from western Sydney. That fact has turned its shore into a thriving scene, heaving with people on sunny days and warm nights. As an industrial port, mammoth cranes and stacks of shipping containers dominate half the curving bay’s horizon, but the beach itself is framed by palm trees. It’s not exactly a postcard Sydney view – but its convenience for those out west, the character and identity visitors bring to Brighton’s calm waters, and the acceptance they find, keeps people coming back. On a humid and cloudy Sunday afternoon, Hassan pauses when asked why he likes to come to Brighton, taking long drags of his shisha and staring out at the ocean before answering. “I come all the way from Picton, nearly an hour-and-a-half drive … There’s just something different about it; you relax when you see the ocean,” he says. Hassan visits Brighton often, and sets up his own hookah, complete with his favourite flavour – double apple. “It’s the closest beach to us, and it’s got more of my community here compared to other beaches. I relax much more here,” he says. Anwar Elahmad agrees the beach’s proximity to the city’s west makes it a preferable destination for him and his family, who drive from Guildford. “It’s the M5, one way … all the way down. It’s easier than going to the other beaches in the eastern suburbs.” Elahmad, who has just finished praying with his friends, says while Brighton isn’t his favourite beach (“a one out of 10 compared to Coogee or Bronte”), pure beauty is not the only thing that matters. “It’s a bay! No waves, the water isn’t the cleanest, but I’m satisfied with one out of 10. I’m content and I’m comfortable. That plays a big part,” he says. “You don’t get looked at, you don’t get picked out, you don’t get profiled. Unfortunately, as Muslims, you do get that at other beaches.” Ibrahm Sabra comes to Brighton at least once a week, saying he loves the atmosphere. His friends prepare their jetski behind him. “I like bringing the jetski, [Brighton is] kid-friendly and it’s just beautiful. “It takes around half-an-hour for us to get here from home. I just feel like I’m at home here. It’s closer than other beaches. It’s central here, we bump into lots of friends and family – I love it.” Having a space like this is “essential for myself and for my family”, he says. As night descends, the number of people swimming dwindles but the walkways along the sand buzz. Something shifts in the night air. Hotted-up cars blare at the traffic lights, groups of teenagers strut along the promenade and families bring ice-creams to watch the sunset. Sarah Mazen, who is visiting from Melbourne, says she had to see the beach for herself. Everyone talks up the nightlife, she says. “I’ve heard about this place all over social media. I have another friend coming from Melbourne and we’re about to go pick her up, but thought we’d stop here first. “I can see how vibrant it is here, how alive it feels. We don’t have much of this in Melbourne.” Royce and Karina are locals, taking their dog for a walk along the beach. They love the suburb at this hour. “The nightlife is great, you can come out and everything is open. Other places shut at eight at night, everything is dead, but here it goes to midnight, people walking around, in the water, it’s nice to see.” Royce has lived in San Souci, a neighbouring suburb, for 24 years, and says much has changed in that time. “The footpath used to be garbage, you couldn’t ride your bike, it was never as packed, it was all a bit rundown. But life happened – and they’ve revamped the area, it’s so much better.” John is out celebrating his graduation from high school with his friends and says the beach attracts a certain type of fashion. “People come and dress up nice, drive their cars, enjoy their time. People make it like this; make it their home. “People are friendly here, it’s just nice walking around, its a nice experience.” Naz and Fatima have come to Brighton from Coogee, where their night began. “It was so boring!” Naz says of the eastern suburbs beach. “Here you have people walking past 24/7, you can have a laugh. You wouldn’t see a crowd like this in Coogee.” Fatima elaborates, saying many of the visitors to Brighton would feel out of place at other beaches. “There’s a lot of Muslim women in hijab here, and it’s good to see them in their element, not judged or stared at,” she says. “Out in the eastern suburbs, of course they’d be going to be looked at. They feel part of a community here.”A feeling of pessimism and despair following the black summer bushfires that swept through Australia in 2019/2020 became the catalyst for one of the most unconventional and ambitious productions likely to be seen during this year’s Sydney festival. Like most arts organisations, Sydney-based physical theatre company Legs on the Wall has spent the better part of two years in hiatus. After critically acclaimed seasons of Man with the Iron Neck (tackling the raw subject of suicide among First Nations men) across four major Australian festivals in 2018 and 2019, two national tours of the production came to an abrupt halt in early 2020 due to Covid-19. Legs on the Wall artistic director Joshua Thomson spent the downtime in introspective and emotional disquiet, struggling to also come to terms with the environmental devastation and national trauma of black summer, which claimed 18.6m hectares of land, destroyed almost 3,000 homes and claimed the lives of at least 34 people. “I felt moved, hopeless and maybe a bit angry … I just felt like there was nothing I could do to help,” Thomson says. “But then I started thinking about what I’m good at and how could I continue to push the conversation and the awareness around climate change. Then I started thinking about the opposite to fire – and that’s when the idea of ice came. “Australia is the driest continent on the Earth … and I wanted to put something fragile into that kind of hostile environment.” Staged across three days in January from Friday, Thomson’s Thaw will see three female artists performing consecutively on a 2.5 tonne block of ice suspended 20 metres above Sydney harbour, in a piece that runs for nine hours each day. The airborne iceberg melting in Sydney’s midsummer heat, a human figure precariously negotiating its slippery and ever-diminishing surface; a metaphor for the fragile and diminishing natural world melting under the burden of humanity. Cecily Hardy, Thaw’s creative producer, is the conduit between Thomson’s artistic concept and the logistics of the venture. It took about 2,700 litres of water to create each of the four icebergs (one was used for rehearsal), with each body of arctic blue-tinted water taking about 10 days to freeze in a custom-made $30,000 steel mould. The freezing process began in November. A crane positioned on the Sydney Opera House’s western boardwalk will suspend a fresh 2.5 tonne iceberg over the harbour each morning on the 14, 15 and 16 January. Each day, Isabel Estrella, Vicki Van Hout and Jenni Large will spend a three-hour shift performing on top of the iceberg. Victoria Hunt was initially programmed, but withdrew in support of the Sydney festival boycott; she will be performing later this month in Thaw’s Launceston show, as a part of Mona Foma. The choreography has been co-devised by the performers and Thomson, backed by an original score by Alaska composer, sound artist and eco-acoustician Matthew Burtner, who is also the director of Alaska’s environmental arts non-profit organisation, EcoSono. How long will it take the iceberg to melt each day? That, says Hardy, is the million-dollar question. Some weather conditions will cause the ice to melt more rapidly than others, possibly dissolving the iceberg by more than 50% over the nine-hour performance time. “Our testing showed the combination of weather that made the most erosion on the iceberg was wind and sun together,” says Hardy, who fondly refers to her icebergs as “she”. “Of course the heat melts her, but it’s the wind that makes that surface melt away more quickly. Surprisingly she melts up quite a bit slower than you would imagine when she’s just [exposed to] direct sun on a still day. “That’s part of the whole point: that some days after a long day, she might look quite different to what she ended up looking like the day before depending on the weather, and that in itself is quite exciting.” Working on a heritage site that can be visited by thousands of people in a single day has presented a unique set of occupational health and safety challenges, Hardy says. There were many hurdles that the company – working in tandem with Sydney Opera House management, the crane company, riggers and engineers – had to resolve, which were then independently peer-assessed to ensure maximum safety. “There’s so many layers of consideration, planning and technology that have gone into what looks like a quite simple and beautiful thing,” Hardy says. Aside from the opera house forecourt, the three performances of Thaw will be visible from the Cahill Expressway, Circular Quay, the MCA and international passenger terminal, and Lavender Bay, along with myriad other vantage points clustered around the Sydney harbour waterfront. The performances will also be in full view of Kirribilli House, the secondary official residence of Australia’s prime minister Scott Morrison, who – in the wake of Cop26 – has become internationally infamous for his inaction on climate change. Thomson says Thaw is undeniably political but not in a didactic sense. “There’s an opportunity and a responsibility for this work to say something … and yes, it has an element of spectacle,” he says. “But hopefully, through the spectacle and the scale, we will bring people in, capture the minds of people in their wonder and deliver this message through a moment of thought, not a slap in the face.” Thaw will be performed over Sydney harbour next to the Sydney Opera House from 14-16 January and livestreamed as part of Sydney festival’s At Home digital program and on Sydney Opera House’s Stream platform. Saturday’s entire performance can be viewed as a live video feed on 15 January from 10am to 8.30pmGraham Slade says Point Lonsdale front beach was a site of many firsts: he was four years old when he first walked on to it, seven years old when he was given his first surfboard and a teenager when he took his first steps into adulthood on its sand. “As you go through life, everything happened at Lonsdale first,” Slade says. “You went out to a lot of parties in your late teens, getting towards 20 years old, and sampled a few things. “My main addiction though was surfing, and I’m still pretty keen.” Looking back, the 69-year-old says that as the surfboards he rode went from cork to traditional longboards to modern fibreglass, he has watched the sand at Point Lonsdale wither. Over the years, as the swell has grown more powerful, the sand has washed away, leaving jagged rocks after storms. Now Slade is among residents who say authorities have a responsibility to rebuild beaches like Point Lonsdale, which have degraded after decades of mismanagement. “An analogy would be if a driver’s vehicle unintentionally strikes a parked car,” Slade says. “That driver is legally and morally responsible to pay for repairs to that car. It should be the same for the beach. “The damage was unintentional when they put the sea wall in. They thought they were doing good but didn’t know it would cause erosion. But it has.” ‘It’s already been interfered with’ What happened to Point Lonsdale is in many ways emblematic of what has happened to many other beaches around the country in that its degradation was the product of industrialisation, urbanisation and bad decisions made with the best intentions. It began nearly a century ago when local authorities built a seawall to protect buildings that had risen atop the dunes. Soon it quickly became clear the wall was causing the sand to be washed away and wooden groynes – long structures running perpendicular to the shore – were installed to hold the beach in place. They lasted until 1989 when they had worn away and were removed but not quickly replaced. Over the next nine years the sand on Point Lonsdale began to thin, a process that sped up in 2008 after a $969m project to deepen the Port Phillip Heads shipping channel to allow access for larger container ships. That work ripped out the natural reefs that provided Point Lonsdale beach some protection against the full weight of the ocean, causing the swell to grow more powerful and throwing it directly up the beach. James Cotton, from Save Point Lonsdale Front Beach, says residents have tried to work with the Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning over the last six years to develop a solution but, at the last minute, the department balked. “All of a sudden they just decided they would just close their work on the matter,” Cotton says. “After a six-year consultation process they came back by email and said really sorry, there’s been a change in policy, we can no longer support any works in this area, case closed.” The abrupt about-face followed the introduction of the marine and coastal policy in 2020, which attempted a break from the past by preferring hands-off solutions to coastal management – rather than direct intervention. A spokesperson said the department was now seeking to work with natural processes and would consider re-nourishment programs “in the future”. “Any intervention in coastal environments can lead to negative impacts elsewhere,” it said. “We work with expert coastal engineers before choosing options to tackle erosion so we can avoid moving the problem elsewhere or causing more damage in the future.” But Cotton says while this is a good policy for untouched and healthy beaches, Point Lonsdale has “already been interfered with”, which created an obligation for authorities to address it. “The only reason we’re in this state is because first they put a sea wall in and then they blew up the reef,” Cotton says. “The environment’s already been altered but now they’re saying they can’t do anything about it for fear of altering the environment.” ‘They were a mountain once’ If the situation at Point Lonsdale shows how a beach can be lost – and the tensions created when people try to fix it – actually rebuilding it can be complicated. Ruth Reef, an associate professor with Monash University’s school of earth, atmosphere and environment, says beaches are fragile places, forever remaking themselves in response to subtle changes in the environment. With most sandy beaches in the world only having formed in the last 5,000 years as the oceans stabilised and the current sea level settled to a constant, no two are alike and all are precious. “They were a mountain once,” Reef says. “Think about the beach as a snaking conveyor belt of sand. It’s always exchanging sand. The conveyor belt connects between the land and the deep ocean. “A beach requires two things. First, a supply of sand, and second, waves gentle enough to keep it from being washed away.” Those natural beaches that ring 34,000km of Australian coastline largely owe their existence to erosion. Some began where rivers rose, as rain wore down mountains and the currents carried the sediment to the coast, softening it along the way. Others formed from material pulled by the wind from exposed cliff faces, which was carried up the coast until the sand could travel no further. A further group formed when waves broke down coral reefs or shell matter into fine, soft sand. If the relative geological youth and the delicate balance of forces needed to sustain a beach makes them special places, restoring them means either finding a way to soften the waves, or feeding fresh sand into the system – often at great cost. A good example is the hundreds of millions the South Australian government has spent each year to maintain Adelaide’s metropolitan beaches since 1971, when it was forced to intervene. Before this a chain of sea walls had been constructed along the coast, and infrastructure like jetties and boat harbours blocked the flow of sand along the coast. Adelaide is not the only city in the world to run similar programs. Tractors and bulldozers trundle out on to Venice’s Lido to repair the sands every spring, while Nice’s famous pebble beach was, at one point, being replenished every day. Even in Queensland authorities are in the process of building a 7.8km pipeline in the Gold Coast to recycle sand on its northern beaches. You break it, you bought it Without these sorts of re-nourishment programs, coastal engineer James Guy, who manages the South Australian government’s beach regeneration project, says there would simply be no beach. “Once you develop along the coastline, you are committing to management forever unless you a prepared to not have beaches,” Guy says. “We locked up sand beneath development and the reality is once we did that – and this is before coastal processes were understood – it may well have unknowingly committed society to managing a strip of beaches.” In other words: you break it, you bought it. The success of the program can be seen by work at South Australia’s West beach, which sits roughly in the middle of a beach system that stretches from the cliffs at the south of the Fleurieu Peninsula all the way north through to Outer Harbour. What exactly eroded West beach’s sand is hotly debated. The state government and environmental groups point to a long history of environmental mismanagement that killed the seagrass that held together sand bars and blocked the natural flow of sand northward along the coast – a process known as longshore drift. But John Dundon, from Save West Beach Sand, says the previous Labor government “deliberately sacrificed” the beach when it killed a plan to build a pipeline to recycle sand through the entire system due to costs. “West beach was cheap sand,” Dundon says. “They systematically mined and eroded it to feed beaches farther north.” Whatever the exact reason, a storm in 2016 hit West beach and cut 10 metres into the dunes, wiping away sand that did not return. A report by Danish Hydraulics Institute in 2017 found the government had underestimated the rate of erosion at West beach by a staggering amount. Today 500,000 cubic metres of sand will be trucked in from a quarry at Mount Compass to rebuild West Beach. Meanwhile, the South Australian government is looking to complete the pipeline to stop the sand vanishing once more. Though the work has proven controversial over concerns about the dunes, and there is more work to be done to redirect stormwater runoff, Dundon says it’s been a “joy” to see the beach return after a long fight by the community. “Humans destroyed West beach – they took away a beautiful coastal oasis and starved it and made it into nothing more than a rocky outcrop, with no beach for surf, and no place for the community,” Dundon says. “This goes back to the heart of the thing. We are custodians. We need to take care of the environment and foster it for future generations.”Do you have trouble falling asleep straight away or are you prone to waking up in the middle of the night? Of the many things that could be interrupting your restful slumber, caffeine is among the most likely culprits. Caffeine has a quarter life of 10 to 12 hours, meaning that if you have coffee to get through an early afternoon meeting, you could still have caffeine coursing through your system at midnight. But as those who have ever tried cutting caffeine out entirely soon discover, the cure can be worse than the disease. Caffeine withdrawal can cause headaches for a week or more after, and that comes on top of the lethargy of no longer being able to indulge in your favourite pick-me-up. The solution is simple, although not always easy to stick to: no caffeine after midday. Of course a piccolo at 2pm will taste great, but you’ll be cursing when you can’t switch your brain off later. Even tea, or a coke – best avoid them all. Of course you’ll likely crash mid-afternoon. Have a piece of fruit. Or go for a run. But caffeine is not your friend. Did you know the uptake of caffeine was linked with the rise of capitalism and bosses squeezing more out of your work day? Have one for yourself in the morning because it tastes great but don’t feel the need to sacrifice your sleep for ever greater levels of productivity in the day. Cut down and who knows, you might even be able to manage an afternoon nap!Stephen Colbert Stephen Colbert attempted to sort through the bleak deja vu of Omicron winter in New York on Wednesday evening. “If this pandemic were a movie, it would be Tenet,” the Late Show host said. “It’s impossible to understand, and I just wish it would end, which turns out is the beginning.” The host also reacted to a subtle shift in public health messaging in recent days, as the US reached record numbers of Covid infections: “They’re trying to make us get used to all of this,” Colbert noted. He pointed to testimony on Omicron’s transmissibility from the White House medical adviser Dr Anthony Fauci on Tuesday: “Omicron will infect just about everybody.” “Do you hear that? Being attacked for two years has clearly broken Dr Fauci,” Colbert said, imitating the doctor: “Rip off your mask, go to hot yoga, on the way home tug a hobo – I don’t give a vaccinated crap. We’re all doomed.” Fauci also said that those who have been vaccinated will “very likely, with some exceptions, do reasonably well”. “There are certain things I don’t want to equivocate on,” Colbert responded. “My life is one of them. You don’t want to hear a skydiving instructor say, ‘Jump from the plane! You will very likely, with some exceptions, do reasonably well.’” According to experts, unvaccinated people are 10 times likelier to be infected with Omicron and 20 times likelier to die. “They’re also 50 times likelier to start a fight with a Kroger employee because the Mexican food aisle is in Spanish,” Colbert quipped. Seth Meyers On Late Night, Seth Meyers recapped a rare interview appearance by Donald Trump on a mainstream media network, the US national radio network NPR. “For some reason, Trump thought it would be a good idea to call into NPR,” Meyers explained, “where he seemed to be caught off-guard” when pressed about his 2020 election lies by host Steve Inskeep. “Instead of listening to Trump’s answers mouth agape with no pushback” a la the Fox &amp; Friends hosts, “Inskeep came prepared with basic facts to debunk Trump’s claims, and Trump clearly had no idea how to handle it,” said Meyers. “For starters, he didn’t even seem to know the details about how the interview was going to work,” asking Inskeep at the start if the interview was live (it was pre-taped). “He’s a former president calling into a well-known news program and he acts like he just got stopped on the street by Jay Leno,” Meyers joked. The interview came to an abrupt end when Trump hung up as Inskeep pressed the former president on his lies about the 2020 election. “You know it’s bad when Donald Trump, who will drone on endlessly for as long as you let him, willingly ends an interview before it’s supposed to be over,” Meyers noted. “When these deranged lies are subjected to even a modicum of scrutiny they collapse because they’re absurd on their face.” Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel also lamented “another virus” on the rise: “That big orange golfer who used to run the country.” In an interview with rightwing media company OAN, Trump confirmed he’d had the Covid booster and called Republican lawmakers who refuse to say they’ve been vaccinated “gutless”. It was a thinly veiled barb at Florida’s governor, Ron DeSantis, who stumbled over a question about his booster status on Fox News last weekend. DeSantis is expected to run for the Republican nomination for president in 2024, “and you know that makes Trump crazy”, said Kimmel. “Trump desperately wants credit for developing the vaccines, because he should want credit, but the dummies who follow him boo him when he says he got the vaccine. “And then you have characters like DeSantis who wants to have it both ways – he obviously got the booster but he doesn’t want to admit he got it,” Kimmel continued. “Which makes Trump, who did admit it, look like a wuss to the gators and chewing tobacco crowd. I mean, imagine being called gutless by Captain Bone Spurs.”The decision not to prosecute a teenager accused of pushing a 13-year-old boy into a river was legally flawed and unreasonable or irrational, a court has heard. Christopher Kapessa drowned after he was allegedly pushed into the River Cynon in south Wales by a 14-year-old boy in July 2019. In July 2020 the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) said that although there was evidence to support a prosecution for manslaughter, it had decided it was not in the public interest to do so for what it described as a “foolish prank”. At a judicial review hearing in central London on Thursday, brought by Christopher’s mother, Alina Joseph, against the director of public prosecutions (DPP) for the refusal to bring charges, her counsel, Michael Mansfield QC, said prosecutors had misunderstood the culpability of the teenager and given his youth “undue weight”. He said the decision not to prosecute went against the CPS’s own guidance with respect to homicide cases, which states that “subject to sufficiency of evidence, a prosecution is almost certainly required”. In written submissions, Mansfield described it as an “unreasonable or irrational decision because any proper and correct consideration of the evidence and information in this case could only properly conclude that the public interest requires prosecution for this fatal offence”. He added: “Young age can never be a defence per se to an offence, and all the less so for a young killer, whose manslaughter robbed another young boy of his own life … The defendant has approached youthfulness on the part of an offender by an imbalanced approach that wrongly elevates youth above the loss of life, ie harm, from homicide. The proper approach would be to have those public interest factors tending against prosecution put to the court for consideration when sentence is passed.” After the CPS announced its decision not to prosecute, Joseph claimed it was because her son was black and accused South Wales police and the CPS of institutional racism. While Mansfield did not repeat those allegations, he said it was imperative that public trust and confidence be maintained in the police and criminal justice system “for all persons including minority ethnic communities”. A banner hung outside the Royal Courts of Justice, where the hearing took place, said: “Killed and then failed by state racism.” Mansfield told the court: “It has not been clarified or established why Christopher, who was black, was selected by the suspect.” The barrister told the court that there was a “preponderance of evidence” that the teenager who pushed Christopher knew he could not swim but that even if he did not know, it would not prevent a manslaughter conviction. He added: “There has been a failure to consider properly the aggravating factors in the conduct of the suspect. The selfish telling of lies, the failure to show remorse, and the failure to accept responsibility for his actions, are properly to be treated as aggravating factors of relevance and importance.” In his written submissions Duncan Penny QC, for the DPP, said the CPS decision-maker in the case had acted with “scrupulous fairness”. He said: “She identified the key factors, attached the appropriate weight to those factors and then balanced those key factors that came down in favour of a prosecution against those that did not.” Christopher’s case has been highlighted by Black Lives Matter protesters and 24 MPs signed an early day motion expressing alarm at the CPS decision not to prosecute. Lord Justice Popplewell and Mr Justice Doves reserved judgment.During Britain’s Covid crisis, the state had little hesitation in cracking down on citizens deemed to violate the rules. Just eight days before the party in the prime minister’s garden, a 45-year-old homeless man was hauled before the courts for violating lockdown restrictions. In fact, the police were so overzealous in their use of lockdown rules that the Crown Prosecution Service later found three in 10 cases had been incorrectly charged. All in all, more than 100,000 fines have been handed out to people in England alone for an assortment of offences: from not wearing a face covering to mixing with people outside of your bubble. Needless to say, fines were not evenly distributed, with Black people up to seven times more likely to be fined by the police for lockdown breaches than white people. Of the total number of people fined, 371 people have been slapped with the maximum fee of £10,000 for – and wait for it – hosting gatherings of more than 30 people. Such a sum is easily payable if you are earning something like – to pluck a random figure – the prime minister’s £161,401 salary. For millions of people, such a sum is financially ruinous: as it is, around two-thirds of the UK’s population carry personal debt. All of this stands in the great tradition of the British state, of course. Many of our ministers have admitted to snorting or smoking a cacophony of illegal substances and cocaine traces have been found in parliament – unsurprisingly to anyone familiar with political circles, who knows that drug use is rife in them. Yet our ministers face no legal consequences for their substance use as they cheerlead a war on drugs that leaves Black people more likely to be arrested, charged and imprisoned for drug offences, often with life-ruining consequences. Our legal system cracks down on benefit fraud committed by the poorest, yet offers a whole series of legal tax loopholes for the well-to-do to exploit with abandon. One rule for them, another for us isn’t a cheap rhetorical device – it’s a statement of fact. That our prime minister and dozens of his officials were necking booze in the garden while ordinary citizens were being harassed by police officers is a self-evident affront. That the Metropolitan police have so far had insufficient evidence to take legal action against No 10 for multiple parties despite numerous officers being posted on the estate, but have wrongfully prosecuted so many working-class and, disproportionately, Black citizens tells its own story. Rather than wringing our hands at this injustice, we should be demanding action. There should be an immediate amnesty for those charged with breaking lockdown rules and their fines should be withdrawn. Those who have been made to pay often completely unaffordable sums should be reimbursed in full. The very people who designed the rules were able to shamelessly flout them while the state forced tens of thousands of often financially struggling people to open their wallets for lesser offences: this cannot stand. Pay them back, or tell the world loudly and proudly that British law exists to crack down on the poor and marginalised, while allowing the rich and powerful to run riot. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnist Join our journalists for a Guardian Live online event on the No 10 lockdown party and Boris Johnson’s future on Wednesday 19 January. Book hereThe chief executive of Countryside Properties has left the company after it failed to cash in on the UK property boom that has fuelled the huge profits at its housebuilding peers. Shares in Countryside were down by a quarter on Thursday, making it the biggest FTSE 250 faller by some distance and wiping £700m off its value, after the company revealed the extent of its poor performance. Adjusted operating profits more than halved year on year to £16.5m and housing completions fell by more than a third in the three months to the end of December. In contrast, Persimmon on Thursday reported bumper house sales, up a fifth on pre-pandemic levels in the second half of last year. Countryside announced the immediate departure of its chief executive, Iain McPherson, with its chair, John Martin, standing in until a permanent replacement is appointed. Martin said: “Trading in the first quarter of our new financial year has been below the board’s expectations.” He said he would conduct a review process of all of Countryside’s developments to ensure that each site was being developed “in accordance with the plans set out during the investment process”. As part of the boardroom reshuffle the company has appointed Peter Lee, a partner at Browning West – a US-based activist investor that has built up an almost 10% stake to become one of the company’s biggest shareholders – as a non-executive director. Countryside also responded on Thursday to government plans to protect leaseholders from the costs of all post-Grenfell building safety defects, not just combustible cladding. “[We are] fully supportive of finding an industry-wide solution for the benefit of leaseholders,” the company said. “We are currently working with landlords to expedite remediation in cases where the historic work on Countryside developments did not meet building standards.” The departure of McPherson and poor results cap a torrid year for Countryside. In September, the competition regulator forced the company to give formal commitments to free thousands of people who bought leasehold homes from costly contract terms resulting in the doubling of ground rent fees every 10 to 15 years. Countryside has confirmed it no longer sells leasehold properties with doubling-ground rent clauses, following the investigation by the Competition and Markets Authority.That’s all for today - here’s our main stories: Goodnight. GW In the City, the FTSE 100 has closed at a new two-year high. The UK’s blue-chip index ended the day 12 points or 0.16% to 7563 points, its highest close since late January 2020. Financial stocks rallied, with Barclays, HSBC and Standard Chartered all up over 2% on expectations of higher interest rates this year (good for bank profit margins). Travel stocks also picked up, with British Airways parent company IAG ending 2.7% higher, as worries about Omicron’s impact faded (France is lifting its ban on UK holidaymakers tomorrow morning). But JD Sports was the top faller, down 6.4% after chairman Peter Cowgill sold a block of shares (see 3.21pm). Tech-focused stocks also weakened, following the losses on Wall Street, with industrial software developer Aveva down almost 5%. Among smaller companies, housebuilder Countryside slumped 20% after this morning’s warning about poor trading. M&amp;S fell almost 8% despite reporting stronger Christmas sales - with traders disappointed that it didn’t lift its profit forecasts again. Technology stocks are having a choppy day in New York, where the Nasdaq Composite index is now down 1% or 145 points at 15,043. The selloff comes as average long-term U.S. mortgage rates jump to their highest level since March 2020, as lenders anticipate faster than expected tightening of monetary policy to combat US inflation. The reality TV star Kim Kardashian and boxing champion Floyd Mayweather Jr are among celebrities being sued over their promotion of an alleged “pump and dump” cryptocurrency scheme that investors say caused them to lose money. According to a class action lawsuit filed in a California court, executives of EthereumMax, in collaboration with Kardashian, Mayweather Jr and the basketball player Paul Pierce, sought to enrich themselves by making “false and misleading” statements to investors. Promotions by the company included an Instagram post to Kardashian’s 250 million followers that the head of the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority, Charles Randell, said may have had “the single biggest audience reach in history” for a financial product. The value of the company’s EMAX tokens increased by as much as 1,370% after the media marketing blitz before crashing to an all-time low, the suit claims. By using celebrity endorsements, the claimants say, EthereumMax’s executives, “touted the prospects of the company and the ability for investors to make significant returns due to the favourable ‘tokenomics’ of the EMAX Tokens”. More here. The episode shows the importance of vigilance in promotions involving cryptoassets, as Sushil Kuner, principal associate at the law firm Gowling WLG says: This reflects recent concerns in the UK, with our Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) stating that monitoring cryptoassets, like Bitcoin, is a “red-alert priority”. Back in London, shares in fashion retailer JD Sports have dropped 6% after it reported that chairman Peter Cowgill has sold 10m shares. The sale leaves Cowgill holding over 9.7, shares in JD Sports, which yesterday lifted its profit outlook after a strong performance over Black Friday and Christmas. Its US sales were also boosted by Americans spending their Covid fiscal stimulus cheques on items such as trainers and athleisure kit, adding up to £100m to profits. Wall Street has opened higher, as traders welcome the easing in producer price inflation in December (see last post) The Dow Jones industrial average of 30 leading US firms has gained 114 points, or 0.3%, to 36,404 points, approaching last week’s record high. Aerospace manufacturer Boeing is the top riser (+2.6%), followed by Visa (+2%), Goldman Sachs (+1.4%) and Nike (+0.8%). US producers hiked their prices last year at the fastest rate in at least a decade, but the inflationary surge may be easing. The Producer Price Index for final demand surged by 9.7% in 2021, the largest calendar-year increase since data were first calculated in 2010, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reported today. In December alone, goods and services providers lifted prices by 0.2%, a slowdown on November’s 1.0%, and October’s 0.6%. PPI eased in December thanks to a 6.1% drop in gasoline prices, with prices for meats, gas fuels, fresh and dry vegetables, diesel fuel, and primary basic organic chemicals also dipping. These producer prices are passed onto consumers, who saw inflation rise at the fastest pace in 40 years last month. Here’s Robert Frick, corporate economist at Navy Federal Credit Union, on the rise in weekly US jobless claims: “Especially given the large adjustments in the post-holiday period, we can’t chalk up the increase in weekly unemployment claims to Omicron. The level still remains near the historical average, and while that could change in the next month, with Omicron cases expected to peak in a couple weeks, it’s unlikely any increase would last long.” The number of Americans applying for unemployment benefits rose last week to the highest level since mid-November, but still low by historic standards, Associated Press says. U.S. jobless claims climbed by 23,000 last week to 230,000. The four-week moving average, which smooths out week-to-week blips, was up nearly 6,300 to almost 211,000. The weekly applications, a proxy for layoffs, have now risen four of the last five weeks, possibly a sign that the omicron variant is having an impact on the job market, which has bounced strongly from last year’s coronavirus recession. Altogether, 1.6 million people were collecting jobless aid the week that ended January 1st. Companies are holding onto workers at a time when it’s difficult to find replacements. Employers posted 10.6 million job openings in November, the fifth-highest monthly total in records going back to 2000. A record 4.5 million workers quit their jobs in November — a sign that they are confident enough to look something better. The number of Americans filing new claims for unemployment benefit rose last week, suggesting that Omicron is leading to a rise in layoffs. There were 230,000 new initial claims for jobless support in the week to Saturday 8th January, an increase of 23,000 from the previous week, on a seasonally adjusted basis. Ignoring seasonal adjustments, the actual number of initial claims rose by 103,693 to 419,446. However, the number of people who were already receiving support (the ‘continued claims’ total) dropped to 1.559m, the lowest level for insured unemployment since June 2, 1973. Despite rising, the initial jobless claims total is still around pre-pandemic levels, as this chart shows: The health secretary, Sajid Javid, has confirmed that the time people with Covid in England have to spend in self-isolation is to be cut to five full days. From Monday people would be able to leave isolation if they tested negative on day six, Javid told the Commons, a move which could cut the staff absences seen at the end of December. Stocks of painkillers at UK stores ran lower last week, amid record Covid-19 infections and winter bugs. Paracetamol was out of stock at 8% of stores surveyed by market researchers Kantar between Friday 7th and Monday 10th January, with another 21% of shelves running low. Ibuprofen was either low, or out of stock, at a fifth of stores, after employee absence rates rose sharply at the end of December. That’s slightly worse than in the run-up to Christmas, when 25% of stores were low or out of paracetamol. Toilet rolls, fresh fish and frozen chips also ranked highly on the shortages list. Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst, Hargreaves Lansdown, says the data shows the impact of illness: “The latest ONS data paints a picture of sick Britain as shoppers have stocked up on paracetamol, ibuprofen and toilet rolls as Covid cases surged. Aches and pains, upset stomachs and runny noses saw demand for loo paper and pain relief soar, with the products in shorter supply. UK pubs, bars and restaurants sectors suffered poor trading over the crucial festive period, new data shows. Trading at hospitality venues slumped by 60% on Christmas Day, 31% on Boxing Day and 27% on New Year’s Eve, compared to 2019’s pre-pandemic levels. The figures, from trade body UKHospitality and consultancy CGA, show that the sector suffered a ‘lost Christmas’ and cap off a devastating December in which the omicron variant hit takings hard. That explains clearly why so many hospitality firms have few cash reserves at the start of 2022 (see 10.09am post), and some have little confidence of keeping afloat. Venues in Scotland and Wales, where restrictions were tightened, saw the sharpest falls in trading. UKHospitality CEO Kate Nicholls, said many firms racked up losses during December, rather than the usual profits they relied on, which will hit job creation and growth. “December is a vital period for hospitality businesses, equal to three months’ worth of trading for many. These new figures are crippling for an industry already struggling but also spell disaster for the wider UK economic recovery, as ONS figures showed that overall growth in Q3 was driven by hospitality. “These sales drops versus 2019, and also against our members’ projections before the onset of the new Omicron variant, will have taken most businesses from healthy trading for the month to painful losses, delaying the sector’s recovery and extending hospitality’s long covid. Cash reserves are severely depleted, and some businesses will struggle to survive the first quarter of 2022. “This dreadfully disappointing December has further stymied our ability to deliver jobs, growth and investment at pace, which we all know is so crucial to the recovery of our economy overall.” British fashion retailer Next has cut sick pay for unvaccinated staff who must self-isolate due to exposure to Covid-19, Reuters reports. “It’s highly emotive but we have to balance the needs of the business with those of workers and shareholders,” said a spokesperson for the group. He said unvaccinated workers who test positive will still receive Next’s full rate of sick pay. Next’s move follows a similar one by furniture retailer Ikea. Last month Covid rules in England were relaxed for people who have been vaccinated so they did not need to isolate if they were exposed to a positive case. However, there was no change to the guidance for unvaccinated contacts of positive Covid-19 cases, who were still required to self-isolate for 10 days after their date of exposure to the virus. Next’s policy shift means unvaccinated workers required to isolate after being identified as a close contact of someone with Covid could receive as little as the Statutory Sick Pay minimum of 96.35 pounds ($132.43) a week. Persimmon has reported a bumper year with weekly sales up a fifth in the second half of 2021 compared with pre-pandemic levels thanks to a booming housing market driven by cheap mortgage deals and a stamp duty holiday. The UK’s biggest housebuilder by market value said in a trading update that revenues rose 8.4% last year to £3.61bn as it completed the sale of 14,551 homes, up almost 1,000 on 2020, as the average price of a home rose from £230,534 to £237,050 year-on-year. However, Persimmon said the spread of the Omicron variant has increased sickness-related absenteeism, with some customers delaying moving into new homes to follow government isolation advice. Dean Finch, chief executive at Persimmon, said: “Whilst the industry continues to face the ongoing operational and economic challenges as a consequence of the pandemic, particularly as the Omicron outbreak unfolded in the last six weeks of the year, the group continues to manage these ongoing challenges comprehensively,” “The long-term fundamentals of the UK housing market remain strong and I am confident.” A London-based online payments company has become Britain’s most valuable private fintech business after its latest fundraising valued it at $40bn (£29bn), handing its surf-loving founder a paper fortune of around $20bn. Checkout.com, which simplifies payment processes for businesses, achieved the valuation following a $1bn investment that puts the stake of its 40-year-old chief executive, Guillaume Pousaz, at around $20bn. Pousaz, a Swiss national, dropped out of university in 2005 when his father became ill with cancer and he then moved to California to pursue his love of surfing. It was only after running out of cash that he took up a job with International Payment Consultants, a payments processing firm, in 2006. Pousaz told the Sunday Times in 2020: “I didn’t choose payments — payments chose me.” “I only took that job so I could go surfing.” A year after joining IPC, Pousaz left to launch his first startup. He founded Checkout.com in 2012. More here: UK diner numbers slumped at the start of this month, in another blow to hospitality firms. The number of people dining out fell by 48 percentage points in the week to Monday 10 January, as Covid-19 infections ran at record levels. Seated diner numbers were 88% of the level in the equivalent week seen in 2020, OpenTable data shows. Dining numbers began falling in late November once the Omicron variant emerged as a threat, as people cut their social contact. In London and Manchester seated diners fell by 23 and 57 percentage points respectively. Visits to high street stores and shopping malls also dropped. Overall retail footfall was down 6% in the week to 8 January, to 78% of the level seen in 2019. Marks &amp; Spencer and Tesco enjoyed a strong Christmas trading period, partly as the rapid spread of Omicron prompted people to eat and drink more at home instead of heading out to restaurants and pubs. M&amp;S, which is recovering from years in the doldrums, booked its highest ever sales of food and a surge in clothing. Food sales jumped 10% in the three months to 1 January, compared with a year earlier, making it the fastest growing food retailer in the UK. The strong rise in sales came despite fears of product shortages caused by supply chain difficulties including driver shortages and hold-ups at ports. Clothing sales jumped almost 40% in the UK and more than 17% overseas despite a fall in sales at its high street stores. The company said the sales growth had come despite cutting discounting by two-thirds. Steve Rowe, the chief executive of Marks &amp; Spencer, said: “Trading over the Christmas period has been strong, demonstrating the continued improvements we’ve made to product and value. Clothing and home has delivered growth for the second successive quarter, supported by robust online and full price sales growth. “Food has maintained its momentum, outperforming the market over both 12 and 24 months. The market continues to be impacted by the headwinds and tailwinds that we reported in the first half, but I remain encouraged that our transformation plan is now driving improved performance.” The boost to food retailers from the Omicron wave was also confirmed by Tesco. The UK’s biggest supermarket said sales rose 0.6% in the three months to 8 January – compared with the same period a year before. Tesco increased sales on 2020 when supermarket sales were boosted by the closure of hospitality businesses for many weeks across the UK. More here: The tumble in takings during the usually busy Christmas period has left more UK hospitality firms short of cash. The ONS reports that 40% of all businesses say they have less than three months cash reserves, including 11% with none at all. The problem is most acute in the accommodation and food service activities industry, with 54% of firms having under three month’s cash reserves, up from 44% in early December 2021. Also, 17% of these hospitality firms have low or no confidence in surviving the next three months, the gloomiest outlook across the economy. December is normally a bumper time for hospitality, letting firms build up cash reserves to see them through the lean times in January and February. Last month, though, the plunge in bookings cost pubs, bars and restaurants over £10,000 each in the week leading up to Christmas, with fears that some will not survive. Around three percent of UK staff were off work at the end of last month due to Covid-19 - either infected, isolating or in quarantine. That’s the highest since the data began in June 2020, as the first lockdowns were eased. The Office for National Statistics reports that absences were highest in sectors such as hairdressing, saying: In late December 2021, approximately 3% of the workforce were estimated to be on sick leave or not working because of coronavirus (COVID-19) symptoms, self-isolation or quarantine. This is the highest the figure has been since comparable estimates began in June 2020; the other service activities industry, which includes hairdressing and other beauty treatments, reported the highest absence levels (7%). Covid-19 cases hit a series of record highs at the end of December, with the UK reporting nearly 190,000 new infections on New Year’s Eve. Firms also reported a flurry of cancellations in December, as cautious consumers avoided hospitality venues such as pubs and restaurants. Just over one-fifth of businesses reported increased cancellations from customers, including 44% of accommodation and food service activity firms. The pandemic is also driving up operating costs, with 8% reporting costs increased substantially and 47% reporting costs had increased a little. Tesco is in a good position for 2022, despite today’s share price dip (currently -1.5%) says Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at IG Group. “Tesco had been riding high into today’s statement, so they would have had to pull a huge rabbit out of their hat to avoid a decline in the shares. But we shouldn’t let today’s drop cast too much of a shadow over what was a solid statement all round. Sales up, a good Christmas, and market share thriving too. “Overall it puts the UK’s supermarket titan in a solid place for the rest of the year, and even some additional share price losses in coming sessions should reflect some profit taking, rather than any disappointment around the numbers.” While Tesco and Marks &amp; Spencer were seeing strong food sales, hospitality firms were suffering from weak trading as the Omicron variant kept customers at home. Pub chain Mitchells &amp; Butlers has reported that a recovery in trading last autumn stumbled, after Omicron “led to calls for further caution in socialising”. Its like-for-like sales had risen 2.7% in the 8 weeks to 20th November, but then tumbled 6% in the next seven weeks. M&amp;B, which runs the All Bar One, Harvester and Toby Carvery chains, adds that: The adverse impact of Omicron being particularly felt in the most recent four weeks, over the important festive season, during which like-for-like sales have been down 10.2%. M&amp;B also warned that its costs are rising: As previously announced, in the current year inflationary cost headwinds are expected to be higher than the normal pre-Covid level of £60m to £65m, due particularly to high levels of statutory wage rate increases and persistent historic high prices in energy markets. Britain’s FTSE 100 index has dipped into the red this morning, having hit its highest levels in almost two years on Wednesday. The FTSE 100 is down 12 points, or 0.15%, at 7540. Housebuilder Persimmon is leading the fallers, despite reporting a 10% increase in revenues in 2021 - up to £3.61bn from £3.33bn, with new home completions rising from 13,575 to 14,551. Victoria Scholar, Head of Investment at interactive investor, has the details: “Persimmon reported total forward sales at £1.62 billion as of 31st December, up from £1.69 billion a year earlier and around 20% ahead of 2019’s pre-pandemic level. The fundamentals of an upbeat demand outlook combined with constrained supply continue to point to a strong UK housing market with favourable conditions supportive of Persimmon and the broader sector. However headwinds remain with uncertainty around covid, rising interest rates and cladding related repairs. The sector has been struggling this week after the government called on developers to help pay for up to £4bn to fix the cladding crisis. After a lacklustre performance in 2021, shares in Persimmon have seen no let up at the start of this year, heading back down in the direction of the October trough, erasing more than 75% of the fourth quarter’s double-digit gain. Today’s price action has seen an extension of the recent downtrend that started at the turn of the year. UK housebuilder Countryside has announced the departure of its chief executive, and warned that trading is weaker than expected. Shares in Countryside have tumbled 16%, after it reported that operating profits have more than halved year-on-year in the last quarter. Trading in the first quarter of our new financial year has been below the Board’s expectations. We expect to update the market on progress with the review of developments in 8 to 10 weeks. CEO Iain McPherson is to step down with immediate effect. Countryside has also struck an agreement with activist investor Browning West, which has been pushing for change. Peter Lee, partner at the US hedge fund, will join the board, with Browning West agreeing not to propose resolutions at general meetings or try to remove directors from the Board. Greetings card chain Card Factory says trading is above expectations, Trading recovered particularly strongly through December, with like-for-like store sales in the run up to Christmas returning to similar levels to those delivered in December 2019. Card Factory has reported total sales of £337.3m since the start of February, ahead of the Board’s expectations. That’s still sharply lower than pre-pandemic (it made £424.5m in eleven months to 31 December 2019), as restrictions forced shops to close at times last year. Tesco’s shares have opened lower too, down 1.8%, despite lifting its profit outlook. They’re still close to their highest level since 2014, though. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets says: As a result of the outperformance in Q3, Tesco said expectations for adjusted retail operating profits, which were revised up in the H1 numbers to between £2.5bn and £2.6bn, are now expected to come in slightly above that number. Shareholders seem a little less impressed, with the shares falling back in early trade. This morning’s reaction seems ‘a little churlish’, but doesn’t mean Tesco shares can’t climb higher in the longer term, he adds: Shares in M&amp;S have....&lt; drumrolls&gt; dropped at the start of trading, despite reporting a jump in sales through the Christmas period. M&amp;S shares are down around 4.4%, suggesting that traders had already priced in a strong performance, and were hoping for more today. Retail analyst Nick Bubb explains: Well, “Super” Thursday is traditionally the best day to “bury” bad news about Christmas trading, given the huge number of companies usually reporting at the same time, but the field is a bit thin this year…and although we can’t see any bad news, we can’t see that much good news either, with the City likely to be disappointed by the lack of a profit upgrade at M&amp;S… M&amp;S shares had rallied strongly in 2021, hitting the highest since May 2019, as it upgraded its profit forecasts twice. Today it only nudged that guidance higher, saying it was “more confident” in hitting those targets. Online fashion group ASOS is sticking with its recently downgraded guidance, after being hit by supply chain problems and rising costs. ASOS has reported total sales growth of 5% in the last four months of 2021, including a 13% rise in the UK. It says that the pandemic continued to disrupt business: Supply chain constraints played out as anticipated, whilst market demand remained volatile due to significantly increased COVID caseloads across large parts of the UK, Europe, and the US. Customer growth slowed, after surging earlier in the pandemic as lockdowns drove people towards home shopping. ASOS added another 300,000 customers, lifting its total to 26.7m. ASOS issued a profits warning in October, with CEO Nick Beighton stepping down. Mat Dunn, COO, says ASOS is delivering on that guidance “despite challenging market conditions”. This performance reflects the strength of our offer, excellent customer experience and the dedication and hard work of all ASOSers. We continued to make progress against our objectives to improve the flexibility and speed of our retail model and accelerate the pace of delivery of our international growth strategy. Looking ahead, while mindful of the near-term uncertainty relating to the pandemic, our guidance for the full year remains unchanged. ASOS has also announced it moving to the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange, off AIM (the Alternative Investment Market, favoured by smaller firms). Ross Hindle, analyst at research group Third Bridge, says M&amp;S is outperforming its rivals (after years of lagging behind). “M&amp;S has served up a piping hot performance with total UK sales strongly beating consensus estimates. “A resurgent M&amp;S was Britain’s fastest-growing retailer over the Christmas quarter, as it made the most of favourable trading conditions in December. “M&amp;S was a big beneficiary of Britain’s appetite for at-home luxury as consumers sought to spend a bit more on the Christmas Cheer and make the best of another Covid Christmas A well-executed restructuring has seen the Group outperform peers over the past 12 months, Hindle adds: Fresher fashion labels, an improved website, and a more modern store environment are all building momentum, however it is the Group’s partnership with Ocado that continues to shine bright. “The M&amp;S and Ocado partnership has been a fruitful one for both parties with M&amp;S products now accounting for nearly 30% of the Ocado basket. We expect this partnership to continue to blossom and our experts cannot foresee the rumours of a total buy-out by M&amp;S materialising. But,....there’s also more to do: “Despite the positive performance, M&amp;S is still plagued by structural challenges, especially in its Clothing &amp; Home division. To complete its resurgence M&amp;S needs to slim down its bloated clothing ranges, trim its high SKU count [the number of items for sale], and resolve its non-premium store locations.” Richard Lim, CEO at Retail Economics, says Tesco’s focus on its Clubcard loyalty scheme is paying off -- especially as the cost of living squeeze tightens. “The retailer’s single-minded focus on competitive pricing and driving loyalty through its Clubcard-only discounts has won over customers this Christmas. The use of Clubcard has been a masterstroke from the retailer, enhancing the perception of value and playing on the hugely powerful customer instinct of FOMO - the fear of missing out. “Online continued to deliver strong gains as a wave of new e-commerce converts stuck to a new way of getting their groceries over Christmas. Sales growth was mightily impressive in the wholesale part of the business with Booker seeing double-digit growth as catering and convenience boosted sales. “Looking forward, the imminent squeeze on incomes will force many households into recessionary behaviours, trading down to own-brand and shopping around as they look to make budgets stretch that little bit further. Tesco is well placed to win new customers with their laser-like focus on value as they double-down on their Clubcard success.” Tesco says this morning that over 95% of its promotional sales are now on Clubcard Prices, with 8.5m customers now accessing Clubcard via its app. Some snap reaction, from Retail Week’s Luke Tugby: And the FT’s Jonathan Eley: Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Marks &amp; Spencer has hailed a strong Christmas as the UK retailer’s turnaround strategy starts to pay off..... as supermarket chain Tesco upgrades its profit outlook. M&amp;S’s UK sales jumped by 8.9% in the last quarter, compared to pre-pandemic levels two years ago, a trading update just released shows. In the last 13 weeks of 2021, food sales were 12.4% higher than in the last quarter of 2019, with M&amp;S’s Retail parks and Simply Food stores “continued to outperform”. Basket sizes increased, as customers used M&amp;S for more of their everyday shopping -- perhaps splashing out on more high-end food to celebrate Christmas after a tough year. Clothing &amp; Home sales, which have long been a problem area for M&amp;S, rose 3.2% compared with two years ago. M&amp;S says it is now “more confident” of hitting its recent upgraded profit forecasts of £500m -- unless new material restrictions or lockdowns are imposed. M&amp;S’s chief executive, Steve Rowe, said: “Trading over the Christmas period has been strong, demonstrating the continued improvements we’ve made to product and value. Clothing &amp; Home has delivered growth for the second successive quarter, supported by robust online and full price sales growth. Food has maintained its momentum, outperforming the market over both 12 and 24 months. The market continues to be impacted by the headwinds and tailwinds that we reported in the first half, but I remain encouraged that our transformation plan is now driving improved performance.” In what retail analysts are calling Super Thursday, Tesco has raised its profit outlook, reporting strong sales at large stores and convenience outlets, with online sales significantly ahead of pre-COVID levels. The UK’s biggest supermarket has reported a rise in Christmas sales, and declared that its market share is now the highest in four years. Tesco’s UK like-for-like sales rose 0.3% year-on-year over the Christmas period, and were 8.8% higher than two years ago -- showing how grocers’ sales have benefitted from the pandemic. Tesco says that it now expects retail operating profits slightly above its previous guidance, after stronger than expected sales this year. Tesco CEO Ken Murphy says: “We are delighted that we were able to help our customers have a great Christmas. Despite growing cost pressures and supply chain challenges in the industry, we continued to invest to protect availability, doubled down on our commitment to deliver great value and offered our strongest ever festive range. This put us in a strong position to meet customers’ needs as, once again, COVID-19 led to a greater focus on celebrating at home. As a result, we outperformed the market, growing market share and strengthening our value position. ASOS and Card Factory are also reporting results (we’ll get to them shortly...) Yesterday, supermarket group J Sainsbury, sportswear/fashion firm JD Sports and homeware chain Dunelm alo lifted their profit forecasts Today we also get the latest US jobless figures, which may show an impact from omicron on America’s labor market. Britain’s Office for National Statistics releases its weekly healthcheck on the UK economy, covering indoor dining, store shortages, credit card spending and gas prices (among other indicators) European stock markets are set for a subdued start, after US inflation hit its highest level since 1982 yesterday. The agenda 9.30am GMT: Weekly UK business insights and economic activity data 1.30pm GMT: US weekly jobless figures 3pm GMT: Federal Reserve governor Lael Brainard’s Senate hearing on her nomination to become Fed vice chairMore than 400 years after Hamlet was performed by a ship’s crew anchored off west Africa in the first known production of a Shakespeare play outside the British Isles, the bard is once again taking to the high seas. In evidence that all the world is indeed a stage, the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC) has signed a three-year deal with Cunard for productions aboard the company’s flagship cruise liner, Queen Mary 2. Passengers will be able to enjoy a new one-hour compilation piece, Boundless As the Sea, described by the RSC as “a unique blend of Shakespeare’s iconic love scenes”, in the ship’s purpose-built theatre. The onboard cast will also lead a series of workshops exploring their craft, and “intimate, informal events” in which actors will perform favourite sonnets and speeches, and answer questions from the audience. An abridged version of the RSC’s 2018 production of Miss Littlewood, a musical about the life of actor and director Joan Littlewood, known as the “mother of modern theatre”, will also be performed. Erica Whyman, the RSC’s acting artistic director, said: “Shakespeare can seem forbidding. Some people have been made to feel as though he belongs to a certain kind of audience. So an introduction that opens up how beautiful the language is, that brings the language to life and respects it, can unlock it for new audiences.” The deal with Cunard was a “classy partnership between two organisations offering people the opportunity to expand their horizons”, she added. “In a sense, it’s an extension of what we do already in touring the UK, and we’re very proud of that work. We take a ‘first encounter’ programme which is tailor-made for people who are seeing Shakespeare for the first time to schools and communities in areas of multiple challenges. [This] is just a different way of touring.” Sonia Massai, a professor of Shakespeare studies at King’s College London, said: “The more Shakespeare, the better. Shakespeare has survived, in fact thrived, in any shape or form in which [his work] has been presented to audiences over the last few hundred years. I’m not a purist as a scholar – in fact, I’m really interested in contemporary uses of Shakespeare.” The bard’s plays had “always functioned as a platform for debate about the big questions of our own time. That’s the purpose of the arts more generally, and Shakespeare clearly occupies a central place in that.” The RSC – the “gold standard” of Shakespearean performance – received considerable public funding, so “any innovation, any attempt to reach new audiences, is to be welcomed”. But, she added, cruise ship audiences were “probably quite similar to audiences who already go to Stratford [the RSC’s base] or theatres across the world”. Whyman said the RSC worked “very, very hard in our day to make sure that we’re reaching the most diverse range of audiences. Cunard is a particular project, which allows a particular audience to have access to our work, and there’s no reason to deprive them of that experience”. Prices for the Shakespeare cruises start at £379 a person for an inside cabin on a two-day voyage from Southampton to Hamburg, and reach £19,389 a person for a 26-day round trip between New York and the Norwegian fjords in a top-of-the-range suite. As well as Shakespeare, passengers can enjoy live music, wine tasting, an onboard planetarium and a game of deck quoits. Lee Powell, the vice-president of brand and product at Cunard, said: “To be able to offer our guests access to performances by world leaders in both contemporary theatre and Shakespeare’s finest work is an extraordinary opportunity which I know our guests will fully immerse themselves in.” The RSC declined to disclose financial details of the partnership. The performance of Hamlet on 5 September 1607 aboard the Red Dragon, an English ship on its way to India, was logged in Capt William Keeling’s diary, regarded as authentic by Massai. The play was presented to an eminent guest, the local king’s brother-in-law, Lucas Fernandez. Keeling was pleased enough with the result for his crew to perform Richard II a few weeks later. • This article was amended on 13 January 2022. An earlier version said that the Red Dragon’s Hamlet performance was more than 500 years ago.There’s plenty to ask the man who Donald Sutherland calls “son”. He’s British for starters – born in 1966 in St Mary’s hospital in Paddington. He’s named after American director Warren Kiefer, who directed Donald Sutherland in 1964’s horror Castle of the Living Dead, and grew up with his mother in Canada alongside his twin sister, who looks spookily similar if you care to Google her. Sutherland’s film career has spanned nearly 40 years. He made his debut in 1983 comedy drama Max Dugan Returns with Donald Sutherland and Matthew Broderick. He soon became one of the names associated with the Brat Pack – the group of young Hollywood actors who frequently appeared together in 80s coming-of-age films. He played the bully, Ace, in 1986’s Stand By Me with River Phoenix, Corey Feldman, Wil Wheaton and Jerry O’Connell; Doc in 1988 and 1989’s Young Guns and Young Guns II with Charlie Sheen, Emilio Estevez and Christian Slater; and vampire gang leader David Powers in 1987’s The Lost Boys. There’s talk of The Lost Boys being remade with A Quiet Place’s Noah Jupe and Jaeden Martell, from It. How does Kiefer feel about a younger generation fanging up his legacy? Time to join the club? Or death by stereo? Sutherland was nearly cast as Robin in an early script of Michael Keaton’s 1989 version of Batman. Then there’s 1990 horror Flatliners with – of course – Julia Roberts, 1992’s A Few Good Men … Plus 2002’s Phone Booth, where Kiefer literally but brilliantly phones in his role as a mysterious but threatening voice on the end of a phone in a phone box. Since 2001, you’d probably most associate Kiefer with playing 24’s Jack Bauer, who over nine seasons (and one special) loses his wife, fakes his own death, deliberately becomes addicted to heroin and spends 20 months being tortured by the Chinese, all whilse seemingly holding it in. His bladder of steel has even been the subject of its own Guardian discussion. So – be our guest – and someone please do ask: when does Jack Bauer go to the toilet? Most recently, Sutherland has gone from loyally serving Presidents Palmer and Heller (but not – boo, hiss – President Logan) to playing POTUS in three series of Designated Survivor from 2015 to 2019. At one point, the calm and collected President Kirkman counters a deadly virus spreading over the world, leading some people to wonder: did Kiefer predict the future? Sutherland is also about to release his third country album, Bloor Street (“I asked myself, what do I love about acting and music?” For me, it’s storytelling ...”). He’s in the process of rescheduling his UK tour due to the Covid situation. Still, at least it’s not the lethal Cordilla pulmonary-immuno virus from Day 3 of 24. So, dammit! Post your questions for Kiefer in the comments below by [tick … tock … tick … tock … ] 12:00 hours on Monday and we’ll get Chloe to upload the schematics ready to publish in Film&amp;Music in print and online on 28 January. Mr President, it’s been an honour … Kiefer Sutherland’s new album Bloor Street is out on Pheromone Recordings on 21 January.A property developer bidding to build a 51-storey apartment tower with only one staircase has put its planning application on hold just hours after the Guardian exposed fire safety concerns. On Thursday evening Ballymore had planned to seek approval for one of the UK’s tallest residential buildings close to Canary Wharf in east London, but withdrew its application after fire safety experts branded as “madness” its plan to build more than 400 flats in a tower two-and-a-half times the height of Grenfell with just one staircase. Details of the scheme triggered widespread outrage and concern, including from survivors of the disaster at Grenfell Tower, which also had only one staircase. The local MP, Apsana Begum, said constituents were “right to be distressed” and said she would ensure concerns were addressed. On Thursday the London fire brigade also raised formal concerns about the proposals with planners at the London Borough of Tower Hamlets, and Ballymore asked for the application to be taken off the planning committee agenda. An LFB spokesperson said the design “does not provide suitable and convenient means of escape and associated evacuation strategy for all building users”. “In buildings with a single escape route, we would expect the developer to have their own fire engineers provide a full review to show the resilience in the event of a fire and this does not appear to have been carried out.” Under current building regulations, a single staircase is allowed in tall buildings if they are designed so that residents can “stay put safely in their flats in the event of a fire”. However, fire safety experts believe that is too risky and the government is reviewing provision of escape routes. One fire safety expert, Arnold Tarling, told the Guardian it was “utter madness that this is still allowed”. A leaseholder in a nearby Ballymore apartment block that caught fire last year described the plan as “very scary” because it could result in evacuees and firefighters trying to use the same stairway in opposite directions. The Grenfell United families group said: “Grenfell had a stay put policy and one stairwell. Seventy-two died. Fifteen of the 72 victims killed were disabled. Personal evacuation plans are still not compulsory for disabled residents. The stay put policy remains. Where are the lessons learnt?” Rabina Khan, a local councillor who was planning to oppose the scheme, said she was “very pleased” that the scheme could now be rethought. “I want to see two stairwells,” she said. “We need to put people before profit.” At least 27 countries have stricter rules than the UK requiring second staircases in tall residential buildings. They are required in all buildings above four storeys in the US, above 25 metres in Belgium and Poland, above 60 metres in Germany and Switzerland, and above 80 metres in Italy. Ballymore’s Cuba Street tower is expected to be 174 metres high. News of the plan for a single staircase caused widespread alarm. Create Streets, an urban design thinktank influential among Conservatives, tweeted: “Stupidity is making the same mistakes again. Towers have their place (they work particularly well for the rich and childless) but should not be the default way of populating our cities.” The Royal Institute of British Architects has meanwhile called on the government’s new building safety regulator to set a new height threshold at which at least two staircases are required in residential towers. A Tower Hamlets council spokesperson said: “Comments from the London fire brigade were received today, which raise a number of issues that will need to be addressed. The applicant has asked for more time to respond and therefore the item will no longer be considered at tonight’s meeting, and will only be brought to committee once these issues are resolved.” A spokesperson for Ballymore said: “As part of the planning application for our Cuba Street development, Ballymore received comments from the London fire brigade today, requesting clarification around aspects of the application. We are more than happy to provide that clarification and will continue to work closely with the LFB and local authority towards presenting the scheme for planning approval in due course. Like all Ballymore developments, the Cuba Street scheme will be built in full accordance with approved and emerging guidance and British Standards.” Tower Hamlets Justice for Leaseholders Group, which represents people affected by the current building safety crisis, said the withdrawal of the application was “a sign of the start of a new era in fire safety and leaseholder rights in the UK”. “The public outcry over the construction of a new building with weak fire safety measures should serve as a warning to both developers and to councils … this latest development shows that they are ‘on notice’.”Foreign dramas can be like a little holiday, allowing you to dream of living in a country where the weather, the people or just the interiors are a bracing contrast to what you are used to. Yet it is hard not to look for the ways in which things are the same wherever you go. Good news! Netflix’s new Japanese drama The Journalist is about a corrupt government siphoning off public money. I immediately feel at home. Land around a school has been sold off cheaply in a deal involving the prime minister and his wife, while another politician is under investigation for his involvement in a startup that has received inordinate government subsidies. The first of these scandals is picked up by our titular hero, Anna Matsuda (Ryôko Yonekura), a maverick broadsheet reporter who is famous for battering government spokespeople in televised press conferences. The more jaded, news-saturated types tuning in may say Matsuda’s interrogations are just wordy showboating – the sort of heavily editorialised haranguing that pleases people who agree with the point, but doesn’t move the story on. At least she is trying to bring the bad guys down, though – and it has made her a star. “She’s incredible!” says one media-savvy young fan, devouring the latest Matsuda clip via smartphone at a cafe table. The Journalist is to some extent a fantasy of fearless, truth-telling reporting. If that were all it was, it would be a straight-up dud. Episode one presents childish views of newspaper journalism – apparently a noble discipline quite separate from the fake news pumped out online – and government malfeasance. The latter manifests as junior civil servants being ordered by senior colleagues to open incriminating documents on their computers, edit out all references to the PM and hit save. Intense closeups of computer screens show us text being typed over. The political analysis is equally basic, with the idea of capitalism as the root cause of the characters’ various miseries hovering constantly in the show’s peripheral vision, but never identified. Rather than being self-serving corporate entities whose interests coincide with the people they are meant to hold to account, media organisations are forever fighting against interference from unseen government “high-ups”. Similarly, the police repeatedly abandon investigations into official wrongdoing – another motif for which you don’t need to be familiar with Japanese politics to appreciate. But then the second episode brings tragedy and it becomes clear that The Journalist isn’t trying to be a complex drama about power dynamics. It is an open-hearted melodrama about good, ordinary people, whose health and happiness ought to matter, being crushed by injustice. Once the corruption scandal progresses to a life lost, rather than just money misappropriated, the focus is on men in suits whose career aspirations have, over time, inured them to the moral consequences of their work. Slowly, The Journalist breaks down its characters into those who can cope with suppressing their own humanity and those who can’t. As the series wears on and Matsuda keeps the controversy alive, the apologetic bows get deeper as granite professional facades finally crack. “I am truly sorry,” is the most common line of dialogue and, if you can ignore the shameless sad piano in the background, it gets more moving each time you hear it. This is wish fulfilment, based on the question that nags us most when we read about corruption and cover-ups: how can the people who did this sleep at night? We would love to see them unable to do so – and The Journalist indulges that desire. But it does so effectively, setting up simple stories about the emotional fallout of institutional cruelty to remind us what is at stake. Shinobu Terajima gives a controlled, dignified performance as a widow whose bewildered vulnerability gives way to determination, while there is a heartbreaking subplot about an ambiguous bromance between political colleagues, one of whom deeply regrets the way their bond failed to hold when his friend’s idealism cost him dearly. Finally saying the thing that has long being unsaid – whether it’s “I love you” or “I did this and I apologise” – is at the heart of all The Journalist’s dramatic payoffs. In the end, it turns that responsibility towards us. In its later episodes, it is explicit about Japan being a country that has slid into a swamp of dishonesty because its citizens’ apathy has allowed it to do so. If you want something better, the programme says, you – as an individual – have to speak up. Naive and sentimental though The Journalist may be, it is not wrong about that.Over the last decade and more, no Lieder recitals have given me more intense pleasure than those by the tenor Christoph Prégardien. Though he is now in his mid 60s, and his voice has inevitably lost some of its former bloom and flexibility with age, this Brahms disc, recorded in 2020, confirms that the sheer intelligence of Prégardien’s performances, his immaculate diction and the perfect weight and colour he gives to each phrase, still conjure revelatory interpretations from everything he sings. The collection sees the start of what Naxos plans to be a complete survey of Brahms’s songs. How much of the series will be allotted to Prégardien isn’t clear, but with Ulrich Eisenlohr as his partner, the communicative power and mastery of every nuance of this opening instalment make one hope that the pair will be regularly involved. The four groups of songs cover almost a quarter of a century in Brahms’s development, from the nine songs of Op 32, completed in 1864, to the five of Op 105, which date to 1888. As Eisenlohr points out in his very thorough sleeve notes, the poems that Brahms set are rarely of the highest class – in that respect he differed in his approach to Lieder writing from his 19th-century predecessors, such as Schubert and Schumann; Gottfried Keller and Theodor Storm are probably the best known of the writers represented here. But each of these sets mixes and matches material from a variety of sources: Op 32, for instance, juxtaposes German translations of the 14th-century Persian lyric poet Hafez with poems by the early Romantic August von Platen-Hallermünde, while Op 43 includes a text from Des Knaben Wunderhorn, the folk collection that Mahler would later explore so extensively. However lowly or mundane the words, though, Prégardien treats them with the respect he would give to a poem by Heine or Goethe, just as Brahms extracts every morsel of meaning in his settings. It’s fair to say that there is no intrinsically great music here; what we have, though, are outstanding performances of all 24 songs, each the product of Prégardien’s craft and his lifetime’s experience in this repertoire. This week’s other picks There is more outstanding Brahms from the clarinettist Michael Collins on the BIS label, with the two sonatas Op 120, which were written for his instrument just three years before the composer’s death. The release marks Collins’s 60th birthday later this month, and the sonatas provide a perfect showcase for his creamy tone and superb technical facility; Stephen Hough is the equally immaculate pianist. Their performance of the first sonata, in F minor, is intense and truly searching, that of the second, in E flat, lighter and more relaxed, while as a bonus they add Collins’s own “adaptation” of Brahms’s A major violin sonata Op 100, a more successful translation than one could ever imagine.FKA twigs recently took to Instagram to depict her mixtape Caprisongs as a soundtrack for preparing to go out: “It’s bronzer in the sink, alcopop on the side … a club pre-game … your bestie who is always late but brings the most to a party.” This is not a description that would fit most of Tahliah Barnett’s oeuvre – to date she has dealt largely in darkness and heartache. But where 2019’s Magdalene came with a sleeve featuring twigs looking troubled, her face disturbingly distorted, on the cover of Caprisongs – the first thing she’s released since she accused her ex-boyfriend Shia LaBeouf of abuse (allegations he denies) – she’s clad in glittering jewellery, pulling down her bottom lip to reveal the acronym GOAT (greatest of all time) written on her teeth. Its contents follow suit. Twigs herself sounds different: the quivering RP voice she deployed during Magdalene is largely gone, although it makes a brief reappearance during Minds of Men. It’s replaced by something with roots in her adopted home of south London, a better fit for lyrics more obviously rooted in hip-hop and R&amp;B than before, the delivery frequently influenced by the fast-paced triplet flows of rap. There’s a noticeable new buoyancy to the musical approach: “Falling in love all over again, but this time with music and myself”, as she put it on Instagram, in what reads like a response to the distress of her emotional life. FKA twigs’ desire to present herself differently on Caprisongs goes far beyond the visuals and vocal tics. For all the soul-baring on Magdalene, which picked apart the collapse of her relationship with actor Robert Pattinson and the frequently racist and sexist frenzy it engendered on social media, there remained a certain unattainable quality about twigs herself, with her elaborate videos, the warping of her face on album sleeves and her live shows thick with demonstrations of her mastery of tap dancing and sword-based kung fu. Even when singing about heartbreak, she seemed an artist who cleaved to the notion that pop stars should be strange and unearthly, not straightforward reflections of their audience. Caprisongs, however, presents her in a more prosaic light: as your mate, not a mystery. Like Jazmine Sullivan’s 2021 critics’ favourite Heaux Tales, and indeed Adele’s 30, it features intimate voice-note recordings: of twigs bemoaning an ex’s behaviour and discussing her insecurities; of her astrologer, talking a load of wafty old cobblers; and of her friends and collaborators, some of whom attempt to buck twigs up (“I wish you could see in you what I can see in you”), and some of whom expound on their occasionally confusing personal philosophies. “I’m one of a kind – well, people like me are one of a kind,” offers rapper Pa Salieu. The album represents an intriguing shift in a climate where pop stars who adopt personae then stick with them for decades, never breaking character: no Bowie-esque shape-shifting for Lana Del Rey or the Weeknd, who turns up here on Tears in the Club. But, in one sense at least, Caprisongs does resemble its predecessor. The music and production are wildly inventive, as always with twigs, although this time more clearly tethered to beats that take inspiration from trap, drum’n’bass and – on Papi Bones – dancehall. Sounds fly in and out of the mix, tracks frequently feel like one-way journeys, ending up in a completely different place from where they started. Brilliant ideas abound: the dramatic jump-cut changes of Honda’s backing; the wildly chopped-up harp samples on Darjeeling that sound like your internet connection is buffering; a sudden explosion of stacked harmonies and white noise midway through Ride the Dragon. If you’re going to use AutoTune, you might as well do it as imaginatively as she does on Pamplemousse, constantly zapping and shifting the pitch and texture of her vocals. But, as with Magdalene, you’re often unavoidably aware that the songwriting at the centre of Caprisongs is underbaked. There are really good things here: Darjeeling brilliantly interpolates a snatch of Olive’s You’re Not Alone to underline the song’s depiction of London as a place so diverse that anyone can feel at home; Oh My Love has a pretty tune; you wonder if Tears in the Club’s popularity has less to do with its starry special guest than its really strong melody. But more often, Caprisongs settles for the fragmentary: scattered snatches of melodic ideas that might have been more fully developed, tunes that struggle to cut through the sonic tumult around them. Lightbeamers is as hard to grasp as smoke; the patchwork of bass line, chanting and fluttering vocals on Which Way feels as though it’s rambling, despite lasting barely two minutes. There’s a lot that’s laudable about Caprisongs. Not least its desire to keep moving and changing – enough that complaining about something as straightforward as a paucity of memorable tunes almost feels miserly. But equally, it’s something that ultimately impedes your enjoyment of the album. As a soundtrack for the start of a night, it doesn’t quite pan out as you might hope.Lucas Digne has completed his move to Aston Villa and said he did not expect his time at Everton “to end this way” after falling out of favour with Rafael Benítez. Digne joined Everton from Barcelona in 2018 but has not played since 1 December. The left-back’s transfer for about £23m was confirmed on Thursday. Going in the opposite direction is Anwar El Ghazi, whose loan to Everton has been confirmed. There is a buy option in the deal for the 26-year-old winger, with the price set at about £8.5m. Digne wrote on Instagram: “Only one year ago I signed a new contract with the ambition of staying in this club for a long time, giving everything for my club, for the development and project, that I believed in – and for the passionate fans. “My dream was helping the club back where it belongs. Wearing the captain’s armband in some matches always made me proud. Everything must come to an end. I just didn’t expect it to end this way.” Benítez said last week that the 28-year-old had asked to leave and accused Digne of prioritising his own interests above those of the Everton team. “What has happened and some things that was said about me in the last month has made me very sad,” Digne continued. “But I’ll not enter a war of words with anyone. The club don’t deserve that, the fans don’t deserve that and to be honest, I don’t feel I deserve that … Sometimes it only takes one person from outside to destroy a beautiful love affair.” Digne is Villa’s second January signing, after Philippe Coutinho, who has come on loan from Barcelona. Villa’s head coach, Steven Gerrard, said: “When Lucas became available we jumped at the opportunity to bring him to the club. To sign a player of his pedigree and quality in the January window is a great addition to our squad.” Gerrard was identified by Digne as the reason he joined Villa. “I came here for the manager,” he said. El Ghazi will wear the No 34 shirt at Everton in tribute to his friend and former teammate Abdelhak Nouri, who sustained permanent brain damage after a cardiac arrest playing for Ajax in July 2017. “I want to show my quality to my teammates, to the club and, of course, the fans,” El Ghazi said. “I want to put a smile on their faces.”Sales at Halfords dropped off in December, as the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid caused consumers to stay at home, while supply chain disruption delayed deliveries of some its children’s bicycles. The cycling and motoring retailer said sales of children’s bikes started well during the 13 weeks to the end of December but were knocked by unexpected freight delays. This was compounded by the drop in footfall at Halfords stores, as consumers behaved cautiously amid fears of Omicron. The retailer said in September it was experiencing supply chain disruption, after previously benefiting from a bike boom during the pandemic as commuters and families tried out transport on two wheels. Halfords said there had been a “strong performance during October and November but a drop-off in performance in the latter part of the period as the Omicron variant grew in prominence”. Sales of cycling products during the festive period dropped by 2.1% compared with 2019, while sales of motoring products also dropped by 1.5% over the same period, leading to an overall fall of 1.8%. The retailer closed more than 10% of its shops during the pandemic, as it sought to make its store estate more profitable, leaving it with 404 Halfords stores. Viewed on a like-for-like basis, by comparing sales at stores that remain open, retail sales rose by 5.6% during the final three months of the year. Halfords’ trading during the festive period was boosted by the performance of its auto centres, where like-for-like sales rose by 33%, thanks for greater demand from drivers for MOTs. The chief executive, Graham Stapleton, said: “The outstanding performance from our autocentres business confirms the rationale behind our recent acquisitions. With the recent addition of National to the group, motoring will represent more than 70% of our revenue, and we expect to carry out 7.5m motoring servicing jobs a year.” He added that the company planned to offer car servicing in more locations across the country, at garages and mobile service vans. The retailer said the knock to trading showed that Covid-19 remained a challenge for businesses, although it expected the impact of Omicron to dwindle. Halfords also expects sales of motoring products to reduce in the coming months, as consumers take fewer domestic holidays.Dozens of journalists and human rights defenders in El Salvador have been subjected to “jaw-dropping” phone hacks using the Pegasus spyware allegedly deployed by governments around the world against dissidents, reporters, diplomats and members of the clergy, according to internet security researchers. Reporting on its latest findings about the use of the Israeli firm NSO Group’s spyware, the University of Toronto’s Citizen Lab said it had identified a Pegasus operator working almost exclusively in El Salvador in early 2020. Citizen Lab found that 35 journalists and civil society activists had been targeted over a 16-month period that coincided with their investigations into allegations that the government of President Nayib Bukele was negotiating a pact with El Salvador’s street gangs to reduce violence and win their electoral support. The news comes two months after the Biden administration put NSO Group on a US blacklist after determining the spyware company had acted “contrary to the foreign policy and national security interests of the US”. Although the researchers could not conclusively link the hacks to Bukele’s government, the report said “the strong country-specific focus of the infections suggests that this is very likely”. Such suggestions, however, were denied by the Bukele government. “El Salvador is no way associated with Pegasus and nor is it a client of NSO Group,” said Sofía Medina, a spokeswoman for Bukele. Bukele has often hit out at his critics in El Salvador’s independent press – many of whom were targeted in the hacking attacks. The 40-year-old president – who once referred to himself as “the world’s coolest dictator” – made international headlines in February 2020 when he marched soldiers in combat fatigues into congress and told MPs to approve a loan for new security equipment or be summoned back in seven days for another session. Citizen Lab conducted a forensic analysis of 37 devices and found evidence of incursions on the phones that occurred between July 2020 and November 2021. Their investigation, carried out with Access Now, was reviewed by Amnesty International’s Security Lab. John Scott-Railton, senior researcher at Citizen Lab and an author of the report, said the “aggressiveness and persistence of the hacking was jaw-dropping”. He added: “I’ve seen a lot of Pegasus cases but what was especially disturbing in this case was its juxtaposition with the physical threats and violent language against the media in El Salvador. This is the kind of thing that perhaps wouldn’t surprise you in a dictatorship, but at least on paper El Salvador is a democracy.” Twenty-two of those targeted work for the independent news site El Faro, which during the period of hacking, was working on stories related to the Bukele administration’s alleged deal-making with El Salvador’s street gangs to lower the homicide rate and to support Bukele’s party in midterm elections in exchange for benefits to gang leaders. Bukele has vehemently denied there was any negotiation with the gangs. But in December last year, the US government accused his government of secretly negotiating a truce with leaders of the country’s feared MS-13 and Barrio 18 street gangs, and financial sanctions were imposed on two officials from Bukele’s administration. Carlos Dada, El Faro’s director, said the high point of interventions in their phones was in September 2020, when El Faro broke the story about the alleged negotiations between the government and the gangs. “These coincidences in the end are not so gratuitous,” he said. “The highest intensity of the telephone interventions against 22 people at El Faro happened in the months around our most sensitive publications and most critical of the government.” In a statement, NSO said it does not operate the technology once it is given to a client and cannot know the targets of its customers. But it said the use of its tools to monitor activists, dissidents or journalists “is a severe misuse of any technology and goes against the desired use of such critical tools”. It noted that it has terminated multiple contracts in the past due to client misuse. NSO does not identify its customers. But sources familiar with the company said it did not currently have an active system in El Salvador. The sources, speaking on condition of anonymity because they were discussing the company’s clients, said NSO was trying to obtain the phone numbers that were tracked and will investigate to see if there was any misuse. “The company will act with all measures at its disposal based on the contractual agreements,” the sources said. Erika Guevara-Rosas, Amnesty International’s Americas director, said the use of Pegasus in El Salvador had revealed “a new threat to human rights” in the country. She added: “The authorities must stop any efforts to restrict freedom of expression, and conduct a thorough and impartial investigation to identify those responsible.” NSO group was placed on the US blacklist three months after a consortium of journalists working with the French non-profit group Forbidden Stories, revealed multiple cases of journalists and activists who were hacked by foreign governments using the spyware, including American citizens. The Guardian and other members of the consortium also revealed that the mobile numbers of Emmanuel Macron, the French president, and nearly his entire cabinet were contained on a leaked list of individuals who were selected as possible targets of surveillance. NSO has said that its spyware is used by foreign government clients to target serious criminals. It has also denied that any of its clients ever targeted Macron or any French government officials.European rugby fixtures can go ahead as planned this weekend after the French government relaxed its rules on travellers entering the country from the UK. Newcastle, Bath and Sale are all due to play in France this weekend and had expressed reservations over travelling if restrictions remained in place but Thursday’s announcement gives those sides the green light. The clubs were willing to boycott their fixtures if a ruling that required all travellers to isolate for 48 hours before producing a negative test remained in place. The clubs were worried that members of their party could be stranded in France for 10 days but, as of Friday morning, fully vaccinated travellers only have to show proof of a negative test taken 24 hours before departure. It means that Newcastle’s Challenge Cup match at Biarritz on Friday, Bath’s Champions Cup clash with La Rochelle on Saturday and Sunday’s fixture between Clermont and Sale will now go ahead as planned. The Scarlets are also in action away to Bordeaux on Sunday. Restrictions remain for players and staff who are not fully vaccinated, however, and the Sale director of rugby, Alex Sanderson, has admitted that will mean the Sharks are not entirely at full strength on Sunday. Those who are not fully vaccinated would have to isolate for 10 days and that in turn causes a potential headache for England, who travel to France for their final Six Nations match on 19 March, unless overseas sportspeople are given exemption by the French government. About 96% of Premiership players are fully vaccinated but the England and Exeter centre Henry Slade has previously explained why he would not be receiving any jabs. Nonetheless the French government’s decision to “ease the specific health border control measures that were decided in December for vaccinated travellers from the United Kingdom” is a boost for organisers of the Champions and Challenge Cups, European Professional Club Rugby. It had to cancel seven fixtures – which have now been designated as 0-0 draws – in December when France effectively closed its borders with the UK and was left scrambling to save this season’s competitions. “The uncertainty of it has created angst for a lot of people who do all the organising,” said Newcastle’s director of rugby, Dean Richards. “I saw the relaxation of the rules being brought in by the French government and welcome that entirely. We’ve sat down and talked about it on a daily basis. On an hourly basis actually. You need to take 40 people to a place but don’t quite know if you’re going to go or not and fork out for it or not.”There have been precious few positives during the Covid pandemic but British academics may have unearthed one: people look more attractive in protective masks. Researchers at Cardiff University were surprised to find that both men and women were judged to look better with a face covering obscuring the lower half of their faces. In what may be a blow for producers of fashionable coverings – and the environment – they also discovered that a face covered with a disposable-type surgical mask was likely to be deemed the most appealing. Dr Michael Lewis, a reader from Cardiff University’s school of psychology and an expert in faces, said research carried out before the pandemic had found that medical face masks reduced attractiveness because they were associated with disease or illness. “We wanted to test whether this had changed since face coverings became ubiquitous and understand whether the type of mask had any effect,” he said. “Our study suggests faces are considered most attractive when covered by medical face masks. This may be because we’re used to healthcare workers wearing blue masks and now we associate these with people in caring or medical professions. At a time when we feel vulnerable, we may find the wearing of medical masks reassuring and so feel more positive towards the wearer.” The first part of the research was carried out in February 2021 by which time the British population had become used to wearing masks in some circumstances. Forty-three women were asked to rate on a scale of one to 10 the attractiveness of images of male faces without a mask, wearing a plain cloth mask, a blue medical face mask, and holding a plain black book covering the area a face mask would hide. The participants said those wearing a cloth mask were significantly more attractive than the ones with no masks or whose faces were partly obscured by the book. But the surgical mask – which was just a normal, disposable kind – made the wearer look even better. “The results run counter to the pre-pandemic research where it was thought masks made people think about disease and the person should be avoided,” said Lewis. “The pandemic has changed our psychology in how we perceive the wearers of masks. When we see someone wearing a mask we no longer think ‘that person has a disease, I need to stay away’. “This relates to evolutionary psychology and why we select the partners we do. Disease and evidence of disease can play a big role in mate selection – previously any cues to disease would be a big turn-off. Now we can observe a shift in our psychology such that face masks are no longer acting as a contamination cue.” Lewis said it was also possible that masks made people more attractive because they directed attention to the eyes. He said other studies had found that covering the left or right half of a face also made people look more attractive, partly because the brain fills in the missing gaps and exaggerates the overall impact. The results of the first study has been published in the journal Cognitive Research: Principles and Implications. A second study has been carried out, in which a group of men look at women in masks; it has yet to be published but Lewis said the results were broadly the same. The researchers did not ask the participants to spell out their sexual orientations.Nearly a quarter of the world’s population experienced a record hot year in 2021, as the climate crisis continues to unleash escalating temperatures around the globe, according to new data from leading US climate scientists. Last year was the sixth hottest ever recorded, with the global temperature 1.1C above the pre-industrial average, a new annual analysis from Nasa and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (Noaa) found. “Science leaves no room for doubt: climate change is the existential threat of our time,” said Bill Nelson, administrator of Nasa. Nelson said that eight out of the top 10 hottest years have occurred in the past decade, which “underscores the need for bold action to safeguard the future of our country – and all of humanity”. There were record-high temperatures in parts of northern Africa, south Asia and parts of South America last year, Arctic sea ice continued its decline and the oceans recorded yet another record year for heat content. “The oceans are storing a heck of a lot of heat,” said Russell Vose, a senior climate scientist at Noaa. “If it weren’t for the large heat storage capacity of the oceans, the atmosphere would’ve warmed a lot more rapidly.” Gavin Schmidt, director of Nasa’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said the changes under way in the Arctic, which is warming at about three times the rate of the global average, are “extremely dramatic” and will affect the rest of the world through, among other things, sea-level rise from melting glaciers. “What happens in the Arctic doesn’t stay in the Arctic,” he said. While 2021 did not top the record heat set in 2020, which was only fractionally hotter than 2016, scientists said last year was yet another demonstration of the long-term global heating that is being caused by human activity, such as burning fossil fuels and deforestation. The concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is now at levels not seen on Earth in the past 4m years. “It doesn’t matter how you do the analysis, it shows you the Earth has warmed quite dramatically,” said Vose. Noaa and Nasa undertake their own temperature analyses in slightly different ways, using data from weather stations, ships and ocean buoys. “It’s clear that each of the past four decades has been warmer than the one preceding it,” he added. “It’s certainly warmer now than at any time in the past 2,000 years, and probably longer.” Earlier this week, the European climate agency Copernicus said 2021 was the fifth hottest year on record, with the last seven years the hottest ever documented. A slight edge was taken off last year’s temperatures by a La Niña, a periodic climatic event that cools the waters of the Pacific Ocean. Despite not being the hottest individual year on record, 2021 did contain a number of extraordinary signs of climate breakdown. July last year was the world’s hottest month ever recorded, with Death Valley in California recording what may be the hottest temperature ever reliably measured during this month, at 54.4C (130F). A total of 1.8 billion people, approaching a quarter of the world’s population, live in countries that did experience the hottest year on record, according to a separate analysis released on Thursday by Berkeley Earth. A total of 25 countries, including China, Nigeria and Iran, recorded a record warm annual average in 2021. “No one lives at the global average temperature,” said Robert Rohde, lead scientist at Berkeley Earth. “Most land areas will experience more warming than the global average, and countries must plan their responses to this.” Last year also saw a cascade of disasters that scientists have determined were worsened by the world’s excess heat. Floods devastated parts of Germany and China, while the Pacific north-west of North America saw an unprecedented, and deadly, heatwave that scientists said would have ben “virtually impossible” without climate change. “What terrifies me … is that these facts and figures are no longer surprising or shocking,” said Kristina Dahl, a senior climate scientist at the Union of Concerned Scientists. “Rising temperatures are already triggering dire impacts worldwide, and will only worsen as the planet warms.” The world’s governments agreed in the Paris climate accords to limit the global temperature rise to 1.5C above pre-industrial times to avoid disastrous climate change but this threshold is now in view, Vose said, with a 50% chance at least one year this decade will hit 1.5C and the average temperature to reach this level “sometime in the 2030s and certainly by the 2040s” if planet-heating emissions are not cut. 2022 will probably be in the top 10 hottest years, with a small chance of it being the hottest year on record “without something like a volcano erupting or a comet slamming into Earth”, Vose said. Schmidt said the impact of global heating will continue to worsen as the world warms further. “We are already seeing the impacts in local weather events and extremes such as heatwaves and intense precipitation,” he said. “We’ve reached a point where this is not just an academic measure of what’s going on. It’s now being reflected in weather and events we are seeing.”A Canadian court has halved the sentence of a woman who killed her husband, revisiting a controversial case that revealed the legal system’s “outdated thinking” of the realities of domestic abuse. In a 2-1 ruling released on Wednesday, Alberta’s court of appeal determined that Helen Naslund’s 18-year sentence should be reduced to nine years. “It is beyond time for this court to explicitly recognize that cases of battered women killing abusive partners involve unique circumstances that must be considered by the sentencing judge, particularly where battered woman syndrome is involved,” Justice Sheila Greckol wrote for the majority. According to an agreed statement of facts, in 2011 Helen Naslund, a grandmother of eight, shot her husband, Miles Naslund, in the back of the head while he slept. The killing came after Miles Naslund had physically and emotionally abused her for nearly three decades, prompting Helen Naslund to attempt suicide on multiple occasions. After the killing, Helen Naslund and her sons hid Miles Naslund’s body in a pond on their property, buried his car and kept the crime a secret for six years. While her son Neil received a three-year sentence, Helen Naslund agreed to a joint submission by the defence and crown prosecutors that would see her serve a sentence of 18 years for manslaughter, thereby avoiding a trial and the likelihood of a far harsher sentence if convicted. The sentence made headlines back in 2020 as one of the longest handed down in the case of an abused woman killing her partner and prompted more than 25,000 people to sign a petition in her defence. In the appeal court’s decision, Greckol faulted the sentencing judge, Sterling Sanderman, for his failure to account for the decades of abuse Naslund suffered. “The sentencing judge suggested that Ms Naslund had ‘other options’ open to her, implicitly the option to walk out the door,” Greckol wrote. “For the sentencing judge to suggest that battered women have ‘other options’ is to invoke a stereotype that a battered woman stays in a situation of domestic violence by choice.” Greckol also found the sentence of 18 years was excessive, pointing to a number of previous cases in Canada where sentences ranging from a suspended sentence to eight years. “Counsel … failed to fully explain to the sentencing judge how they arrived at a sentence markedly harsher than those imposed in similar cases,” she wrote. Writing in the dissent, however, Justice Thomas Wakeling disagreed there was evidence of battered woman syndrome and argued that if Naslund’s case had gone to trial, she would probably have received life in prison with no chance of parole for nearly two decades. “I am satisfied that the notional reasonable observer would conclude that Ms Naslund has no good reason to complain about this bargain,” he wrote of the deal reached between prosectors and the defence, adding that she never claimed to have received poor legal counsel. “It has probably saved her many years of prison time.” In a statement issued through her lawyer, Helen Naslund said she was “incredibly grateful” for the support she had received over the years. “I hope that other women can benefit from the court’s recognition of the terrible situation in which battered women find themselves.” Her son Neil told CBC News he was happy with the outcome. “She will get to spend more time involved in her grandkids’ lives and have the chance to see her very senior father before he passes, and for that I’m very happy,” he wrote in a text message. With her reduced sentence, Naslund may be able to apply for parole by the end of 2022. Alberta’s crown prosecution has 60 days to decide if it will appeal Wednesday’s decision to Canada’s supreme court. In Canada, local crisis hotlines can be found via www.sheltersafe.ca. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.orgSue Gray, the permanent secretary investigating “partygate”, has a task that grows in political significance almost every day. She was for many years the head of propriety and ethics at the Cabinet Office. That role essentially does all the tricky political stuff, from investigating ministers’ conduct to vetting political memoirs. I’ve known Sue for more than a decade and she is formidable, but none of that should matter. That alone is not good enough for the public to blindly trust that she will be allowed to deliver the unvarnished truth, when the stakes are as high as they can be, and everyone knows her report could determine the fate of the prime minister. The civil service is often called upon to deliver the most uncomfortable messages to ministers. Indeed, it is deliberately set up to do so. Civil servants cannot be hired or fired by ministers. They are permanent. They have a duty of integrity, honesty, objectivity and impartiality under the civil service code. This means that they must act in a way that retains the confidence not only of this government, but also a future one. Again, blind trust is not required from the public. We know civil servants seek to do the right thing. Following the resignation of Sir Philip Rutnam, the then permanent secretary at the Home Office, live on BBC News, Michael Gove, then Cabinet Office minister, went to parliament and announced an investigation into the allegations that the home secretary had bullied civil servants. Two days later, pressed at prime minister’s questions, Boris Johnson delivered his infamous “I’ll stick with Prit” line, despite knowing that he would ultimately be required by the established rules to pronounce on her guilt or innocence. Fast forward nine months and Johnson’s decision that she did not breach the ministerial code, despite the evidence that she had bullied staff – including shouting and swearing at them – resulted in the resignation of Sir Alex Allan as the independent adviser on ministers’ interests. My union, the FDA, sought to challenge Johnson’s decision by way of judicial review. As part of that process, we uncovered that two months after the investigation was launched, in May 2020, Johnson was handed a draft report. What followed is unclear but, given subsequent events, it’s a pretty safe bet that he was not entirely thrilled by its contents. By July 2020, Johnson had the final report with recommendations from Sir Alex. Clearly unhappy, he sat on the report for a further five months until its publication was essentially forced on him by leaks. Only the civil service came out of that debacle with any integrity. Against what must have been the most intense political pressure from the prime minister, civil servants stuck to the truth and the facts that they had uncovered. Sue Gray’s report will be factual, and in all likelihood uncomfortable for many in No 10. The weakness in the system, though, is not her ability to report the truth. It is in the control the prime minister has over what happens next. For any civil servant implicated in misjudgment or wrongdoing, the process is clear and disciplinary action may follow under Cabinet Office rules – but what about Johnson himself? That is the element that should truly concern the public. If the evidence suggests that the ministerial code has been breached only Johnson can sanction an investigation into ministers and, perversely, into himself. Johnson chose to retain that power despite the recommendations from the committee on standards in public life that it should go. The public can trust the civil service to deliver the facts. The bigger question is can it then trust the prime minister to do the right thing? Dave Penman is the general secretary of the FDA union Join our journalists for a Guardian Live online event on the No 10 lockdown party and Boris Johnson’s future on Wednesday 19 January. Book hereRussia has refused to rule out a military deployment to Cuba and Venezuela if talks with the west on European security and Ukraine fail to go its way, while warning the latest discussions with Nato were hitting a dead end. In an apparent attempt to up the ante with the Biden administration, Sergei Ryabkov, who led Russia’s delegation in a meeting with the US on Monday, told Russian television he could neither confirm nor exclude sending military assets to Cuba and Venezuela if talks fail. Asked about these steps, he said “it all depends on the actions by our US counterparts”. Meanwhile another senior Russian diplomat threatened unspecified “necessary measures” if Moscow’s security demands were not met. At the end of a week of diplomacy that appears to have produced no progress, the US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said US had intelligence Russia was preparing to fabricate claims of an imminent Ukrainian attack on Russian forces as a pretext for invasion. “We saw this playbook in 2014. They are preparing this playbook again,” Sullivan said, and said that the administration would share more of the intelligence in the following 24 hours. Sullivan said no dates had been set for any further talks but added: “We’re in communication with the Russians and we’ll see what comes next.” Asked about Ryabkov’s suggestion of Russian deployments in Cuba or Venezuela, he would he would not respond to “bluster”. Meanwhile the US defense secretary, Lloyd Austin, promised his Ukrainian counterpart, Oleksii Reznikov, continuing US provision of “defensive assistance” to help build the capacity of Ukraine’s armed forces. Michael Carpenter, the US representative at the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), made clear that there had been no progress made in defusing tensions at Thursday’s meeting. “The drumbeat of war is sounding loud, and the rhetoric has gotten rather shrill,” Carpenter told journalists afterwards. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said the OSCE talks had consolidated international support for Ukraine in the face of what he called “illegal ultimatums and military pressure from Russia”. He said the country’s western allies shared Ukraine’s position that it should be free to choose which security alliances it joined, including Nato. “Ukraine will also continue to work actively with partners to implement a comprehensive package to deter Russia from a new wave of war in Europe, which has already begun,” he said, in a comment posted on his ministry’s website. A volley of bleak statements from Russian senior officials emerged as Poland’s foreign minister, Zbigniew Rau, warned that Europe faced its greatest risk of war in 30 years. Rau was addressing the 57 nations of the OSCE, an organisation that includes Russia, Ukraine, the United States and European nations. It was the third time this week Russia had discussed security with western countries. The Polish minister, who has taken over the OSCE chair, told reporters he “cannot say a breakthrough is imminent” in discussions on European security, while pledging to launch a dialogue. “Some of the participating states believe that it’s enough to make a statement and not to participate in debate,” he said, without naming countries. “It seems that the risk of war in the OSCE area is now greater than ever before in the last 30 years,” Rau had told delegates earlier. “For several weeks we have been faced with the prospect of a major military escalation in eastern Europe.” Russia has mobilised 100,000 troops and placed military hardware along its border with Ukraine, while issuing a series of security demands that Nato has said are impossible to meet, such as removing troops from eastern members of the alliance and a block on any membership application from Kyiv. Ryabkov said discussions were hitting a dead end. “I do not see any reason to sit down again in the coming days, to gather again and start these same discussions,” he was quoted as saying by the Interfax news agency. “We propose to go step by step through the text, to work on it in order to bring it to a stage where it would be ready to sign. This is impossible today, because on the key elements of these texts, the United States and its allies say categorically ‘no’.” Carpenter reaffirmed US readiness to continue a dialogue but added “we are not going to renegotiate core principles”, listing the 1975 Helsinki Accords, the UN Charter and the 1990 Paris Charter, which affirmed the right of sovereign states to make their own decisions about their security, free from the threat of force, and guaranteed the inviolability of borders. “Those are sacrosanct. Those are our bedrock,” Carpenter said. He said he did not know if there were plans to put the US position in writing, as the Russians were demanding. “We’re happy to talk about conflict resolution mechanisms, happy to talk about reciprocal restraint and risk reduction and confidence building, military transparency, all of those things are on the table,” Carpenter said, welcoming a Polish initiative to establish a more regular dialogue among the OSCE’s 57 members to discuss mutual security concerns. Russian officials focused on the agreements that Moscow drafted in December and demanded a response. The country’s mission to the OSCE threatened Moscow would take “necessary measures” if the west did not respond to Russian demands. “If we don’t hear constructive response to our proposals within reasonable timeframe &amp; aggressive behaviour towards [Russia] continues, we’ll have to take necessary measures to ensure strategic balance and eliminate unacceptable threats to our national security,” Russia’s mission to the OSCE wrote on Twitter, citing its ambassador to the OSCE, Alexander Lukashevich. The Russian OSCE mission also warned that “a crisis on the continent may arise with unpredictable consequences for European security”. In Kyiv, Pavlo Klimkin, Kuleba’s predecessor as Ukrainian foreign minister, said this week’s talks with the Kremlin in Geneva, Brussels and Vienna had “eased tensions”. But he said the risk of a military or “other provocation” by Moscow remained extremely high, “especially in late winter or early spring”. “As the talks continue, the threat of immediate escalation, at least the degree of tension, has decreased. This does not mean that the danger has become much less. It has become less, but it persists,” Klimkin told the news agency Interfax-Ukraine. Klimkin predicted that Vladimir Putin was more likely to attack Ukraine using “hybrid methods” than stage a full-blown military invasion. “Blitzkrieg against Ukraine is impossible. They understand that more than a third of our people are ready to hold weapons, and when there is danger for the country, I am sure there will be even more.” He said Putin wanted to turn back the clock and make central and eastern Europe a zone of Russian influence and domination again, as it was in Soviet times. “This is by definition pure insanity … Russia’s real goal is the destruction of Ukrainian statehood. Our very existence hinders Putin’s model of vertical governance,” Klimkin said. In Moscow, the Kremlin spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said there could be a complete rupture in US-Russian relations if proposed sanctions targeting the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and other top civilian and military leaders were adopted. Senate Democrats have also proposed targeting leading Russian financial institutions if Moscow sends troops into Ukraine. The EU is also drawing up possible sanctions, although has declined to reveal details. Last month Ryabkov compared the current tensions over Ukraine with the 1962 Cuban missile crisis — when the Soviet Union deployed missiles to Cuba and the US imposed a naval blockade of the island. That crisis ended after John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev agreed Moscow would withdraw its missiles in exchange for Washington’s pledge not to invade Cuba and the removal of US missiles from Turkey.Clean air campaigners have warned leaders in Greater Manchester that pausing plans to charge polluting vehicles in the region “would be a serious blow for people’s health”. Greater Manchester authorities announced plans on Thursday to ask the government to partially delay the rollout of the biggest clean air zone in the UK, citing evidence that global supply chain issues could increase the costs and reduce the availability of cleaner vehicles. The first phase of the zone, designed to tackle illegal levels of air pollution, will go ahead as planned in May. It is the second phase of the plan, which affects vans, taxis and private hire vehicles that is up in the air. It will cover 10 local authority areas and will charge buses, HGVs and some taxis to enter the zone. Unlike clean air zones in Birmingham and London’s Ulez, Greater Manchester decided to exempt the 285,000 private cars licensed in the region that already breach air pollution limits, as well as mopeds and motorbikes. Lorries, buses and coaches that breach nitrogen dioxide (NO2) emissions standards will be asked to pay £60 a day, while vans, taxis and minibuses will be charged from £7.50 to £10, to combat the 1,200 premature deaths caused in the region each year by breathing dirty air. There are 152 locations across the 10 local authority areas with illegal levels of NO2. In a statement, Andy Burnham said ministers would be asked to “undertake an urgent and fundamental review of the policy for the second phase of the clean air zone”. The mayor of Greater Manchester also asked the government to consider excluding motorhomes and horseboxes. The government has awarded £120m in funding to help those eligible switch to cleaner, compliant vehicles, but Burnham has said it is not enough to support those on the lowest incomes with the oldest cars. “Everyone in Greater Manchester deserves to breathe clean air but we have always said this cannot be at the expense of those who cannot afford to upgrade their vehicles to make them compliant in this timeframe,” he said. “Clean air can only be achieved by the right package of financial support to help people upgrade their vehicles, and this latest evidence highlights significant challenges in this area. We are worried about what this could mean for those businesses and individuals impacted, and their ability to upgrade as well as our ability to deliver the clean air plan.” The mayor added that he was listening to those who had been in touch. On Wednesday, campaigners boarded a bus with a sheep and a Shetland pony to demonstrate their opposition to the plans, while a petition in favour of scrapping the CAZ has amassed more than 25,000 signatures. Other critics include cab drivers, farmers and small-business owners, who say the costs of the scheme could be insurmountable. The children’s health campaign group Mums for Lungs wrote to Burnham on Thursday, expressing concerns at any delay to the scheme. “Manchester’s children deserve the same commitment” as that shown by London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, they wrote. One of the signatories, Ruth Todhunter of Little Lungs, based in Levenshulme in Manchester, said that Burnham had posed for a photograph alongside children campaigning for cleaner air at the Cop26 conference in Glasgow last year. “How can you have that photograph taken and then possibly delay the clean air zone?” she said. Katie Nield, a lawyer at the environmental law charity ClientEarth, said that “pausing plans for a CAZ would be a serious blow for people’s health, especially for those on low incomes, who suffer disproportionately from the impacts of toxic air”. The charity, which has taken the government to court three times, resulting in a 2018 judgment forcing ministers to draw up plans to bring air pollution levels within legal limits in the shortest possible time, said that if the delay was approved, it would not “hesitate to act to stop [it] happening”. “Cleaning the air is a moral obligation, which should be enough of a motivation for the region’s leaders. However, there is also a legal obligation, in place to protect people’s health,” Nield said.French authorities have released a man who had been arrested over the unsolved murder of three members of a British-Iraqi family and a French cyclist in the French Alps in 2012, saying he has been ruled out as a suspect. Police detained the man on Wednesday for questioning as part of a new investigation into the killings. “No charges have been brought against the person who was questioned,” the Annecy public prosecutor said in a statement. “The explanations given and the verifications done allow us to rule out his participation in the facts. The investigation continues.” The arrest, house search and questioning of the unnamed man were a rare development in one of France’s most notorious unsolved cold cases. His lawyer, Jean-Christophe Basson-Larbi, told BFM TV: “My client is relieved ... I hope that those guilty will be found and I hope my client will never be considered a suspect again.” On Wednesday, Basson-Larbi had told reporters that the arrest was unjustified as the man had been “cleared in 2015” after being spoken to as a “mere witness”. He added: “This man’s position is still the same: ‘I was on a walk’… He did not cross paths with this poor family.” French media reported that the man being questioned was a motorcyclist who had been seen near the area of the crime by forest workers. A police image of a man in a motorcycle helmet with a goatee beard was released in 2013, the year after the murder. He was identified in 2015, questioned as a witness and found to have no link to the killings. He was reported to have been a business owner who was paragliding in the region at the time. The local prosecutor Line Bonnet did not confirm these reports of the man’s identity but she said the individual was among four witnesses who “returned to the scene” to participate in a reconstruction just over three months ago. Saad al-Hilli, an Iraqi-born engineer, his wife, Iqbal, and her mother, Suhaila al-Allaf, were shot in a layby in a remote woodland car park close to the village of Chevaline, in the hills above Lake Annecy. Each was shot several times in their British-registered BMW estate car, and more than two dozen spent bullet casings were found near the vehicle. The couple’s two daughters, aged seven and four at the time, survived the attack, but the older girl was shot and badly beaten. The younger child had lain still for hours under her mother’s body. A local cyclist, Sylvain Mollier, 45, was also shot dead at point-blank range after apparently stumbling upon the scene. No one has been charged over the attack, with French and British police having so far failed to make any real progress in the case despite a huge effort involving officers on both sides of the Channel. During the course of the nine-year murder investigation, several individuals have been questioned without being charged. After a review, authorities have said they no longer believe that the former soldier Nordahl Lelandais, who has already confessed to the killing of a hitchhiking soldier and an eight-year-old schoolgirl, could be linked to the killings. Saad al-Hilli’s brother, Zaid, who was arrested in Britain in June 2013 on suspicion of conspiracy to commit murder, was told in early 2014 by British police there was not enough evidence to charge him. The brothers, born in Baghdad before the family moved to Britain in 1971, had been close but reportedly fell out over the family house inherited from their mother, who died in 2003. The Hilli family lived in the village of Claygate in Surrey.Thursday’s top three stories involved men who fail to tell the truth and ultimately come unstuck. Is this a “man thing”? This morning I asked my husband if he had brought the recycling bins in (I wasn’t sure if those outside belonged to our neighbour). Thirty seconds of bickering ensued: “Go and have a look.”“Can’t you see I’m busy?” “I don’t know what you’re talking about.” Until, finally, “DID. YOU. BRING. THE. BINS. IN?” “No, not yet.” I think he was hoping Sue Gray would come along and rescue him. Julia Greenwood Brighton • Could I suggest to the compiler of Wednesday’s quick crossword that a senior moment is not a “momentary lapse of memory by those of certain age” (No 16,125, 12 January). That is simply forgetting, and can happen at any age. Surely a senior moment is a flash of insight that could only occur to someone with considerable life experience? Mary Brown Stroud, Gloucestershire • My favourite mishearing (Letters, 11 January) comes from Baby Grumpling in The Perishers some 60 years ago with his cross-eyed teddy bear named Gladly, so called after the hymn “Gladly, my cross-eyed bear”. Bob Waring Southport, Merseyside • A windfall tax on the fast-lane PPE contracts would be the best way to level up (Lords watchdog assesses complaint against Michelle Mone over PPE firm, 11 January). Catherine Dunn St Andrews, Fife • I wonder if a letter addressed to “The Liar, London” would find its way to No 10 (Letters, 12 January)? Pete Bibby Sheffield • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Local memorials as markers of Britain’s slave past are indeed important, and it is wonderful that the Captured Africans memorial in Lancaster was highlighted (Letters, 11 January). The Lancaster Black History Group was formed in the wake of the Black Lives Matter movement in 2020 and is working with community groups such as the Priory church, where many black slaves were baptised in the 18th century, to create a range of markers of this troubled history. Crucially, the work highlights runaway Africans whose agency in escaping bondage is now being discovered, including an Ibo boy (unnamed) in 1765 who spoke “broad Lancashire dialect”. Such work is vital to reveal hitherto hidden histories, and is available as a new map on the Visit Lancaster website. I know of local campaigns and trails from Cromarty to Norwich and from Bath to Birmingham. A national memorial would be an amazing contribution to the conversation, but meanwhile let’s check out our own backyard and work to reveal, not cancel, history. Prof Alan Rice University of Central Lancashire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I was disappointed by Dave Green’s letter (12 January) regarding the penalties he suggests for those who are unvaccinated. I can empathise with his words as a previous cancer patient myself, and also as a frontline nurse, but I disagree with his judgment on “anti-vaxxers”. Those who have chosen not to have the vaccine do not all share the same mindset, and it is worth bearing this in mind before they are all excommunicated from society. My adult son is autistic and is unvaccinated by choice. His belief system may differ from most people’s, but as he is housebound due to crippling anxiety, hopefully he will not be much of a risk to himself or others. Let’s be civilised enough not to alienate him further. Of course, he might have chosen to forgo the Covid vaccine without the complexities of an autism diagnosis, but we cannot punish those who are fearful or those who wish to preserve their self-determination. There are other groups of people who take up hospital beds and who are judged as selfish by some due to lifestyle choices too. Where should we draw the line? I hope open discussion and respect can be maintained in the discourse. Name and address supplied • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The lack of detail in Michael Gove’s proposal to make developers pay for unsafe cladding is instructive (Report, 10 January). His statements beg far more questions than answers. How will unsafe cladding be defined and who will have that responsibility? If insulation is a primary concern, to what insulation standards will new cladding need to be installed and who will monitor the quality of the remedial work? How will “developer” be defined, and why pick on developers? Assuming it is possible to define the problem with precision, there will be a natural instinct to share the blame: the builder? Product suppliers? Subcontractors? Client? Building regulations? The government? The Grenfell Tower inquiry is into its fifth year without any specific conclusions about responsibility or blame for the disaster. Gove’s announcement is a recipe for further confusion, bankruptcy and endless litigation. A more sensible route would be a risk assessment on a building-by-building basis. Charles Thomson Director, Studio 54 Architecture • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The prime minister’s excuse about the May 2020 party is utterly pathetic (Boris Johnson’s future on a knife edge after No 10 party apology, 12 January). The rules in May 2020 were clear regarding the meeting of people outside your household. The specific rules relating to work were also clear – if people couldn’t work from home, “workers should try to minimise all meetings and other gatherings” and “only absolutely necessary participants should attend meetings and should maintain 2m separation throughout”. In addition, we were told to “reduce the number of people you spend time with in a work setting”. Clearly Boris Johnson and all those who took part in No 10 gatherings think rules are for bending. Now it appears that the PM is waiting for the investigation to finish to see if his skin can be saved. It should not be left to a civil servant to determine his future – the 1922 Committee must get a grip and get rid of the man now if they want to have any chance of a future with their electorate. Ailsa Clarke Freeland, Oxfordshire • I am heartbroken, remembering 16 June 2020 when my beloved younger sister died suddenly (not Covid-related). Only two people were allowed to be with her at the end of her life until doctors pronounced her dead – her husband and elder daughter were those two. I had to sit in the hospital car park for hours, not able to be with my only sister while she was dying. This was not the only agony. The agony of deciding a short guest list for the funeral; the agony of those who wanted to come but didn’t, as they were vulnerable or shielding others who were vulnerable. The social distancing rules that prevented us hugging and crying together at funerals. It was all horrendous. These were the rules to safeguard us all in the first months of lockdown and now we are learning of yet more contemptuous rule-breaking by those who made them. I am full of contempt for the prime minister who lies brazenly, and he and his ilk who hold us all in such contempt. They are despicable. Our country deserves, and needs, better than them. Hilary Hunt Welford, Northamptonshire • As someone who has voted Conservative in every election since 1970, I am finally forced to say: “Enough is enough.” Heath, Thatcher, Hague, Duncan Smith, Howard, Cameron, May – each had strengths and weaknesses, but each was a politician I could regard as honest and honourable. Boris Johnson is neither. I supported him in the leadership election because I wanted to “get Brexit done”. Even when he achieved that by shamelessly betraying the Ulster Unionists and the British fishermen, I went along with the “ah well, compromises are inevitable” excuses. But now, knowing what he and his inner circle were up to, as they told the rest of us we were not allowed to comfort our sick and dying for fear of spreading the virus, makes my stomach turn. One day I will probably return to the Conservative fold, but only when the party has a leader I can respect. Francis Bown London • No one seems to have asked the question that I want to know the answer to: if these were work meetings at 10 Downing Street, why was Carrie Johnson there? Imagine the Tory and rightwing media furore if Cherie Blair had been pictured at any such government meeting. Jean Garner Shrewsbury, Shropshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The Scottish Conservatives are set to deliver an unprecedented snub to Boris Johnson by not inviting him to their spring conference, it has emerged. (See 4.43pm.) Johnson’s leadership remains in peril, although there have been no more high-profile calls for his resignation from Conservatives today and many MPs seem happy to wait until the Sue Gray report into all the party allegations – and until they have had more time to digest the public reaction to Johnson’s apology yesterday – before deciding whether or not to actively push for his removal. But the controversy has already caused a deep split between the UK party and its Scottish branch. Tory MSPs were outraged when Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, said last night that Douglas Ross, the leader of the party in Scotland, was “lightweight”. The remark has offended non-Tory Scots too, who took it as a dismissal of Scottish people generally, and this morning one prominent Scottish Conservative, the academic and constitutional expert Adam Tomkins, said the Scottish party might want to start thinking about loosening ties with its London HQ. (See 10.19am.) The Metropolitan police has signalled that it will not decide whether to launch a formal investigation into the lockdown-busting party at Downing Street last May, attended by Johnson, until Gray has concluded her inquiry into all the party allegations. This is from ITV’s Paul Brand. Johnson is unlikely to be seen in public for the next week after a member of his immediate family tested positive for Covid, Downing Street has said. Brandon Lewis, the Northern Ireland secretary, has insisted Johnson was “very, very sincere” when he apologised for attending a BYOB gathering in the Downing Street garden, but did not believe he had broken the rules. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, has confirmed that the minimum time people with Covid in England have to spend in self-isolation is to be cut to five full days. Jonathan Van-Tam, the deputy chief medical officer for England whose knack for analogies helped convey the twists and turns of the Covid crisis, is stepping down from his government role. A security warning from MI5 has been circulated to MPs and peers accusing the lawyer Christine Lee of seeking to improperly influence parliamentarians on behalf of China’s ruling Communist party. The Conservative MP Daniel Kawczynski faces suspension from the Commons after the standards watchdog found he undermined a formal apology over intimidatory behaviour towards staff by indicating in media interviews that he did not fully mean the gesture. The UK has recorded 109,133 new cases and 335 further deaths, the government has revealed on its Covid dashboard. The total number of new cases over the past week is down 23.9% on the total for the previous seven days. But deaths are up 67.1% week on week. The civil war between the Scottish Tories and Downing Street has deepened after it emerged that Boris Johnson will not be invited to address this spring’s Scottish Conservative conference – an unprecedented snub for a UK leader of the party. Several Tory sources have told the columnist and Reform Scotland thinktank director Chris Deerin it would be “inconceivable” for Johnson to speak at the event, due to be held in March, assuming he is still the UK party leader then. Another source has confirmed the story. The Scottish Tories are still planning what form and shape their spring conference will take – whether it can happen in person or remain online-only due to whatever Covid restrictions will be in force then. But “it seems highly unlikely that he will, although no decisions have been taken yet”, one said. “I don’t see a way he could be involved really.” No Conservative MP has been more supportive of Boris Johnson over the No 10 party affair than Michael Fabricant, who represents Lichfield. On Tuesday Fabricant gave a series of interviews in which he defended the party, on the grounds that it was a work gathering to thank people who had been working exceptionally hard. If Johnson had a fault, it was that he was too decent a boss, said Fabricant. “One of Boris’ weaknesses, if you like, is being very loyal to his workers and to his friends,” Fabricant told BBC Radio 5 Live. Not everyone agrees. Alastair Little, a councillor on Lichfield district council, has resigned from the Conservative party, Lichfield Live reports, because he is outraged by evidence of senior people in the party ignoring Covid rules. In an email to party members, Little wrote: After many months of rolling stories of breaches of Covid rules if not laws by the national Conservative party I can no longer remain a member of this embarrassment show. Little is particularly angry about the conduct of his local MP. “Our MP ... has been a fawning backbench embarrassment,” he said. Paul Givan, Northern Ireland’s first minister, said that the executive would next week consider how Covid restrictions could be eased. At a briefing for reporters, after the executive received a Covid update, he said the picture was positive. He said: It was a very encouraging report. We believe that we’re at the peak now in terms of the transmission rates within the community and we’re looking at the admission rates within our hospitals and they are starting to decline already and so the modelling that we’re following now is a very optimistic scenario. We don’t believe there will be a breach of over 500 people being admitted into our hospitals. That is a much better picture than what it had been anticipated just before decisions were taken on 23 December. That gives the executive now more headroom to develop how we can reduce measures in the coming weeks, and so work will now take place for the executive to consider next week what measures we could look at trying to remove that had been brought in, to get us back to at least the pre-23 December position as soon as possible within the prevailing environment that we’re operating in. The UK data watchdog has warned Downing Street staff that deleting messages related to lockdown parties could be a criminal offence. The Information Commissioner’s Office issued a statement following a report by the Independent that No 10 staff were advised to “clean up” their phones by removing information that could suggest lockdown parties were held in Downing Street. An ICO spokesperson said it was an “important principle of government transparency and accountability that official records are kept of key actions and decisions”. The spokesperson added: Relevant information that exists in the private correspondence channels of public authorities should be available and included in responses to information requests received. Erasing, destroying or concealing information within scope of a freedom of information request, with the intention of preventing its disclosure is a criminal offence under section 77 of the Freedom of Information Act. The Royal College of Nursing has called for its members to be exempt from the latest change to isolation rules. (See 2.37pm.) Nurses should remain covered by the existing rules (described as seven-day isolation, although in reality six full days minimum). The RCN general secretary and chief executive, Pat Cullen, said: Health and care workers must be exempt from a reduction of the seven-day self-isolation. By the government’s own estimate, almost a third of individuals are infectious five days after symptoms starting. Health and care workers will fall into that group in large numbers and there can be minimal room for error or complacency. Current and growing workforce pressures must not drive a reduction in isolation requirements in an unsafe way. In the first overseas trip by a shadow foreign secretary for two years, David Lammy chose to fly to Ukraine in a show of defiance against the Russian leader Vladimir Putin. Lammy flew with the shadow defence secretary John Healey to Kyiv today to meet ministers, officials, and civil society activists. His choice contrasts markedly with the ambivalence about Putin shown by Labour during periods of Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership of the Labour party. Corbyn was sharply criticised for his response to the Salisbury poisoning seeking more evidence that Moscow was behind the attack. Allies of Lammy said it was vital that Ukraine understood there was cross-party support across the UK for its sovereignty. The two shadow cabinet members will not be visiting the areas of conflict in the east of the country. Due to the Covid restrictions Lammy’s predecessor Lisa Nandy, now transferred to the brief of levelling up, did not make any overseas visits, but as travel restrictions lift Lammy is determined to show his face abroad as much as possible. He already has strong personal contacts with White House Democrats built up since the Obama presidency. To the extent there are any differences between Labour and the Conservatives on Ukraine, they centre on concerns the government’s integrated review on foreign policy placed too much emphasis on the Indo-Pacific region, as opposed to defence of the Euro-Atlantic area. Labour is also pressing the Conservatives to do more to close down the loopholes that allow post-Soviet oligarchs to store their cash in the UK. Last week in the Commons Lammy defended Nato’s strategy on expansion saying: The truth is that Nato and the European Union’s enlargement was not the west moving east, but the east looking west. These were free, sovereign states seeking a future of security, prosperity, co-operation and peace in a democratic Europe. A security warning from MI5 has been circulated to MPs and peers claiming that a lawyer has been seeking to improperly influence parliamentarians on China’s behalf, my colleague Dan Sabbagh reports. The Department of Health and Social Care has sent out its news release about the decision to cut the minimum isolation period to five days, and it says that it could result in 7% of people leaving isolation when they are still infectious. That sounds worrying, but DHSC says that under the current rules, the figure is already 6%. Although the way the government is presenting the new rule makes it sound as if the minimum isolation period is being cut by two days, in fact it is only a one day cut. In December DHSC headlined its news announcement by saying the isolation period was being cut from 10 to seven days for people who do two negative lateral flow tests. But in fact the rules meant people would only have to spend six full days in isolation; if they did the second negative test early on day seven (a minute after midnight is theoretically allowed), they could spend the rest of day seven out of isolation. Today DHSC has headlined its announcement as minimum isolation being cut to five full days. If the second negative lateral flow test takes place early on day six, the rest of day six is isolation-free. So it is only a one-day change. DHSC says that after five full days of isolation, between 20% and 30% of people will still be infectious. But if they have to get two negative lateral flow tests before being allowed out of isolation on day six, UK Health Security Agency modelling suggests 7% of them will still be infectious. Under the current rules, the same modelling says 6% of people are still infectious when released from isolation on day seven. Because of the infection risk, people who leave isolation after two negative tests are still “strongly advised to wear face coverings and limit close contact with other people in crowded or poorly ventilated spaces, work from home if they can do so and minimise contact with anyone who is at higher risk of severe illness if infected with Covid”. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, justified the move as “balanced and proportionate” taking into account the need for people to be in work. Caroline Slocock, a former civil servant who worked in No 10 as a private secretary to Margaret Thatcher and John Major, has posted a good Twitter thread on what the Sue Gray report might say. It starts here. And this is her main point. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the Commons leader, delivered a snub to another senior Tory in the devolved legislatures in the chamber earlier when he was unable to name the Welsh Conservative leader. Labour’s Kevin Brennan asked him if he thought the leader of the Welsh Conservatives was a lightweight figure too, and if he could name him. After remaining silent for a moment, Rees-Mogg replied: “The secretary of state for Wales is called Simon Hart.” The Welsh Conservative leader is Andrew RT Davies. Alister Jack, the Scottish secretary, has told ITV Border that he does not agree with Jacob Rees-Mogg about Douglas Ross, the Scottish Tory leader, being a lightweight. At the Downing Street lobby the PM’s spokesman refused to back Jacob Rees-Mogg’s comment about lockdown rules potentially going too far. Here are the main points from the briefing. No 10 declined to back Rees-Mogg’s suggestion that lockdown rules went too far. (See 11.33am.) Asked about Rees-Mogg’s comment, the PM’s spokesman said: We think we have sought throughout to strike the right balance when introducing regulations and guidance. Clearly this was a unique situation in which we were required to move at speed, oftentimes while the evidence base was continuing to grow ... We’re confident we sought to strike the right balance throughout. The spokesman would not deny reports that Boris Johnson told MPs privately yesterday that he did not think he had done anything wrong personally. (See 9.40am.) Asked about reports that Johnson said this to colleagues in the Commons tearoom after PMQs, the spokesman said those were “unsourced claims”. He referred journalists to what Johnson said in his statement to the Commons. When it was pointed out that Douglas Ross had said Johnson told him he did not think he had done anything wrong, the spokesman again referred to Johnson’s statement. He said Johnson said at PMQs “there were things we simply did not get right and I must take responsibility”. Critics have pointed out that the “we” in that sentence implied Johnson was not accepting he was at fault personally. The spokesman suggested Johnson was not being distracted by calls for his resignation, saying he was “focused on the public’s priorities”. Asked if the PM thought he was a good prime minister, the spokesman replied: I don’t think self-reflection is his priority, I think his focus is on delivering for the public. The spokesman said Johnson would be limiting contact with other people because a family member had tested positive. The spokesman said: The PM is following the guidance to do daily tests and limit contact with others ... [The] positive test was Wednesday so the PM will continue following this guidance up into ... including Tuesday of next week. For reference, the guidance is to take an LFD [lateral flow device] test every day for seven days, or until 10 days after the household member who has Covid-19 started their self-isolation period if this is earlier and, in this instance it’s not, so it’s seven days ... In line with the guidance, he’s reducing contacts, he’ll be working from No 10, doing the daily tests, and limiting contact with others both outside No 10 and indeed inside No 10 as well. The spokesman said the close family member tested positive yesterday. He did not say who the family member was. The spokesman rejected claims that Jacob Rees-Mogg’s comment about the Scottish Tory leader being “lightweight” undermined the union. Asked if that was the case, he said: No, I think you can see what we’re doing on the union by what Michael Gove has set out just today on the review into inter-government relations, which seeks to take tangible action to strengthen our union. That’s very much been our focus. Westminster Tories’ dismissal of the Scottish Conservative leader, Douglas Ross, after he called for Boris Johnson to resign is emblematic of their “utter contempt for Scotland”, Nicola Sturgeon has said at this week’s first minister’s questions session. Despite her obvious political differences with Ross, she said, “even I’m not as derogatory about him as his own Tory colleagues are being”. Quoting back to Ross the comment by Jacob Rees-Mogg that he was a “lightweight”, she went on: These might be personal insults directly to the leader of the Scottish Conservatives. But actually this says something much deeper about the Westminster establishment’s utter contempt for Scotland. If they can’t even show basic respect for their own colleagues, what chance do the rest of us have? Westminster thinks Scotland doesn’t need to be listened to, can be ignored, and now we’ve been told we have to thole [a Scots word meaning put up with] a prime minister that his own colleagues think is not fit for office. Sturgeon concluded that independence would give Scotland the “added benefit of no longer [having] to put up with being treated like something on the sole of Westminster’s shoe, and I suspect even Douglas Ross finds that a really attractive proposition”. An hour before the Holyrood session, the UK government announced a “landmark agreement” (pdf) setting out how the UK and devolved governments will work together “based upon the existing values of mutual respect, maintaining trust and positive working”. This post-Brexit upgrade of the joint ministerial committee set up by Tony Blair’s Labour government in 1999 has been spearheaded by Michael Gove, who said today it would build on “the incredible amount of collaboration already taking place between the UK government and the devolved administrations”. Given the ongoing rows between the UK government and its Scottish and Welsh counterparts over the post-Brexit internal market framework, and the repeated concerns raised during the pandemic by Nicola Sturgeon and Mark Drakeford about their involvement in decision-making, the devolved administrations might query that description of “incredible collaboration”. In the Scottish parliament Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, has used FMQs to take a swipe at Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, saying she is not as derogatory about her Tory opposite number, Douglas Ross, as Rees-Mogg. This is from the BBC’s Jenni Davidson. As Javid started to reply to Streeting, Streeting said Boris Johnson was not fit to lick the boots of NHS staff. Given the chance, he intervened while Javid was speaking to repeat what he had said, prompting a rebuke from the deputy speaker, Nigel Evans. Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, is responding to Javid. He starts by paying tribute to Jonathan Van-Tam, although it was not the government resignation Labour wanted. He says Van-Tam already has a knighthood; working with Boris Johnson, Van-Tam must also have the patience of a saint, he says. He says Labour backs the cut in the minimum isolation period. But he criticises Javid for reportedly blaming a UK Health Security Agency error for the delay in doing this. And he criticises Javid for defending Boris Johnson yesterday, saying Johnson’s behaviour has undermined public health policy. He says NHS workers would not have been allowed to hold a party during lockdown. Javid ends by saying curbs should not be in place any longer than necessary. With this in mind, we’ve been reviewing the isolation period for positive cases to make sure the measures we have in place maximise activity in the economy and education for example, but also minimise the risk of infectious people leaving isolation. UKHSA data shows that around two thirds of positive cases are no longer infectious by the end of day five and we want to use the testing capacity that we’ve built up to help these people leave isolation safely. After reviewing all of the evidence, we’ve made the decision to reduce the minimum self-isolation period to five full days in England. From Monday, people can test twice before they go, leaving isolation at the start of day six. These two tests are critical to these balanced and proportionate plans and I’d urge everyone to take advantage of the capacity we’ve built up in tests so we can restore the freedoms to this country, while we are keeping everyone safe. Javid says the UK is the the freest country in Europe. It is “leading the world in learning to live with Covid”, he says. Javid says the 1.3 million people most at risk from Covid have been sent a PCR test. If they test positive, they can get an antiviral treatment, he says. Javid says the government remains committed to ensuring all frontline NHS staff have been vaccinated from 1 April. The proportion of NHS trust patients who have had at least a first dose has gone up from 92% to 94%, he says. Javid says he will be speaking about pharmaceutical interventions. He says more people have had a booster jab in the UK than in any other country in the world, relative to population. Javid, the health secretary, says there are almost 17,000 Covid patients in hospital. But he says there has not been an increase in intensive care patients, and there are early signs that the rate of hospitalisation is starting to slow. Sajid Javid is making his Commons statement now. He starts with a tribute to Jonathan Van-Tam. (See 9.55am.) The number of people in England waiting to start routine hospital treatment has risen to a new record high of almost 6 million people. We have a full story here. Earlier in the Commons Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, refused to back Jacob Rees-Mogg’s assessment of the Scottish Tory leader, Douglas Ross. Asked by the SNP’s Kirsty Blackman if he agreed that Ross was a “lightweight”, Barclay replied: I think he is a hugely talented colleague, I work extremely closely with him and I look forward to doing so. The Conservative MP Daniel Kawczynski faces suspension from the Commons after the standards watchdog found he undermined a formal apology over intimidatory behaviour towards staff by indicating in media interviews he did not fully mean the gesture. My colleague Peter Walker has the story here. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, is expected to confirm that the time Covid cases have to spend in self-isolation is to be cut, PA Media reports. PA says: Javid will update MPs in the Commons, a day after Boris Johnson said a decision would be made on the issue “as fast as possible”. The government has been under pressure to bring the situation in England into line with the United States, where the isolation period has been cut to five days. The current UK Health Security Agency guidance is for cases to isolate for at least six full days from the point at which they have symptoms or get a positive test, whichever is first, with release from self-isolation after two negative lateral flow test results on days six and seven. People can leave self-isolation on day seven. The changes are expected to see people being allowed to leave self-isolation after completing five full days, with negative tests on days five and six. The Javid statement is due to start within the next few minutes. Pete Wishart, the SNP’s spokeperson on House of Commons matters, told Jacob Rees-Mogg in the Commons that his comment about Douglas Ross (see 10.19am) showed how little respect Westminster Tories had for Scotland. He said: The Scottish Tories know exactly how the rest of Scotland feels, as the leader of the house poured his scorn and contempt upon them last night. According to him, the democratically elected Scottish Tory leader is an insignificant figure, a lightweight, a nobody – presumably just like every single Tory MSP who agrees with their Scottish leader. The Scottish Tories are supposed to be the Praetorian guard of the precious union and the leader of the house has just undermined them and thrown them under the proverbial bus. If this is how the government even treats the Scottish Tories, why should the Scottish people even entertain being any part of their useless union? In the Commons Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the house, was also asked about the Downing Street party, and Boris Johnson’s apology, by his Labour opposite number. He said that Johnson understood why people who had made sacrifices following Covid rules were so angry, but he went on to make an entirely new argument in part-defence of what happened. Perhaps the lockdown restrictions were too strict in the first place, he said. He told MPs: Everybody understands, on all sides of the house, that people were obeying the rules and that these rules were very hard for people to obey. I received a message last night was from a friend of mine who was unable to go to the funeral of his two-year-old granddaughter. One cannot hear these stories without grieving for people who suffered. Decisions were taken at the beginning of the pandemic that affected people up and down the country and they were very hard. And we must consider, as this goes to an inquiry and we look into what happened with Covid, whether all those regulations were proportionate, or whether it was too hard on people. This is potentially incendiary. Public health experts are adamant that the restrictions imposed last year were necessary to prevent even more deaths. In the Commons Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, is responding to questions on next week’s business. Thangam Debbonaire, his Labour opposite number, asked him about his attack on Douglas Ross, the Scottish Conservative leader, on Newsnight last night. (See 10.19am.) She said that Rees-Mogg was sounding like an SNP politician, only the SNP were less harsh about Ross than he was, she said. In response, Rees-Mogg effectively stood by what he said on Newsnight. He did not repeat his point about Ross being “lightweight”, but he did not retract his comment either, and instead he implied it was not “honourable” for Ross to call for Johnson’s resignation. He said: [Ross] holds office within the Conservative party. It seems to me that people who hold office ought to support the leader of the party. That is the honourable and proper thing to do. Some Conservative councillors are considering denouncing Boris Johnson in their campaign literature to boost their election chances, my colleague Aubrey Allegretti reports. An overnight poll has given Labour a 10-point lead over the Conservatives, their highest for eight years (see 9.40am), and there are some even worse findings in a poll out this morning from Focaldata. Focaldata, which has shared the results with the Guardian and which is due to publish them later today, has been asking respondents about Boris Johnson. Here are the key findings. Almost seven out of 10 voters (68%) think Johnson’s apology yesterday was not sincere, the poll suggests. Keir Starmer has opened a huge lead over Johnson on the question of which leader is more trustworthy, the poll suggests. In April last year Johnson was ahead of Starmer (by 4 points - 38% to 34%). By mid December Starmer was well ahead (by 20 points - 44% to 24%). Since then the gap has got even larger; 51% say Starmer is more trustworthy, and only 16% say Johnson, giving Starmer a 35-point lead on this measure. Starmer has also developed a clear lead over Johnson on who would make the best PM. In mid December Starmer had a four-point lead on this measure (38% to 34%). Now 40% of respondents say Starmer would make the best PM, and 30% Johnson. Some 64% of voters think Johnson should resign, the poll suggests. And even amongst people who voted Tory in 2019, more think he should resign (46%) than think he should stay (43%). Focaldata collected data from a nationally representative sample of 1,003 adults yesterday and today, and the results have been weighted by age, gender, region, education and 2019 voting. Justin Ibbett, Focaldata’s CEO, said: The findings of this poll mark a new low for Johnson. If the prime minister thought December was bad, then this poll suggests that January is going to be even rockier.” The level of trust in Johnson has completely collapsed. Back in April 2021, four in ten (38%) said that he was more trustworthy than Starmer. This figure now stands at 16% - a remarkable drop of 22 points in less than a year. What should really worry Johnson is that it’s not just his usual detractors that are driving the stark findings of this poll. Even 2019 Conservative voters are turning against him - remarkably, more think that he should resign than not. A former Conservative MSP has said that Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, was “wrong” to dismisses Douglas Ross, the Scottish Tory leader, as “quite a lightweight figure” in an interview last night. Rees-Mogg made the comment on Newsnight in response to questions about Ross saying that Boris Johnson should resign. Most Conservative MSPs have publicly backed Ross, and Newsnight said in private all 31 of them agree that Johnson should go. Adam Tomkins, who was a Scottish MSP until the election last year, told the BBC’s Good Morning Scotland that Rees-Mogg was rude and wrong. He said: There’s a ‘Save Boris’ operation going on at the moment, which you would expect Jacob Rees-Mogg to be ... at the head of. That explains why Jacob Rees-Mogg was very rude and dismissive about Douglas yesterday. Jacob’s got this wrong - I don’t agree with anything that Jacob said about this matter. Douglas is a man of principle and a man of steel, and he will lead the Scottish Conservatives in the direction he thinks he needs to lead them in order to secure that credible fighting voice for centre-right ideas in Scottish politics. Tomkins also said the episode also illustrated why the Scottish Tories might want to loosen links with the UK party. He explained: I think there will always be ties but I think that Douglas and his team need to do some deep and serious thinking about exactly what the nature of those ties should be. All of the bad days the Scottish Tories have in Holyrood are not caused by the Scottish Tories in Holyrood, they are caused by events 400 miles south. And they need to reflect on that ... The Scottish Conservative party have a range of really important, substantive ideas to bring to the table in Scotland about economic policy and about social policy, and they are being drowned out because of the pantomime of the politics of Boris Johnson. Boris Johnson has also paid a tribute to Prof Jonathan Van-Tam too following the news that he is leaving his post as England’s deputy chief medical officer. (See 9.55am.) Prof Jonathan Van-Tam is leaving his post as England’s deputy chief medical officer, it was announced this morning. He is returning to a post at the University of Nottingham, in what is said to have been a long-planned move. Van-Tam was probably the most lively and compelling of the many scientific experts who have graced the Downing Street Covid press conferences, and he became famous for his often-elaborate metaphors. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, paid tribute to him this morning. Matt Hancock, Javid’s predecessor, described Van-Tam this morning as “one of the best public health communicators in history”. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’ss first minister, has paid tribute too. Here is the story about Van-Tam’s departure. Here is the full story on Boris Johnson pulling out of a visit today because a family member has tested positive for Covid. Good morning. Boris Johnson’s position as Conservative party leader and prime minister is more perilous than ever before but, after a wretched and humiliating day – which also saw open warfare break out between the party in Scotland and the UK national leadership – his future is unclear, because the parliamentary party collectively is still making up its mind about what to do next. We were due to hear from him this morning, because he had a visit planned in Lancashire. But that has been cancelled “due to a family member testing positive for coronavirus”, Downing Street says. A No 10 spokesperson said: The prime minister will no longer be visiting Lancashire today due to a family member testing positive for coronavirus. He will follow the guidance for vaccinated close contacts, including daily testing and limiting contact with others. Most Tory MPs who have commented on Johnson’s leadership say they want to wait until they read the findings of Sue Gray’s report into all the partygate allegations. But Gray is a senior civil servant, which means that she probably takes the view that ultimately whether or not the PM stays is a political judgment that ought to be taken by politicians (his colleagues). Last night Nick Macpherson, former permanent secretary at the Treasury, posted this on Twitter. The Gray report may come next week, but if Macpherson and others are right, it won’t clearly settle the issue of whether or not the PM should go. Although many Tory MPs are privately saying that Johnson’s position is untenable, but there is little evidence that they are working actively to get rid of him. Last night Kitty Donaldson, Bloomberg’s political editor, said she thought only four of them have written letters to the 1922 Commitee chairman asking for a confidence vote. And so far only four Tory MPs (Sir Roger Gale, Douglas Ross, William Wragg and Caroline Nokes) have called for Johnson’s resignation. The Spectator is keeping a tally. MPs will making a judgment about the impact Johnson’s leadership will have on their chances of re-election, and this morning a new YouGov poll gives Labour its biggest lead over the Conservatives since 2013. But even polling figures like this won’t necessarily settle the issue for the parliamentary party. MPs will remember that being 10-points behind Labour in 2013 did not stop the Conservatives winning the subsequent election, and there is no consensus over who would succeed Johnson if there were a contest, and whether they would definitely do much better. So the party seems stuck at the moment. But that does not make Johnson’s position safe and his difficulties were illustrated this morning when the cabinet minister doing interviews this morning failed to deny reports that privately Johnson has been telling colleagues he has done nothing wrong. Laura Kuenssberg, the BBC’s political editor, picked this up yesterday. And several papers report the same thing today. “MPs were also irritated by the prime minister appearing less contrite in private conversations after his Commons appearance than he had been in public,” the Guardian reports. The Times (paywall) reports the same thing. It says: Within minutes of delivering a “heartfelt” apology to the Commons for attending a drinks event in the garden of No 10 during the first lockdown, Boris Johnson had a somewhat different message for Tory MPs in the tearoom. The prime minister was, according to those present, far from contrite. He told colleagues that “we have taken a lot of hits in politics and this is one of them”, adding: “Sometimes we take the credit for things we don’t deserve and this time we’re taking hits for something we don’t deserve.” Douglas Ross, the leader of the Scottish Conservatives, said that Johnson took a similar tone when he spoke to him yesterday afternoon. He said that the prime minister told him that he “believes he didn’t do anything wrong”. And here is an excerpt from the FT’s story (paywall). Several MPs said Johnson was still in denial. “He said that sometimes in life you get the credit for things you don’t deserve, while sometimes you get the blame for something you don’t deserve, too,” said one Tory MP. “He goes through his life thinking he doesn’t deserve the blame.” Asked about these reports on the Today programme, Brandon Lewis, the Northern Ireland secretary, dismissed them as “tittle tattle that may or may not have come out of the [Commons] tea room”. He said he had not heard Johnson himself say that he was not to blame for what happened, and he said Johnson was “very, very sincere” in his apology. I will be focusing mostly on the fall-out from this crisis today. Johnson is not doing his visit, but we will get a No 10 lobby briefing, and Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, will be taking questions in the Commons. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comThere was never any chance of getting Rishi Sunak to do it. The chancellor had made it clear he wasn’t going to offer anything but the most half-hearted support. Ideally, he wouldn’t be spending any time in the same postcode, let alone the same room, as the prime minister from now on. But Boris Johnson had been more disappointed in other members of his cabinet. Liz Truss’s phone had gone straight to voicemail. Dominic Raab had called in to say he was exhausted after committing random acts of psychopathic violence to try to offset humiliating himself with a supportive tweet. Michael Gove had ruled himself out by making himself available to do anything that was required. The last time the Govester had made that kind of offer was when he had been Johnson’s campaign manager for his 2016 leadership bid. And he knew how that had ended. The man couldn’t be trusted not to betray his own shadow. In the end, there had been only one man left standing. “I need someone with a cunning plan,” Johnson had told Brandon “Baldrick” Lewis, the secretary of state for Northern Ireland. “I am that man,” Lewis had replied. “I have a plan so cunning it will defeat even our most cunning enemies.” Good, then you’ve got the job, Boris had said. So it was that Baldrick came to be sent out to defend the prime minister’s lies on the following morning’s media round. Baldrick first came unstuck when Sky’s Kay Burley made it clear from the off that she thought she was dealing with a halfwit. Though that might have been to overestimate Lewis’s intellectual faculties, as he couldn’t really explain anything very much. He reckoned that Johnson’s boyfriend apology had covered all the bases and been both heartfelt and insincere. Why should he say sorry and mean it when he didn’t think he had done anything wrong? Besides it had been commonplace at the time to use Boris Johnson impersonators – it’s amazing what you can do with a clown in a blond toddler wig – for roleplays in No 10 work meetings, so it was possible the real Boris hadn’t even attended the party. Not that it had been a party, of course. And even if it had been, then the prime minister definitely hadn’t read the email from his principal private secretary about it. We had Johnson’s word for that and what more could you want from a man who has repeatedly lied to wives, friends, parliament and the entire country. That’s what made him such a great leader. Because he wasn’t afraid to take the big decisions on when to lie and when to merely conceal the truth. Bring on the next election and another five years of the Great Dissembler. Err … hang on, said Burley. Back to the party that Boris was unable to tell was a party even though there were trestle tables with food and drink and various staffers were lying face down in the flower beds by the time he turned up. Still that wasn’t a party, said Baldrick. It was just a cunning plan to make it look like a party. Besides, the trestle tables had really been there for spreadsheets. Baldrick’s head was still spinning by the time he had moved studios to Radio 4’s Today programme, where Nick Robinson concluded the dismantling that Burley had started. No one was sorrier than Boris, Baldrick said, and instead of being the only person who was in the garden to not recognise that a party was a party, he wished he hadn’t stayed for 25 minutes wondering what work event had been taking place, before conveniently forgetting about the whole thing until details of the party that wasn’t a party had been leaked to the media at the end of last week. It was the insincerity of the apology that made it so sincere. After all, no one would have believed a sincere apology from The Liar. And he had heroically gone to prime minister’s questions, which he was obliged to do, to explain why he hadn’t really done anything wrong. Something he was sure the inquiry would establish as it was being undertaken by Sue Gray, who just happened to be employed by the prime minister and was therefore far from independent. It was all just a huge misunderstanding that could soon be cleared up. Then everyone would be free to have a massive work event to celebrate. With that, Baldrick shrivelled up in a ball and went to hide until the next time he had a cunning plan – he was fortunate not to have any self-respect to lose – and the mantle of Operation Save Our Boris, codename Sob Story, was passed to Jacob Rees-Mogg, who was making the weekly business statement in the Commons. On reflection, Johnson might have wished Jakey had said a little less. In his own mind, the leader of the house is a model of good manners and easy charm: in reality he is a 12-year-old entitled brat in an oversized suit whose default setting is to be patronising and offensive. The very model of passive aggression. After making a point of doubling down on his dismissal of Douglas Ross, the leader of the Scottish Tories in Holyrood, as a lightweight – the reality is that it’s Mogg who is the lightweight – Jakey went on to insult the Welsh. He had done more for the independence movement in five minutes than the Nats had achieved in years. Then Rees-Mogg went still further. It was incumbent on all Tories to support their leader even if he was proved to be a liar and a fraud and Johnson couldn’t be expected to obey the rules as they were far too harsh in the first place. In fact, an intelligent person would have been obliged to break them. That’s what the rest of the country – we little people – who managed to do so were told. There was just one more thing to do for Boris. Draw a second red line on a family member’s lateral flow test. Now he could hide up in Downing Street where no one could get to him for the next five days. And maybe everyone would have forgotten about his lies by the time he got out. Some hope.The later game, also in Group A, is the first-ever Afcon meeting between Cape Verde and Burkina Faso. Cape Verde can qualify for the last 16 with a win, while a win for the Stallions would put them in control of second place in the group. Burkina Faso coach Kamou Malo is back with the team after missing the loss to Cameroon with Covid-19. “We will play with all our strength to win this match and go as far as possible,” he said before the game. Cape Verde edged out Ethiopia in their opener but are planning a different approach, according to assistant manager Humberto Bettencourt. “We will play a different game than the first match to try to secure a place in the next round of competition.” Righto, that’s the end of me for today, but stick around for reaction and our match report. Ta-ra. I don’t think Cameroon are the best side in the competition – they don’t have the superstars that others do – but they’re confident, grooved and at home. Most likely, their defence will eventually cost them, but if their big boys play as they’re playing, it might be enough. In particular, André-Frank Zambo Anguissa is an absolute player. Cameroon are through to the knockouts! That was a bazzer of a game, to which the contribution of Ethiopia should not be forgotten. But they’re paying for losing to Cape Verde, while the hosts go marching on and look a serious threat to their guests. 90 min And as I type that, the ball breaks to Fai – who I ought not to have omitted from that list in the previous post – and as he sets himself for a shot from 20 yards, he slips and still guides it against the foot of the near post! He’s so composed in possession, never trying to whack the cover off it but using the pace of the ball and feel of his feet to make happen what he wants to happen. 89 min Cameroon look dodgy at the back, but when they attack they commit to it, and in Anguissa, Ekambi and Aboubakar, have game-breakers able to breach any defence. 87 min Oh Yohanes! Ethiopia win it high up and Solomon crosses for Nasir, who can’t control, but the ball carries on to Yohanes, on the far side of the box and he must score! But Onana is out quickly, and he sweeps his finish over keeper and bar! 86 min Ah, it took a deflection, and when the corner comes in it’s only half-cleared, dropping onto Hongla’s laces ... but he can only thrash a shot over the top! 85 min Anguissa, who’s been excellent again, glides in off the left, eases inside, and slams a shot high and wide. 84 min Change for Ethiopia, Gebremichael replaced by Kebede. 82 min I said we’re just getting started, and tomorrow we’ve got a huge game – Ghana, who lost to Morocco, are playing Gabon, who beat Comoros. That should be a banger. 80 min “Despite my national team not qualifying this year,” says JL Kasanga of DR Congo, “I have really enjoyed watching this match (and the tournament) neutrally. Afcon never disappoints!” Agreed. I actually thought DRC were one of the most fun sides to watch in the last competition, and we’re just getting started here. Also, the hosts doing well is good for any tournament. 77 min No hat-trick for Aboubakar either – he’s replaced by Bahoken – and Oyongo replaces Tolo. 75 min Reshid goes in with the double-footed hitchkick, ploughing through ball and Siliki. He catches a bit of the man too, and in the Premier League, that’s close to a red card never mind a yellow, but the ref lets things slide. I can’t say I object, but on the other hand, if those challenges were uniformly allowed, there’d be more nasty injuries than there are. 74 min I should reiterate, this has been, for the most part, a close game. But those two goals in two minutes finished it off which is, I suppose, another way of saying that ultimately, Ethiopia have had no answer to Cameroon’s superior firepower. 72 min A triple change for Ethiopia, Mohammed, Yusef and Hotessa going off with Melayu, Reshid and Gugesa coming on. 71 min This could get messy I’m afraid, and here’s Abounakar, benefitting from a wild lunge from Anguissa to stick him in ... and the resultant shot clatters the near post! Then the flag goes up and Tamene, upon whom the wild lunge was perpetrated, studs catching metatarsus, accepts treatment. 69 min Cameroon send on N’Jie and Ganago Ngamaleu and Ekambi – no hat-trick for him. IT’S A BRACE FOR EKAMBI TOO! Ethiopia are finished, and Anguissa glides through midfield then slides a ball ahead of Ekambi, down the left of the box. Tamene and Debebe think he’s going to hit it, so he ducks inside as they slide into oblivion, then drags a Solskjaer-style finish inside the near post. Lovwly goal! 66 min Ngadeu is late on Nasir and there are minor verbals, but it’s a bit late for that and they’re half-hearted. 65 min So far, there’ve been 16 goals in Afcon – I think – and Vincent Aboubakar has notched four of them. 63 min Ethiopia have barely been out of their half since conceding the second goal. 62 min Aboubakar picks up a loose ball outside the box and times a lovely through-pass to Ekambi, in on goal. But Shanko gets out really well to block the shot behind with his midriff, and I think there was a prior deflection off Debebe too. 61 min Onana gets a going-over for timewasting, and I notice that his top is a really gorgeous shade of blue – I don’t think this photo does it justice. 60 min Incidentally, I learnt a lot about Ethiopia from a book I read while I was away, Nadia Owusu’s Aftershocks. 59 min Siliki’s corner is a good one and Ngadeu is up up early, but Shanko flies out to punch away, then the flag goes up. 58 min Cameroon are after more goals, Shanko tipping away Ekambi’s drives then Siliki having a shot deflected behind. It’s harsh on Ethiopia, who’ve played well and started the second half in the ascendancy, but really they’re paying for losing to Cape Verde. 57 min The celebrations go on for quite some time, then Cameron send Siliki on for Choupo-Moting. CAMEROON ARE GOING THROUGH TO THE KNOCKOUTS! They sweep forward in numbers, Choupo-Moting finding Ngamaleu down the right, he crosses low, and Aboubakar gobbles up the finish from five yards for his fourth goal in two games! There’s that momentum! Choupo-Moting’s played really well today and he finds Fai out wide. Again, the cross is caressed, directly onto the striker’s head, and he thumps down a header that Shanko should probably save, but the bounce takes it above his flailing dive. 52 min Nasir, who’s been Ethiopia’s most dangerous player, spots an overload down the left and funnels wide for Hotessa, who gets extremely excited and larrups a riser somewhere towards Chad. 50 min Var wants a look at the challenge and Shanko should worry because he wasn’t exactly in control of himself or his two, studs-up feet ... but he got the ball, so we leave things as they are. 49 min And now here come Cameroon, Choupo-Moting nashing down the right and sweeping a fine low cross into the middle that looks perfect for Aboubakar! But Shanko doesn’t wait to be asked, hitch-kicking in, Dhalsim-style, and getting both feet on the ball before Aboubakar can lift it over him! That’s excellent keeping. 47 min It’s another frantic start, the Ethiopian counter-press regaining possession deep inside the Cameroon half and Solomon hammering a shot from distance that’s easily saved by Onana. 46 min Ethiopia send on Solomon for Dagnachew, who played ok but had been booked. 46 min We go again... Back come the teams... Here’s some footage of Ethiopia’s 1962 champions. That was a really enjoyable half, both sides looking for goals. Join me in 10 minutes to see how it shakes out. 45+1 min Hotessa finds Dagnachew just outside the box and he swipes a shot from distance that Onana can only parry! The ball loops up towards Nasir, but Tolo intecedes before it comes down. 45 min There’ll be one added minute. 44 min Dagnachew goes short to Nasir, who’s immediately mugged for his lunch money. 44 min Yohanes turns nicely in midfield and lofts a decent ball down the line for Mohammed, whose cross is blocked behind for Ethiopia’s first corner. 42 min Ethiopia have been better these last few minutes. 40 min Now Ethiopia counter, Gebremichael leading the charge and for a omoment it’s three-on-one! But he holds onto the ball for too long and Ngadeu crowds him out. That is a significant oversight. 39 min Cameroon are coming! First, Ekambi tosses a ball into the box for Aboubakar only for Tamane to stretch it behind before he can apply the finish, the when the corner comes in, Castelletto’s near-post run allows him to guide a header punkt against the angle! 38 min Excellent from Cameroon, Choupo-Moting spreading to the excellent Fai, who steps inside and feeds a delicate little inswinging cross for Aboubakar at the back post. But Tamane is wise to the ruse, nipping in to clear. Excellent ball, even better defending. 35 min It’s all Cameroon now, pushing on looking to go in front. Ethiopa aren’t hanging on, but they’re not much of an offensive factor. 33 min Choupo-Moting flicks on well, out to Ngamaleu, and pegs it towards the box. But he can’t get to the resultant cross, which yields a corner but comes to nothing. 32 min Aboubakar finds Ekambi, who crosses low to the back stick; Ngamaleu taps in and thinks he’s scored, but he was extremely offside. 31 min Our first mention of Roger Milla which, Salako advises us, was in 1994. Twice. 29 min Anguissa sends an uppish poke into the box and Choupo-Moting collects, but he can only drag a shot wide of the near post. 28 min Ekambi flicks past Dagnachew, who brings him down and narrowly avoids a booking ; again, the free-kick is wasted. 26 min Both sides are playing with a high line and looking to get it forward quickly. It’s intense, absorbing stuff. 24 min Aaaarrrrgggghhh! Ethiopia are having at this, Gebremichael skating into the box down the right after a fine pass from Johannes, skinning Tolo and drilling a low skidder that Onana can only palm to Nasir ... who can’t rearrange his feet to finish from five yards! 22 min This us a really good game and Ethiopia are coming back into it, Gebremichael cross from the right and finding Nasir ... who sweeps across his body, sending a shot skidding past his ankle and just wide. 21 min ...which Anguissa curls tamely over the bar. 20 min Choupo-Moting is down and holding his shoulder, never a good sign. But after accepting treatment he seems good to carry on and Cameroon have a free-kick just outside the box, left-hand side... 18 min It’s been a while since Ethiopia attacked, but here’s Dagnachew poking forward to Gebremichael and for a second a shooting lane opens up. So he swerves outside Catstelletto and swivels into a low shot that hits Tamene and bounces to safety. 17 min Again, Cameroon get it out to Fai , Hongla picking him out, and again, he caresses a lovely cross into the middle, but this time Ethiopia get it away. 15 min Dagnachew loses control of the ball and Ngamaleu nicks it away from him, so he scissors in an accepts the inevitable yellow card. 14 min Ethiopia are playing a very high line, a risky strategy against two quick strikers. But after losing to Cape Verde, they’ve obviously decided to go after it, and that makes sense: four points might well see them go out. 12 min It’s all Cameroon now, Ekambi finding Aboubakar down the left of the box. He adroitly turns off for the soon to arrive Anguissa, but Debebe steps in to clear. 11 min This match is gleefully skipping along the edge. 10 min Hamid flies in on Hongla and is, I think, booked. This is a terrific goal, Choupo-Moting and Aboubakar combining outside the box, the former holding up for the latter who takes a lovely first touch that takes the ball past his standing leg and allows him to unfurl a screeching curler that Shanko flies left to tip away. But Fai, out wide, collects and swishes a perfect cross onto Ekambi’s brow, and he absolutely panels a header into the far side-netting. What a start! 6 min Cameroon are rattled, Choupo-Moting emoting to the ref and then putting a hand in Yusef’s phizog. He’s booked. NOW THEN! Nasir breaks through the middle and spreads right to Gebremichael before pegging it towards the box. And the resultant low cross is a goodun, picking out Hotessa who, totally unattended, sweeps home the opener! Cameroon will have to do it the hard way again! 4 min Tolo combines with Ngamaleu down then left but Castelletto nips in and Cameroon counter... 3 min This has been a nicely frantic start, and although John Salako reckons both sides are playing a back three, it looks to me like Ethiopia have gone with a four. 2 min Hongla flies in late on Nasir, but the free-kick, from wide on the Ethiopia left, comes to nothing. 1 min Caf told me that Choupo-Moting was playing midfield, but he looks closest to Aboubakar to begin with. 1 min Off we go! I love footballers singing. The ground’s pretty empty, but the noise is anything but. Anthem time! Here come the teams! I wish Sky were starting their coverage earlier, with some studio time, just as I wish CAF were going around schools handing out free tickets and laying on free transport. But we’re in the ground now, so let’s be having you. All has not been well in Ethiopia, but the country’s football team are a symbol of rare unity. Here’s the song they recorded to that effect: Andre Onana (what’s his name?) recently spoke to Sid Lowe of the Guardian, most particularly about the accidentally-failed drug test that almost cost him his career. Neither Beats nor airpods in sight. I was lucky enough to watch the first round of Afcon matches in Africa – Ghana to be precise, from where I returned this morning. You can well imagine the local joy at the Black Stars’ performance against Morocco - I’d love to know why a manager whose side that struggles for goals would leave out Felix Afena-Gyan – and especially given the absence of Mohammed Kudus. But anyway, we digress. Allow me to share one of the highlights of my holiday, formerly the most shazammed song in the world but one that would have passed me by had I stayed in England. It’s a long time since a tune knocked my spots off as this one did, and one of my favourite memories was when I was picking up food, it came on, and the restaurant went off. Ethiopia, meanwhile, stay in 4-3-3, but bring in Debebe for the suspended Belay at centre-back and Hotessa in for Kebede in attack. Cameroon make three changes to the team that beat Burkina, Castelleto replacing Onguene, Hongla in for Kunde and Choupo-Moting taking the place of Gwet. By the looks of things, they’re also moving from 4-1-4-1 to 3-5-2. Cameroon (3-5-2): Onana; Castelleto, Ngadeu, Tolo; Fai, Anguissa, Hongla, Choupo-Moting, Ngamaleu; Ekambi, Aboubakar. Ethiopia (4-3-3): Shanko; Hamid, Tamene, Debebe, Yusef; Mohammed, Yohannes, Dagnachen; Gebremichael, Nasir, Hotessa. Afternoon all and welcome to the start of what seems to be known as matchday two! Cameroon’s first game, the 2-1 win over Burkina Faso which opened the tournament, was an uplifting romp and the sole first-round fixture to yield more than a single goal. Which isn’t to say there’s not been plenty to enjoy - verily there has – but as we settle into things, another belter will be eagerly received. For that to happen, Ethiopia will have to go some. Their first encounter, a 1-0 defeat to covid-stricken Cape Verde, could scarcely have gone worse, nor so they have the players to rebound from so significant a setback. Consequently, the intrigue of this match will be the extent to which the hosts can continue marking their territory. They’re not the most talented squad or even that close to it, but if Vincent Aboubakar – who was extremely poor in the last Afcon – has hit a streak, momentum can take them deep. Kick-off: 5pm local, 4pm GMTKanye West, also now known as Ye, has been named as a suspect in a battery report taken by the Los Angeles police department in the early hours of Thursday morning, following an incident outside the Soho Warehouse, a members-only club. West has not been arrested, Variety confirmed on Thursday. LA’s Fox 11 first broke the story, claiming the rapper, 44, punched a fan who asked for an autograph. Citing law enforcement sources, TMZ reported the incident occurred around 3am and is being investigated as a misdemeanor battery, which carries a maximum jail sentence of six months. The website published furtively recorded video of an irate West on a street, filmed “sometime between Wednesday night and Thursday morning”, in which West can be heard yelling, “Did y’all say that or not? Did y’all say that or not? … Cuz that’s what happened right fucking now.” TMZ also reported that West was partying earlier in the evening at Delilah’s nightclub in West Hollywood with the actor Julia Fox, whom he has recently started dating. He later left the club while Fox stayed behind. The news comes a day after organizers for the Coachella music festival confirmed West as a headliner for the April 2022 event along with Billie Eilish and Harry Styles. It would be West’s first full set at North America’s largest music festival since he headlined there in 2011. This is not West’s first brush with law enforcement for battery – in March 2014, West pleaded no contest to a misdemeanor count of battery against a photographer whom he charged during a paparazzi swarm at LAX in July 2013. The incident, in which West attempted to wrestle the camera from the man’s hands, was captured on video. As part of his probation, West was required to undergo 24 anger management sessions, perform 250 hours of community service and pay restitution to the victim. Beverly Hills police also investigated an incident in January 2014 in which West was accused of assaulting a man at a chiropractor’s office. The rapper reached a civil settlement with the man and was not charged.My friend and former colleague Colin Slater, who has died aged 87, reported on more than 3,000 Notts County football matches, first for local newspapers and then, over a span of more than 50 years, for BBC Radio Nottingham, following the club’s fortunes as they rose and fell from the fourth to the first tier of English football and back again. Few football journalists can have so clearly embodied the institution on which they reported in the minds of supporters, players and officials. When Colin wrote a memoir of his time at Meadow Lane in 2011, he gave it the title Tied Up With Notts. He was proud of his close and warm association with what was, until recently, the world’s oldest professional league club, founded in 1862, but he never forfeited his journalistic objectivity and was as critical as any disaffected fan on the occasions when the team fell into the hands of unscrupulous or negligent owners. When, during one of the odder periods in the club’s history, Sven-Göran Eriksson, the former England manager, was appointed director of football at a club then in the fourth tier, lured by what soon turned out to be nonexistent financial backing from North Korea, Colin was given the first one-to-one interview. He was pleasantly surprised when the Swede opened their conversation by asking a question of his own: “I hear you’ve been here a long time and attend every game, so I want to know something about you. Tell me about yourself.” No one, Colin reflected, had ever asked him to explain his background. An outsider might add that this was their mistake. Colin was born in Shipley, and went to Belle Vue grammar school in nearby Bradford. After training on local weekly newspapers, covering Bradford City, he moved to Nottingham, where he joined the Evening News, becoming their Notts County correspondent in 1959. As early as 1965 he was helping to save the club from extinction by persuading a local car dealer to write a cheque for £10,000. In 1968 he accepted an offer to become the first press officer – later chief information officer – of Nottinghamshire county council, while taking on commentary duties on Notts for the newly created BBC Radio Nottingham. In the summer he would commentate on the cricket at Trent Bridge, sometimes acting as the PA announcer, and running Nottinghamshire CCC’s marketing department from 1988-96. He never lost the trace of West Yorkshire, either in his gentle conversational voice or the more urgent tone that came through the radio on the occasions when the Magpies did something worth getting excited about. The club named a suite after him, making him a lifetime honorary president; he chaired their former players’ association and was a trustee of the Notts County Foundation. John Motson called him “a doyen of the broadcasting industry”. A tall man of great humour and unfailing courtesy, he chaired the local bench of magistrates, helped found the east Midlands branch of the Lord’s Taverners charity, and was a trustee of Nottingham’s day centre for homeless people. Active in the Christians in Sport organisation, in 1995 he was elected to represent the diocese of Southwell and Nottingham as a lay member of the General Synod. In 2001 he was appointed MBE for services to radio broadcasting and the community in Nottingham.Londoners should avoid strenuous physical activity on Friday due to “very high” levels of pollution, experts have warned. The poor air quality is the result of an intense area of high pressure covering western Europe. The associated lack of air movement means emissions from vehicles and other pollutants are not blown away as they usually would be. The government’s forecast predicts pollution levels will hit band 10, the highest level on the scale. The last time pollution levels hit this mark was in March 2018. Older people and those with lung or heart problems should avoid strenuous physical activity, the government’s official advice stated, while people with asthma may need to use inhalers more often. Even healthy people should “reduce physical exertion, particularly outdoors, especially if you experience symptoms such as a cough or sore throat”. The worst pollution is forecast to be in the city centre, with the dirtiest air stretching from Stratford in the east to Hammersmith in the west, though pollution levels are expected to be high throughout the entire city. Earlier this week Sadiq Khan, the mayor of London, said car use had returned to close to pre-pandemic levels, and that the effect on residents could be disastrous. “If we do not double down on our efforts to deliver a greener, more sustainable future, we will replace one public health crisis with another – caused by filthy air and gridlocked roads.” Pollution levels are expected to return to normal by Saturday.Wordle has taken over your timeline through pure force of pleasantness. Every day, an empty six-tiered grid appears in the world’s browser. We try to guess a secret five-letter word; with each entry the player learns if the letters they used appear in the solution, appear in the solution and are in the right place, or aren’t in the solution at all. So, you might navigate from ASKEW to ABLED, before eventually arriving at ABBEY. There’s only one new Wordle puzzle a day, and designer Josh Wardle has not included any of the garish barnacles that tend to accrue to breezy mobile pastimes. That philosophy has made it a runaway success with hundreds of thousands of players. In a media environment awash with misinformation and division, it’s just kinda nice to spend a few minutes every day trying to guess a word. But what if Wordle mutated into a much more confrontational, brain-burning trial? What if Wordle became evil? Ladies and gentlemen, I give you: Absurdle. Absurdle is the invention of a designer who goes by the alias “qntm”. Consider it an alternative ruleset to Wordle – a game that sharpens the original premise into a horrific machiavellian scheme. The gambit is heady, but I’ll try to explain it the best I can. Wordle is circled around a single word the player is trying to deduce by eliminating the letters on the board. Absurdle, on the other hand, never picks a specific answer, and instead pares down the list of potential solutions as little as possible with each entry. So, for instance, if the player starts off with “PRUNE” Absurdle will identify a bucket of words composed of letters that do not appear in that five-letter combination and take refuge within it. Counter with “ADIEU” and the list gets smaller. The more guesses you make, the smaller the answer list gets, until a resolution is forced from the thick matrix of logic. The goal is to back Absurdle into a corner, where, through all of your guesses and potential letter arrangements, there is only one word in the dictionary that fits the algorithm that you and the game have created. Voila, you’ve beaten Absurdle at its own game. “The technique which Absurdle uses is well known to anybody who’s ever played Hangman as the executioner,” says qntm. “There is always the temptation to change your chosen word or phrase retroactively to invalidate your opponent’s guesses. That’s almost exactly what Absurdle does.” Qntm says that the inspiration for Absurdle grew, in part, out of another one of his projects called “Hatetris”. That game puts you in front of a cursed Tetris board that consistently serves up the worst possible piece. (Imagine getting three of the L-shaped blocks in a row? A fate worse than death.) The idea is to give a sense of personality to the AI system and let players wrestle with the ghost in the machine. “In the same way that Hatetris was an experiment to find the most difficult possible variant of Tetris, Absurdle is an experiment to find the most difficult possible variant of Wordle,” explains qntm. “In both cases, I’m taking a seemingly single-player game and turning it into an adversarial, asymmetric two-player game; turning a passive computer into an opponent which is playing to win. I think that’s a fun twist.” Already, a small contingency of obsessives have become consumed with the idea of Solving Wordle – breaking down this game to its core fundamentals through the raw power of coding and identifying the science-sealed ideal strategy to crush the puzzles, consistently, on the second or third try. (For what it’s worth, I’ve heard that “SOARE” is the most mathematically sound first guess.) So qntm wants Absurdle to be a challenge to other programmers. Achieving ideal Wordle strategy is one thing, ideal Absurdle strategy is quite another. But qntm also balks at the idea that Absurdle somehow represents a more diabolical interpretation of our tranquil word game – one where we are engaged in an eternal duel with our smartphones. No, qntm believes that the only sinister Wordle spinoffs are the rip-offs popping up in droves on app stores. Absurdle might taunt you, but it aims to be an ally, not an enemy. “Absurdle is up-front about the challenge it lays down for you,” he says. “The evil and confrontational variants of Wordle are the fake third-party clones for sale on the App Store. Don’t buy them. They aren’t by Josh Wardle. Don’t reward scummy behavior.” “Wordle is free. Absurdle too. If you need either game on your phone, save a web link on your home screen.”As recently as 2019, Christine Lee was being awarded and congratulated personally by then prime minister, Theresa May, for helping Chinese-British cooperation and had been photographed with David Cameron during his time at No 10. Three years on, however, and the Chinese-British relationship has dramatically changed. Now at the centre of an MI5 security warning to MPs, the 58-year-old anglo-Chinese solicitor had been lauded by Downing Street as the founder of the British Chinese Project, a non-profit organisation aiming to promote engagement, understanding and cooperation between the Chinese community and wider UK society. “I also wish you well with your work to further the inclusion and participation of British-Chinese people in the UK political system,” May wrote in a letter to Lee. Lee herself was by then eagerly participating in the political system, having donated to the Labour MP Barry Gardiner and his constituency party. Her son was also taken on as a policy researcher in his office, working there until his resignation on Thursday. Gardiner had been a close ally of the British Chinese Project (BCP), going on to set up an All-Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) at Westminster, which received thousands of pounds of funding. Electoral Commission records show that Christine Lee &amp; Co – her law firm – has donated £584,177 to Gardiner’s office, along with an April 2013 donation of £5,000 to the local association of Sir Ed Davey, now the Liberal Democrat leader. Lee’s other interests have been extensive. Records at Companies House – which state that she has British nationality – record that she holds or has held 16 directorships, at least eight of which remain active. As for links to the Chinese government, Lee has been open in that the website of her Birmingham law firm, Christine Lee &amp; Co Solicitors, records its role as legal adviser to the Chinese embassy. It states: “Much of the success of the firm has been spearheaded by Madame Christine Lee herself, propelling the firm forward into a pre-eminent firm within the UK Chinese community and is now a reputable name in both the UK and China.” Indeed, her achievements were not going unrecognised in public in China itself. A report on Chinese state media in 2019 records that she was one of the representatives of the Chinese community overseas who were invited to participate in the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic of China. The report described her as a “well-known Chinese lawyer in the UK” and quoted her as saying that China’s development “brings dignity and self-confidence to overseas Chinese”. It goes on to report that Lee had moved in 1974 with her parents from Hong Kong to Northern Ireland, where in school she was said to have been was often teased by classmates. “I understood at that time that no matter how fluent my English is, and no matter what nationality I am, I will always have yellow skin, black eyes, and the blood of the descendants of Yan and Huang will always flow in my body,” Lee is quoted as saying. It was this experience that also set her on the path to becoming a lawyer, and eventually turning a focus towards encouraging and assisting British-Chinese people to get involved in politics, starting her support for a 19-year-old who was ultimately unsuccessful in his attempt to get elected in London at the 2009 European parliamentary elections. “The meaning of this election is not about winning or losing. A 19-year-old Chinese can take the first step, why can’t others continue to stand up?” Lee was quoted as saying.The Guardian’s world affairs editor assesses the outcome of three rounds of talks this week about the fate of Ukraine, involving Russia, the US, Nato and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). Did the talks achieve anything? Not much. The Russians have described them as a “dead end”. The gap between what the US and its allies were prepared to talk about – reciprocal limits on missiles and military exercises and other confidence-building measures – and what Moscow was demanding – guarantees that Ukraine and other former Soviet bloc states would never join Nato – is as wide at the end of the week as it was at the beginning. But at least the possibility of finding common ground has been tested, and diplomacy is being given a chance. Is there any more clarity about what Russia wants? Yes. It is clear now that Russia was not using its troop build-up and its demands about Nato as a bluff to achieve gains on other matters. The three meetings this week have provided opportunities for Russia to take an off-ramp and find a face-saving solution, but Moscow has not taken them. There is little doubt any more that Vladimir Putin is seeking nothing less than a transformation in European security, with a much-reduced Nato presence along its borders. Are there likely to be more talks? Russian officials on Thursday did not make it sound like there was much appetite in Moscow for further discussions. The Poles suggested having an intensified dialogue on security issues within the framework of the OSCE, but the Russians have said all along they want a quick resolution, rather than an ongoing process of airing grievances. Ukraine has suggested a summit to address the crisis, this time with Kyiv at the table, but there has been no response from Moscow. What happens next? The diplomats go back to their capitals to discuss the next steps. All eyes will be on Moscow and the movements of Russian troops and armour in the region around Ukraine. The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, is due to give a press conference on Friday. That should give a clearer idea of Putin’s state of mind. The Russians have demanded the US give written comments on the draft agreements that Moscow published in December, which include the proposed limits on Nato. It is not clear yet whether Washington will submit those written responses summing up its objections. Has the chance of war increased or decreased after the talks? Increased. The probability that Putin was using the pressure on Ukraine as leverage to get something else was always small. Now it has all but disappeared. It is also clearer that the US and its allies are not ready to offer a fudge on Ukraine’s Nato membership, acknowledging that it is unlikely for the foreseeable future. After this week, we know that Putin is ready to go to the very brink of war. The question now is: will he go over it?Two men have been charged after a 15-year-old girl was killed in a speedboating accident in the Solent. Emily Lewis died when the rigid inflatable boat (Rib) hit a buoy in Southampton Water on 22 August 2020. Twelve people were taken to hospital after the crash in which two people were thrown overboard. A report by the Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB) found that shortly after 10am the teenager was “catapulted into the handrail directly in front of her seat” when the Rib crashed into the north-west Netley buoy in Southampton Water at 38.4 knots (44 mph). It found that all passengers on the boat suffered injuries of some kind. An inquest into her death heard that Emily, from Park Gate near Southampton, was taken to nearby Southampton general hospital, where she died of an upper abdominal injury. It is understood that Emily’s father, Simon, mother, Nikki, and 19-year-old sister, Amy, were also on the boat, and that both her mother and sister suffered broken arms. Michael Lawrence, 54, who was driving the boat, has been charged with gross negligence manslaughter. Michael Howley, 51, who owns the company that operated the boat trip, Seadogz, has been charged with failing to take all reasonable steps to secure that the boat was operated in a safe manner. In a statement released previously through Hampshire constabulary, her family said: “We are all in shock that our beautiful daughter and sister is no longer with us, and words just don’t seem available to express our deep sense of loss.” Stuart Parkes, head teacher at Brookfield School where Emily was a pupil, described her as “kind, compassionate” and as a “bright, conscientious student”. Rosemary Ainslie, the head of the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) special crime division, said: “The CPS has today authorised Hampshire constabulary to charge two men in relation with the death of Emily Lewis, 15, who was in a boat which struck a buoy in Southampton Water on 22 August 2020. “The CPS reminds all concerned that criminal proceedings against these defendants are active and that they have the right to a fair trial. “It is extremely important that there should be no reporting, commentary or sharing of information online which could in any way prejudice proceedings.”Rishi Sunak has been accused of going “missing in action” on Britain’s unfolding energy crisis, as he faced claims he was positioning himself for a potential leadership bid. With pressure growing on the chancellor to act, Rachel Reeves, his Labour shadow, said urgent steps were needed to help hard-pressed families before an expected surge in gas and electricity prices from April. “The chancellor has been missing in action on the energy crisis, leaving working people worrying about what the government will do as bills skyrocket and their taxes are about to be hiked,” she said. It comes after Sunak declined on Wednesday night to hand his full backing to Boris Johnson amid growing public anger over Downing Street parties, with the chancellor using a Twitter post to issue a lukewarm endorsement of the prime minister, fuelling intense speculation among Tories over his own leadership ambitions. While Johnson apologised in parliament for attending a Downing Street “bring your own booze” garden party during the May 2020 lockdown, Sunak spent Wednesday on a ministerial visit to Devon, hundreds of miles from Westminster. In a carefully worded tweet posted at 8pm, after eight hours of public silence, Sunak said he supported Johnson’s request for patience until the conclusion of an official inquiry. There have been suggestions at Westminster that Sunak could withdraw his support from the embattled prime minister by resigning. But a former Tory cabinet minister dismissed that idea, saying: “He who wields the knife never wears the crown. You don’t want to do a [Michael] Heseltine.” Sources close to the chancellor said he had returned to London to hold a raft of meetings at the Treasury on Thursday on how best to respond to the energy crisis, amid signs of the government beginning to ready a response after months of pressure from consumer groups, industry representatives and MPs. It is understood a plan will be announced before Friday 4 February, when the energy watchdog, Ofgem, is expected to announce by how much average bills will rise as it lifts the cap on what energy companies can charge. Without intervention, British consumers face a rise in their annual energy bills of more than £700 from April. “The chancellor has been conducting meetings all week on how to best to respond to the energy crisis, including with the prime minister, colleagues and fellow MPs,” said a Tory source. “Unlike the Labour party, we are considering the complexities of the situation and working on how best to target support appropriately.” Energy industry sources said they had been concerned for some time that ministers were taking too long to grasp the severity of the situation. Coming amid surging costs on the wholesale markets, the hike is expected to drive millions of homes into fuel poverty for the first time and take a disproportionate toll on households with lower incomes and older billpayers. “We’re expecting something to be done within the next couple of weeks, before the new price cap is announced,” one industry source said. “But we can only hope that the plans are enough to address the scale of the crisis without playing politics.” “Since the autumn it has felt like we’re dealing with a government which half hopes that the situation may resolve itself; that maybe the [gas] markets will cool off, and it won’t look so bad by the spring. But thankfully there are parts of government which can now see the wider economic implications of these energy costs,” the source added. Peter Smith, director of policy and advocacy at the charity National Energy Action, said action was vital before the April jump in utility bills. “Without providing clarity urgently, this risks leaving many members of the public wondering whether or not there is a plan to help,” he said. Labour claimed Sunak had been repeatedly absent at key moments. In December, he was forced to fly back from meetings with Silicon Valley executives in California as the Omicron wave of Covid-19 worsened and hospitality businesses pressed for help from the Treasury. Reeves said: “He has got form on going awol. He had to be dragged back kicking and screaming from California when businesses faced huge risks when the Omicron variant hit, he was nowhere to be seen during PMQs or when we debated a VAT cut on home energy bills in parliament this week.” Possible interventions that could be considered by the chancellor include reforms to the warm homes discount (WHD), including a possible state-funded expansion of the scheme to help the most vulnerable customers with the cost of their bills. Energy suppliers have suggested £20bn of loans, possibly backed by government guarantees, could help cover the cost of providing a safety net for bust providers before borrowed funds would be repaid at a later date. However, there are concerns over how this might look politically, while a stubbornly high energy price could make repayments at a later date harder to stomach. Another option would be to cut the 5% rate of VAT on energy bills – a plan called for by Labour but so far rejected by the government, despite it having been promoted by Boris Johnson as a potential Brexit bonus before he became prime minister. Analysts at the US investment bank Goldman Sachs – including chief UK economist Steffan Ball, a former top adviser to Phillip Hammond – said they expected an energy support package worth about £3.4bn funded through government borrowing. It said this could include a £100 increase in the WHD scheme, alongside a VAT cut and loans to energy suppliers. Options including a windfall tax on oil and gas firms, which have benefited from soaring prices, as well as any increase in benefits, appear unlikely, they added. A Treasury spokesperson said: “The chancellor is fully engaged and is listening to concerns about high energy prices, recognising the pressure this is putting on families across the country. He has been in regular contact throughout with the secretary of state for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy and the PM. “Our energy price cap continues to protect consumers, and we have support in place for vulnerable households including the new £500m household support fund, warm home discount, winter fuel payments and cold weather payments.”