Modern dating is a minefield at the best of times, let alone when you’re 40, living in a foreign country, widowed and the single father of an emotionally difficult 11-year-old. When we meet American expat Gary (Josh Gad), he’s being dumped in an Australian restaurant by a self-described empath who claims he’s not emotionally available enough. Soon after, Gary has a chance encounter with the beautiful Mary (Isla Fisher) when their cars collide, and is stunned when she manages to soothe his daughter Emma (Ariel Donoghue) during a panic attack – something he can’t do himself. Mary seems like a dream come true, but not all is as it seems. Directed by Abe Forsythe and produced by Jodi Matterson (Nine Perfect Strangers), Bruna Papandrea (Big Little Lies) and Steve Hutensky (The Dry), this schlocky six-part series is choppy and confused, unsure of its purpose. Mary’s true identity is flagged in the title of the show, which has all the subtlety of a Twilight film – except that Twilight could be considered “so bad it’s good”, and this is really just the former. Mary is a kind of manic pixie dream wolf, playing the prospective stepmother of Emma’s dreams; she gives the girl a Carl Sagan novel, which Emma reads obsessively, and recommends a Queens of the Stone Age song, so Emma locks herself in a car to listen to it. The charm of Mary, for both Emma and her father, is the way in which she can cut through to some kind of emotional centre: through interacting with Mary, Emma is able to develop a new vocabulary that helps her in her therapy sessions. But does all this make Mary a good partner for Gary? Here’s where Wolf Like Me does, perhaps, succeed a little: illustrating the addictive, push-pull nature of toxic relationships. Just as we think Gary is out for good, something pulls him back towards Mary; Mary’s constant running away act is frustrating but understandable, given her fear of intimacy and judgment. Both characters elicit some sympathy from the viewer, but neither is particularly likable. The relationship is unhealthy on both sides and borders on emotional abuse, manipulation and boundary-crossing. It’s hard to watch without thinking both characters would be better off without the other. One early scene shows Gary ordering a cab driver to follow Mary home so he can see for himself what she’s up to. “You shouldn’t be following women like this, it’s 2021,” the driver says. This might be the show’s only real moment of self-awareness. Its depiction of women and race leaves a lot to be desired: one particularly uncomfortable thread sees Gary go on a date with an Asian woman, who is only on the dating app to learn English. Wolf Like Me gets more ridiculous across the six 30-minute episodes, with Mary and Gary’s relationship developing at warp speed as their lives become more intertwined. The climax, in which Mary’s secret is finally shown on-screen, is laughably bad – especially in terms of special effects and costuming – but there’s a sweet father-daughter moment there, in which Gary finally finds a way to communicate with Emma. Still, the plot is nonsensical. It’s hard to tell what genre Wolf Like Me wants to be. Horror? Romcom? Drama? A mix of all three? Whatever it is, it falls flat. Wolf Like Me premieres on 13 January on Stan (Australia) and Peacock (US).The rollout of smart motorways has been suspended by the government until at least 2025 in response to safety concerns from MPs and motoring groups. Schemes to convert stretches of the M3, M25, M62 and M40 will be put on ice until five years’ worth of safety data from the controversial roads are available, ministers said. The government has promised a £900m package of additional safety measures on existing smart motorways in the meantime, including building more emergency refuge areas for vehicles in difficulty. Smart motorways, which were introduced to increase road capacity and manage traffic by converting the hard shoulder to a live running lane, have been heavily criticised by safety campaigners – particularly relatives of people who have died in crashes after being left unable to find safe refuge when their vehicles broke down. The government’s change of tack comes in response to a report by the cross-party transport select committee demanding a halt to the programme and a number of safety enhancements. While the Department for Transport said that available data shows that smart motorways are the safest roads in the UK in terms of fatalities, it has agreed to have the technology independently evaluated by the regulator, the Office of Rail and Road (ORR), and to suspend the new schemes pending the full five years’ worth of safety data across the so-called “all lane running” motorways converted over the past decade. The first smart motorways were either known as “controlled”, with a permanent hard shoulder as well as the electronic signage that imposes temporary, changeable speed limits, or “dynamic”, where the hard shoulder is used at peak times. In a review of smart motorways commissioned by transport secretary, Grant Shapps, in March 2020, the government said dynamic smart motorways were confusing and should be phased out in favour of all-lane running, removing the hard shoulder permanently. However, MPs on the transport committee said that the decision was premature and based on insufficient evidence. The government says it will also pause the conversion of seven dynamic smart motorways to all-lane running while it assesses the data, before making a decision on next steps – but made clear, for now, that it did not believe that safety would be improved by reinstating the hard shoulder on motorways, as called for by many campaigners. In its formal response to the committee’s report, the DfT noted the conclusion of MPs that evidence suggested reducing motorway capacity “could put more drivers and passengers at risk of death or serious injury if they were to divert on to less safe local roads, and that hard shoulders do not provide a safe place to stop”. The government said it would now spend another £390m on installing more than 150 additional emergency refuge areas on existing smart motorways, about 50% more than at present, by 2025, on top of the £500m spend on retrofitting more stopped vehicle detection technology promised after Shapps’ 2020 stocktake. Shapps said he had tried to “raise the bar” on safety, adding: “While our initial data shows that smart motorways are among the safest roads in the UK, it’s crucial that we go further to ensure people feel safer using them. “Pausing schemes yet to start construction and making multimillion-pound improvements to existing schemes will give drivers confidence and provide the data we need to inform our next steps.” Smart motorways already under construction will, however, be completed, the DfT said. That includes stretches of the M1, M4 and M6 due to be finished in 2022 or 2023. The DfT said failing to complete them would cause “significant disruption” for drivers. The chief executive of National Highways, Nick Harris, said existing motorways would be made safer “and we will step up our advice to drivers so they have all the information they need”. Motoring organisations and road safety campaigners welcomed the news of the pause. Meera Naran, whose eight-year-old son, Dev, died in a crash on the M6 in 2018, said it was “a positive opportunity to assess the future of our motorway network”. The RAC said it was a “watershed decision [and] an unqualified victory for drivers” while the AA said it had met a key demand, that emergency refuge areas should be no more than three-quarters of a mile apart. Huw Merriman MP, chair of the transport committee, credited ministers for revisiting the issue so soon and accepting the safety recommendations. He said: “It was clear that the public needs more reassurance that these motorways are safe to use.” However, former roads minister Mike Penning MP, who signed off several smart motorway schemes but has since spoken out against them, said he remained deeply concerned. “Either we are happy that all-lane running is safe or we’re not,” he said. “If there is any reasonable doubt, which there clearly is … then we should stop using them.”Pausing the rollout of smart motorways suggests the government has finally bowed to the inevitable, faced with the collective outrage of motoring groups, bereaved families, newspapers, MPs – and indeed a former minister who signed off the schemes. Not, though, that the small print guarantees drivers have in any way seen the end of the hard shoulderless highways: ongoing major works will be completed, and even design work will go ahead for more stretches, in case the mood changes by 2025. For now, that decision awaits more data. The trouble is that the cold data has yet to convince drivers who feel instinctively that the motorways are unsafe. While the accident statistics, as the Department for Transport continues to point out, show that smart motorways are the safest roads in the country – in terms of fatal incidents involving motorists by a significant margin, per mile, compared with A-roads – it is the circumstances of those fatalities, rather than the numbers, which have appalled. In several cases, people died in their cars long after breaking down and calling for assistance; unable to make it to a place of safety, hit by other vehicles at high speed. Inquiries have heard harrowing testimony, including the final, recorded conversations of victims. And coroners as well as relatives have concluded that the deaths were due to the layout of the motorways. Roads which were initially trialled with more refuge areas, or hard shoulders only used at peak times, with technology to manage speed and to detect stopped vehicles, have been rolled out without the same levels of protection. Until today’s decision, the government had affirmed that all smart motorways would be converted to all-lane running, ie without a hard shoulder at any point. Grant Shapps’ stocktake in 2020 was an acknowledgment that drivers feared they could not be reached in the event of trouble, without a clear passage for emergency vehicles. Safety measures, from greater retrofitting of technology and clamping down on motorists ignoring the red Xs signals, were inadequate reassurance. Nonetheless, the reasons that compelled ministers to move from trials in 2006 to mass introduction of smart motorways from 2014 remain. More and more traffic, barely dented by Covid restrictions, and less tolerance of new roads. Drivers are the most impacted by the work to convert motorways – rather than say, the neighbouring residents or surrounding countryside blighted by building a new road. Eating up the hard shoulder provides a relatively cheap, efficient, and less environmentally intrusive way of expanding the network – although green campaigners have made clear that the rollout, encouraging more traffic, is barely compatible with climate commitments. A pause until 2025 will also save hundreds of millions of pounds on road contracts, not insignificant after the Treasury blocked planned rail investment – the kind of spending that was supposedly popular. Suspending the programme may have become a political no-brainer but the DfT’s constraints suggest any motorways built after 2025 will probably remain, more or less, “smart”.It was the year that millions of urban dwellers plotted – or daydreamed about – a move to a more isolated location, with a small Scottish island, remote Cumbrian villages and the Isle of Man all featuring in a list of homebuyer search hotspots for 2021. The pandemic has prompted many people to look at quitting their homes in the town or city and relocating somewhere with more open space or more room for working from home. Rhos-on-Sea, a small seaside town in north Wales near Colwyn Bay, topped property website Rightmove’s list of the 10 most popular hotspots, all of which are either villages or located near the sea. However, the site also found that during the final months of 2021, London snatched back its crown as the most searched-for major area – suggesting that, as lockdowns lifted and restrictions eased, many would-be homebuyers underwent a reality check. Sandwiched between Llandudno and Colwyn Bay, Rhos-on-Sea is popular with daytrippers, with a population of less than 8,000. Searches for properties in the town were up 858% on 2020. In fourth was the village of Breage in deepest Cornwall, located a few miles from Helston and 20 miles from Land’s End. In fifth place on the list was the Isle of Man, with its “favourable tax regime” and low crime rate. Unlike other offshore jurisdictions, there is no limit on buying or renting property on the island. In sixth and 10th place were villages in Cumbria: Frizington, situated a few miles from the Lake District national park, and Allonby, which boasts a long sandy beach and views across the Solway Firth to the mountains of southern Scotland. The town of Huntly in Aberdeenshire, just under an hour’s drive north-west of Aberdeen, was in seventh place, and in eighth was Millport, the only town on Cumbrae, off the Ayrshire coast, which has been dubbed “Scotland’s most accessible island”. The seaside village of Thorpeness in Suffolk came in ninth place. Perhaps a little more familiar to many were the second- and third-placed hotspots. Hove in East Sussex, just to the west of Brighton, saw home searches up 680% on 2020, while in third came the village of Chadlington in the Oxfordshire Cotswolds – the epicentre of broadcaster Jeremy Clarkson’s foray into agriculture, as depicted in his Amazon Prime reality show, Clarkson’s Farm. In terms of major areas, London is historically the most searched-for location on Rightmove; however, in January and February 2021, and then from May until September, Cornwall led the way. But after that, London took the top spot again and kept it. Rightmove said these findings reflected “changed buyer preferences” in 2021, when more people looked for homes near coastal areas as they spent time working from home, while the return of London to the top of searches later in the year highlights its returning popularity.UK households have suffered the sharpest fall in the amount of cash they have available to spend for almost eight years, amid a worsening cost of living crisis driven by high inflation and rising energy bills. According to a report by the insurer Scottish Widows, increasing living costs at the end of last year hit people’s pockets and led to the steepest decline in cash availability since the start of 2014. It said people were increasingly pessimistic about their future finances in 2022, according to the latest reading from its quarterly household finance index. The poll of 1,500 individuals, compiled by Ipsos Mori and IHS Markit on behalf of the insurer, found that pressure intensified on savings and disposable income in the final months of 2021, with both declining quicker than at anytime in over the past seven years. The index, which measures households’ overall perceptions of financial wellbeing, fell from 44 in the third quarter to 40.1 in the final quarter of 2021, the lowest reading since the second quarter of 2020 when Covid-19 first spread. A figure above 50 signals an improvement as opposed to a deterioration. It comes as a separate report from the Royal Society for Arts said young adults were among the hardest hit by the cost of living crisis, in a warning that the damage to their finances from inflation, student debt, and rising taxes risked creating a new “generation precariat”. According to a survey of 1,000 young adults by the thinktank, researchers found almost half (47%) were unable or just about managing to make ends meet each month, or had an income that varied significantly from paycheck to paycheck. With inflation at the highest level in a decade, ministers are coming under growing pressure to act on living standards ahead of an expected sharp increase in gas and electricity prices for British consumers from April. According to the RSA study, carried out as part of an inquiry by the Health Foundation thinktank into young people’s health, those living in financially precarious situations were far more likely to be worried about their mental and physical health. It found that just 41% of young people believed others like them would ever be able to buy their own home, and only 51% thought they would ever earn enough to support a family. Just over half (51%) said they thought young people like them would not be able to retire and live comfortably when the time comes. The researchers said young adults risked a tougher squeeze than other age groups as the government’s “national living wage” for under-23s was lower than the headline rate of £8.91 an hour. The legal pay floor will go up to £9.50 from April for those aged 23 and over, while there will also be increases for those in younger age brackets. The RSA also noted that the government was considering lowering the repayment threshold on student loans to £22,000 from £27,295 at present, which would have the effect of reducing incomes for graduates. Fran Landreth Strong, an RSA researcher and lead author of the report, said: “Young people across the UK face a toxic cocktail of inadequate work and safety nets, high levels of debt, and a rising cost of living. “Our research shows that this results in a worrying number of young people facing financial precarity, with significant impact on their mental and physical health and their confidence about the future. Without proper action, we risk creating a ‘generation precariat’, unable to invest in their futures and move confidently into adulthood.”Joe Biden called on the US Senate to eliminate the filibuster rule in order to pass the two voting rights bills stalled by Republicans. The US president took the bully pulpit, using a speech in Atlanta, Georgia, the cradle of the civil rights movement, to give an impassioned plea for Congress to pass his bills to ensure Americans’ access to the ballot box. Biden said he was “tired of being quiet”. (But has he left it too late?) Kamala Harris, accompanying the president and speaking first, argued that Senate Democrats should not allow the filibuster to prevent them from advancing national voting rights legislation. The vice-president said: “The American people have waited long enough. The Senate must act.” Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer, a Democratic senator from New York, said earlier that the Senate would act on voting rights “as soon as tomorrow”. Dr Anthony Fauci, the president’s chief medical adviser, once again clashed with the Republican senator Rand Paul. Members of the White House pandemic response team testified before the Senate committee on health, education, labor and pensions. The top US public health official accused the rightwinger of using the Covid pandemic for his political benefit. The House select committee investigating the 6 January insurrection has issued a subpoena to Trump’s policy adviser Ross Worthington. Worthington helped draft the speech that Donald Trump delivered prior to the attack on the capitol. The committee has also subpoenaed two advisers to Trump’s son Donald Trump Jr, Andy Surabian and Arthur Schwartz. – Joanie Greve, Joanna Walters, Maanvi Singh Martin Luther King III, a civil rights leader and son of Martin Luther King Jr, reflected on Joe Biden’s speech in Atlanta, calling on the president to “use the full power of his office” to eliminate the filibuster: President Biden was clear in his call for eliminating the filibuster to pass voting rights, and we’re grateful he has taken this bold step to support the change that we need. But he can’t rest this call at the feet of the Senate and walk away – he must use the full power of his office to ensure this Jim Crow relic finally falls. The president cited his pedigree of dealmaking to pass voting rights legislation as a senator – we know he has the power and influence to do the same today. When we met with the president today, we reiterated that we expect strong action, not just words. We need to see a plan. We will be watching closely and mobilizing to ensure his speech is backed by the full power and influence of his office.” Andrea Waters King, a civil rights advocate, added: We won’t be satisfied until the president signs both the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act and the Freedom to Vote Act into law. We are hopeful to see him heed our call and begin putting his full force behind the legislation now. But we intend to hold him accountable until we see him deliver for voting rights.” An Indiana state senator has backtracked on his remarks that teachers must be impartial when discussing nazism in classrooms after he sparked widespread backlash. During a state senate committee hearing last week about Senate Bill 167, a proposed bill that would ban “concepts that divide”, the Republican senator Scott Baldwin, who co-wrote the bill, said teachers should remain unprejudiced when teaching lessons about fascism and nazism. “Marxism, nazism, fascism … I have no problem with the education system providing instruction on the existence of those ‘isms’,” Baldwin said, adding, “I believe we’ve gone too far when we take a position … We need to be impartial.” He went on to say that teachers should “just provide the facts” and that he is “not sure it’s right for us to determine how that child should think and that’s where I’m trying to provide the guardrails”. Baldwin has since walked back on his remarks. In an email to the Indianapolis Star last Thursday, he said that his intention with the bill was to make sure teachers are being impartial when discussing and teaching “legitimate political groups”. “When I was drafting this bill, my intent with regard to ‘political affiliation’ was to cover political parties within the legal American political system,” Baldwin said. “In my comments during committee, I was thinking more about the big picture and trying to say that we should not tell kids what to think about politics.” He went on to denounce the aforementioned ideologies, saying, “nazism, Marxism and fascism are a stain on our world history and should be regarded as such, and I failed to adequately articulate that in my comments during the meeting. I believe that kids should learn about these horrible events in history so that we don’t experience them again in humanity.” SB 167 was filed in recent weeks in response to the fierce debates that have emerged across Indiana and the rest of the country in the past year regarding the ways schools should teach children about racism, history and other subject matters. Read more: Joe Biden has styled himself as a defender of democracy but, critics say, is setting the worst possible example with his choice of envoy to Athens. The US president nominated George Tsunis, a hotel developer and Democratic donor with no diplomatic experience, as US ambassador to Greece. When Tsunis seeks confirmation at a Senate foreign relations committee hearing on Wednesday, he will be hoping to avoid a repeat of the train wreck that was his last appearance there eight years ago. On that occasion Tsunis was Barack Obama’s nominee for ambassador to Norway. Bumbling and ill-prepared, he admitted that he had never been to Norway and referred to the country as having a president when, as a constitutional monarchy, it does not. Tsunis also claimed that Norway’s Progress party was among “fringe elements” that “spew their hatred” and was criticized by Norway’s government. In fact, the Progress party was part of the governing coalition. The hapless nominee withdrew from consideration after causing dismay among Norwegian Americans and earning ridicule on CNN’s Anderson Cooper 360 and Comedy Central’s The Daily Show with Jon Stewart. Now he is getting a do-over that, critics maintain, he does not deserve. Brett Bruen, who was global engagement director of the Obama White House and recalls Tsunis’s first foray as a “debacle” in which he was “torn to shreds” by Senator John McCain, said: “The notion that he gets a second chance just utterly shocks me because in serious circles of international affairs he’s a punchline. “So why in the world would you send someone to a significant country like Greece – at a dangerous time – to represent us there who in the eyes of most foreign policy hands can’t keep some fundamental facts straight and does not deserve to be ambassador to Ulaanbaatar, let alone Athens?” A lawyer, developer and philanthropist, Tsunis has donated to both Democrats and Republicans, including more than $1.3m to Obama in 2012. Read more: The House Select Committee probing the 6 January insurrection have issued subpoenas to policy adviser Ross Worthington, who helped draft the speech that Donald Trump delivered prior to the attack on the capitol. The committee has also subpoenaed two advisers to Trump’s son Donald Trump Jr, Andy Surabian and Arthur Schwartz. Thanks for tuning into the US politics news live blog, we’re handing over from the east coast to the west now, where Maanvi Singh will take you through the next few hours as things continue to develop. Here’s where things stand: Joe Biden called on the US Senate to eliminate the filibuster rule in order to pass the two voting rights bills that are crucial to his legislative agenda but are stalled there by Republican opposition and a lack of will to change the rules to work around them. The US president is at the bully pulpit, using a speech in Atlanta, Georgia, the cradle of the civil rights movement, to give an impassioned plea for Congress to pass his bills to ensure Americans’ access to the ballot box. Biden said he is “tired of being quiet”. (But has he left it too late?) Kamala Harris, accompanying the president and speaking first, argued that Senate Democrats should not allow the filibuster to prevent them from advancing national voting rights legislation. The vice president said: “The American people have waited long enough. The Senate must act.” Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer, the Democratic senator from New York, said earlier today that the Senate will act on voting rights “as soon as tomorrow”. Dr Anthony Fauci, the president’s chief medical adviser, once again clashed with Republican Senator Rand Paul today, as members of the White House pandemic response team testified before the Senate committee on health, education, labor and pensions. The top US public health official accused the right-winger of using the Covid pandemic for his political benefit. Joe Biden argued that the Republican minority in the Senate should not be allowed to use the filibuster to prevent the Democratic majority from enacting its agenda. “Today, I’m making it clear,” the president said in Atlanta, to protect our democracy, I support changing the Senate rules, whichever way they need to be changed, to prevent a minority of senators from blocking action on voting rights.” Biden’s speech represented his most direct appeal yet to change Senate rules, but his strong words still may not be enough to get voting rights bills across the finish line. Because the Senate is evenly divided between the two parties, majority leader Chuck Schumer needs all 50 Democratic senators’ support to move forward with rule changes. At least one of those senators, Joe Manchin, has made it clear that he will not support any rule changes unless they can attract bipartisan support, which seems virtually impossible given Republicans’ unified opposition to filibuster reform. Joe Biden encouraged election officials to decide whether they want to be on the right side of history when it comes to protecting voting rights for all Americans. “History has never been kind to those who have sided with voter suppression over voters’ rights,” the president said in Atlanta. “Do you want to be on the side of Dr King or George Wallace? Do you want to be on the side of John Lewis or Bull Connor? Do you want to be on the side of Abraham Lincoln or Jefferson Davis? This is the moment to decide.” Joe Biden said the Senate had been “rendered into a shell of its former self” because the filibuster has been “weaponized and abused” by the Republican minority. The president argued Democrats should use every tool at their disposal to protect American democracy and strengthen voting rights. “Let the majority prevail,” Biden said. “And if that bare minimum is blocked, we have no option but to change the Senate rules, including getting rid of the filibuster for this.” However, it remains unclear whether Democrats have the votes to amend the filibuster, as some centrists -- namely Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema -- have expressed skepticism of the idea. Joe Biden is now speaking in Atlanta, Georgia, calling on Congress to pass national voting rights legislation to ensure Americans’ access to the ballot box. The president argued this is a fragile moment for democracy and said America could set an example for the rest of the world by strengthening voting rights and election integrity. “We must be vigilant, and the world is watching,” Biden said. “They’re watching American democracy and seeing if we can meet this moment.” The president noted he has been having conversations with lawmakers about voting rights for months and now wants to see action, telling the Atlanta crowd, “I’m tired of being quiet.” Kamala Harris argued that Senate Democrats should not allow the filibuster to prevent them from advancing national voting rights legislation. “The American people have waited long enough. The Senate must act,” the vice-president said in Atlanta, Georgia. Harris warned that future generations would one day ask us what we did to protect democracy, framing this moment as a crucial inflection point in American history. “They will ask us not about how we felt. They will ask us, what did we do?” Harris said. “We cannot tell them that we let a Senate rule stand in the way of our most fundamental freedom.” Kamala Harris acknowledged America’s long history of passing laws to make it more difficult for certain voters, particularly people of color, to access the ballot box. “Anti-voters laws are not new in our nation, but we must not be deceived into thinking they’re normal,” Harris said. “There is nothing normal about a law that makes it illegal to pass out water or food to people standing in long voting lines.” The vice-president urged Americans not to be complacent about the enactment of voting restrictions, warning that Republicans were trying to “interfere with our elections to get the outcomes they want”. “Do not succumb to those who would dismiss this assault on voting rights as an unfounded threat,” Harris said. “If we stand idly by, our entire nation will pay the price for generations to come.” The sun beamed down over the area where the stage was set up, with the weather peaking at 50 degrees. Attendees included students wearing maroon-colored Morehouse face masks and members of Vice President Kamala Harris’ Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority. Outside nearly a dozen people waved signs in protest of the administration’s appearance on campus. Prior to the event beginning, Reverend Al Sharpton and Jesse Jackson were seen riding through a crowd of attendees on a golf cart. Despite being inaccurately introduced as Martin Luther King High School, the drum line from Southwest Dekalb High School performed. The band had been silently practicing for its big moment for more than an hour before the event began. The event took place at the Atlanta University Center consortium on the Clark Atlanta University and Morehouse College’s campus in southwest Atlanta’s West End neighborhood. The AUC consortium is comprised of four HBCUS, including Spelman and Morris Brown college. Spelman college SGA president Jillian Jackson invoked the activist legacies of Julian Bond, Raphael Warnock and Stacey Abrams who attended schools within the Atlanta University Center consortium while introducing the president and vice president. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris are now delivering remarks on the need to pass national voting rights legislation at the Atlanta University Center Consortium. The president and vice-president were introduced by Jillian Jackson, the student body president at the historically Black Spelman College. Jackson recounted her pride when she registered to vote at an NAACP drive, and she lamented the challenges that many Americans face in trying to access the ballot box. As Harris stepped up to the podium, she told Jackson, “I can’t wait to see what you do next.” Senator Angus King, an independent who caucuses with Democrats, described the upcoming vote to amend the filibuster to clear the way for passing a voting rights bill as “the most important vote that I will ever take in my life”. “I have been very reluctant since being here to talk at all about changing the filibuster, and if we were here today talking about a policy issue, I wouldn’t be at this podium,” King said at a press conference on Capitol Hill. “But we’re not talking about a policy issue. We’re talking about a structural issue. we’re talking about how our system works.” The Maine senator quoted the British historian Arnold Toynbee, who once said, “Civilizations commit suicide; they’re not murdered.” “I don’t want to see that happen in the United States of America,” King said. As Joe Biden arrived at the Historic Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, where Dr Martin Luther King Jr was once a pastor, reporters shouted questions at the president. One journalist asked Biden for his message to supporters who are disappointed that Democrats have not already done more on voting rights. Another reporter asked Biden whether he has the votes necessary to pass a bill. “Keep the faith,” Biden replied. As of now, it appears that Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer does not have the votes necessary to amend the filibuster, which would clear the way for Democrats to pass a voting rights bill. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris have just visited the crypt of Dr Martin Luther King Jr, the civil rights icon, and his wife, Coretta Scott King, in Atlanta, Georgia. The president and the vice-president laid a wreath at the crypt after meeting with members of the King family, including Dr Bernice A King and Martin Luther King III, two of Dr King’s children. Biden and Harris are now visiting Historic Ebenezer Baptist Church, where Dr King was once a pastor, before they deliver their speeches on voting rights this afternoon. In a statement released earlier today, Martin Luther King III said, “We are hopeful that after tomorrow’s trip to our home state, the President will honor my father’s legacy by traveling back to Washington and using every political chip he has to ensure the filibuster doesn’t obstruct the right to vote for Black and Brown Americans.” Although Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema have attracted the most attention in the debate over filibuster reform, some other Senate Democrats appear to be on the fence as well. Politico reports: Mark Kelly is not yet committed to a change in the Senate rules that would allow elections reform legislation to pass by a simple majority. A centrist who is up for reelection in November, Kelly said Monday he is still undecided just days before he may have to vote on proposals to weaken the filibuster. ... For a caucus that prides itself on unity, there’s plenty of nuance in Democrats’ views. Some, like Sen. Jon Tester (D-Mont.) like a talking filibuster but are ‘not crazy’ about making an exception for voting rights. Meanwhile, Sen. Jeanne Shaheen (D-N.H.) says reform is needed but is promoting more modest changes. She cites the near-impossible odds the party faces in getting all 50 Democrats on board for changing the filibuster unilaterally, also known as the ‘nuclear option.’ As a reminder, Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer cannot afford any defections if he wants to amend the filibuster because the upper chamber is evenly divided, 50-50, between Democrats and Republicans. Joe Manchin is insisting that any changes to Senate rules must attract bipartisan support, which is virtually impossible given Republicans’ unified opposition to filibuster reform. And if Democrats cannot change Senate rules, they almost certainly cannot pass voting rights bills, as Republicans have repeatedly used the filibuster to block those proposals. Derrick Johnson, the president of the NAACP, urged lawmakers to prioritize the fate of American democracy over their desire for bipartisanship. “Bipartisanship is wonderful when it works. But it must never come at the cost of democracy,” Johnson said on Twitter. “Getting voting rights legislation to the president’s desk has got to be the top priority above anything else.” Chuck Schumer, the senate majority leader, is pledging swift action on voting rights after Joe Biden’s forthcoming speech on the topic in Georgia later today. The New York Democrat is saying the senate could act as soon as tomorrow to take up voting rights legislation. That means Schumer could bring up either the Freedom to Vote Act or the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act for a vote in the US senate. Both bills still will require the support of at least 60 senators to proceed because of the longstanding senate rule called the filibuster. If Republicans again block the bill, which they are expected to do, Schumer will likely move to have a vote to change the rules around the filibuster. Fellow Democrats have discussed a number of possible tweaks to the rule to overcome Republican obstruction. It’s still not clear if Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, two key Democrats who support keeping the filibuster in place, would support those measures. Schumer has pledged a vote on the voting rights measure no later than 17 January, a federal holiday in the US to celebrate the life and work of the civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr. Meanwhile, Joanna Walters writes: Joe Biden and Kamala Harris’s high-stakes visit to Atlanta today is in danger of backfiring horribly after exasperated voting rights activists in Georgia first warned them not come there just for more speeches without a “concrete plan” to get the relevant legislation passed in the Senate and then, when no signal was forthcoming about such a plan, basically decided to boycott the event. The president and vice president are both with the family of Martin Luther King III now, the son of civil rights icon Dr Martin Luther King Jr, for a private meeting, having laid a wreath at the civil rights icon’s tomb in Atlanta moments ago. Jerome Powell, chairman of the Federal Reserve, has acknowledged that high inflation has emerged as a serious threat to the central bank’s goal of getting more Americans back to work and that the Fed will raise rates further if needed to stem surging prices. “If we have to raise interest rates more over time, we will,” Powell said during a hearing of the Senate banking committee, which is considering his nomination for a second four-year term. The Associated Press reports: Fed officials have forecast three increases in the their benchmark short-term rate this year, though some economists say they envision four rate hikes in 2022. The stark challenge for Powell if he is confirmed as expected for a new term was underscored by the questions he faced from both Democratic and Republican senators. Powell and the central bank are under rising pressure to rein in inflation without ramping up interest rates so high that the economy tumbles into another recession. Today, Powell took pains to rebuff suggestions from some Democratic senators that rate increases would slow hiring and potentially leave many people, particularly lower-income and Black Americans, without jobs. Fed rate increases typically lead to higher rates on many consumer and business loans and have the effect of slowing economic growth. But Powell made clear that he is now more worried about the damage that rising inflation could inflict on the job market. “High inflation is a severe threat to the achievement of maximum employment,” he said. The economy, the Fed chair added, must grow for an extended period to put as many Americans back to work as possible. Controlling inflation without raising rates so high as to choke off the economic recovery is critical to lowering unemployment, Powell said. “We know that high inflation exacts a toll, particularly for those less able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation,” he told the committee. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden is traveling to Atlanta, Georgia, to deliver a speech on the need to pass national voting rights legislation. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer has set a deadline of 17 January, Martin Luther King Day, to vote on rule changes to clear the way for passing voting rights bills. Speaking to reporters before flying to Atlanta, Biden said, “People are going to be judged – where were they before and where were they after the vote. History is going to judge us. It’s that consequential.” But Senator Joe Manchin has indicated he still wants bipartisan support for any changes to the filibuster, which Republicans have repeatedly used to block voting rights bills. Republicans are unified in their opposition to amending the filibuster, and Democrats cannot move forward without Manchin’s support, making it virtually impossible to pass a voting rights bill right now. Dr Anthony Fauci accused Republican Senator Rand Paul of trying to politically benefit from the pandemic, as the president’s chief medical adviser testified before the Senate committee on health, education, labor and pensions. “In usual fashion, you are distorting everything about me,” Fauci told Paul. “You keep coming back to personal attacks on me that have absolutely no relevance to reality.” The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Dr Anthony Fauci, the president’s chief medical adviser, once again clashed with Republican Senator Rand Paul today, as members of the White House pandemic response team testified before the Senate committee on health, education, labor and pensions. During his questioning, Paul accused Fauci of using government resources to attack other health experts who disagreed with him on coronavirus-related policies. “In usual fashion, you are distorting everything about me,” Fauci told Paul. “You keep coming back to personal attacks on me that have absolutely no relevance to reality.” Fauci argued that Paul’s attacks had distracted from the work necessary to get the pandemic under control, while also endangering him and his family. “That kindles the crazies out there,” Fauci said. “I have threats upon my life, harassment of my family and my children with obscene phone calls because people are lying about me.” Fauci also noted that Paul has fundraised off calls for his resignation, encouraging supporters to donate to his campaign if they believe the expert should be fired. “Go to Rand Paul website and you see ‘Fire Dr. Fauci’ with a little box that says contribute here,” Fauci said. “So you are making a catastrophic epidemic for your political gain.” Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell warned that Republicans would retaliate against Democrats if they move forward with amending the filibuster to pass voting rights bills. “Fifty Republican senators, the largest possible minority, have been sent here to represent the many millions of Americans whom Leader Schumer wants so badly to leave behind,” McConnell said in a floor speech moments ago. “So if my colleague tries to break the Senate to silence those millions of Americans, we will make their voices heard in this chamber in ways that are more inconvenient for the majority and this White House than what anybody has seen in living memory.” Republicans could theoretically throw up more procedural roadblocks to delay the confirmation of Joe Biden’s nominees and block the passage of routine bills. “What would a post-nuclear Senate look like? I assure you it would not be more efficient or more productive,” McConnell said. “I personally guarantee it.” The Republican who memorably resisted Donald Trump’s attempt to overturn his election defeat in Georgia has said he will run for re-election on a platform of “integrity and truth”, against an opponent who as a churchman “should know better” than to advance the former president’s lies. Brad Raffensperger, the Georgia secretary of state, became a household name after he turned down Trump’s demand that he “find 11,780 votes” in order to overturn Joe Biden’s win in the southern state. It was the first victory by a Democrat in a presidential race in Georgia since 1992. The call is among subjects of an investigation by the district attorney of Fulton county into whether Trump and others committed crimes in their push to overturn election results in the state. On Monday, Fani Willis told the Associated Press she expected to make a decision in the case in the first half of this year. “We’re going to just get the facts, get the law, be very methodical, very patient and, in some extent, unemotional about this quest for justice,” she said. Another reporter asked Joe Biden whether he was insulted that Georgia gubernatorial candidate and voting rights advocate Stacey Abrams will not be attending his speech in Atlanta. “I spoke to Stacey this morning. We have a great relationship,” Biden said, adding that their teams got their scheduling “mixed up”. “We’re all on the same page.” A number of influential political activists in Georgia are refusing to attend Biden’s speech because they say the event is a “waste of time” when it appears Democrats do not have the votes in the Senate to pass a voting rights bill. Jewel Wicker has more details on that dust-up: Joe Biden has just left the White House to start the trip to Atlanta, Georgia, where he will deliver an afternoon speech on the need to pass national voting rights legislation. As he left the White House, a reporter asked Biden what he is risking politically by making the speech when it remains very unclear whether the evenly divided Senate can pass a voting rights bill. “I risk not saying what I believe. That’s what I risk. This is one of those defining moments, it really is,” Biden said. “People are going to be judged -- where were they before and where were they after the vote. History is going to judge us. It’s that consequential. And so the risk is making sure people understand just how important this is.” As of now, it appears that Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer does not have the votes necessary to amend the filibuster and allow voting rights bills to advance. Schumer has set a deadline of 17 January, Martin Luther King Day, to vote on the matter. In his Atlanta speech, Biden is expected to say, “The next few days, when these bills come to a vote, will mark a turning point in this nation. Will we choose democracy over autocracy, light over shadow, justice over injustice? I know where I stand. I will not yield. I will not flinch.” Before traveling to Atlanta to address voting rights, Joe Biden congratulated the University of Georgia Bulldogs for their victory in last night’s national college football championship game. “Congratulations @GeorgiaFootball on your national championship! Your skill, grit, and determination show us what is possible – and how to win your school’s first title in 41 years. I’m proud of you, Bulldogs,” the president said on Twitter. The Bulldogs scored three touchdowns in the fourth quarter to defeat the Alabama Crimson Tide 33 to 18. Senator Joe Manchin reiterated that he wants bipartisan support for any changes made to the filibuster, which is extremely unlikely to happen given Republicans’ vehement opposition to Democrats’ proposals. “We need some good rule changes to make the place work better, but getting rid of the filibuster doesn’t make it work better,” Manchin told reporters on Capitol Hill moments ago. Because the Senate is evenly divided between the two parties, majority leader Chuck Schumer needs the support of all 50 Democratic senators to get rule changes approved. Many Democrats have called for amending the filibuster with a simple majority, but Manchin once again made clear that he wants the vote to occur under regular order, which would require a two-thirds supermajority for passage. “We need some good rules changes, and we can do that together,” Manchin said. “But you change the rules with two-thirds of the people that are present, so it’s Democrats and Republicans changing the rules to make the place work better. Getting rid of the filibuster does not make it work better.” Manchin’s comments come hours before Joe Biden is set to address the need for filibuster reform to pass voting rights bills in a speech in Atlanta, Georgia. Echoing a number of other civil rights leaders, the president of the NAACP said Joe Biden’s speech on voting rights today needs to translate into action in Congress. “There is nothing more urgent than securing the foundations of our democracy,” NAACP president Derrick Johnson said in a statement ahead of Biden’s trip to Atlanta. “This administration and this Congress must use all the tools at their disposal to get voting rights across the finish line. We need to see outcomes.” Of course, it remains unclear whether Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer can convince all 50 members of his caucus to support changing the filibuster, which would allow voting rights bills to advance. Senate Republicans have repeatedly used the filibuster to block the passage of the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. The attorney general of New York state is acting unconstitutionally and in an un-American way in investigating the Trump Organization, Eric Trump has insisted, claiming a civil inquiry into his father’s financial and tax affairs is politically motivated. “This is what you would expect from Russia,” Trump told Fox News on Monday. “This is what you would expect from Venezuela. This is third-rate stuff.” The investigation run by Letitia James is looking into questions including whether the Trump Organization altered property valuations for tax purposes. A separate, criminal investigation in Manhattan is covering similar ground. Such alleged behavior has been widely reported. In 2016, as Donald Trump ran for the White House, the Guardian reported on a golf club outside New York City. The headline: How Trump’s $50m golf club became $1.4m when it came time to pay tax. Trump denies wrongdoing. Eric Trump initially refused to comply with the James investigation but was taken to court then questioned in 2020. James has issued subpoenas to Donald Trump Jr and Ivanka Trump. They have refused to comply. The family has sued, alleging the investigation is politically motivated – a delaying tactic the New York Times said “Mr Trump has deployed in the past when faced with scrutiny by law enforcement and others”. As the Times put it, “there is no constitutional protection against a prosecutor harboring a political bias”. Experts believe the Trump suit will not succeed. Eric Trump’s remark about Russia raised eyebrows. He is reported to have told a golf writer, in 2014, that the Trump Organization did not “rely on American banks” because it had “all the funding we need out of Russia”. He denies the remark. Joe Biden will meet with Martin Luther King III, the son of the celebrated civil rights leader Dr Martin Luther King Jr, and his wife, Arndrea Waters King, before delivering his speech in Atlanta. “We are grateful for the opportunity to meet with the President to express our deep concerns for the state of our democracy, and convey that his visit cannot be a mere formality. We see his speech as a critical first step in a series of actions to move voting rights legislation forward,” King said in a statement. “We also support the Georgia groups who have decided not to attend the President’s speech today — they’re frustrated after a year of inaction and we are too. We’re in communication with them and stand in solidarity to ensure voting rights get done.” While in Atlanta, Biden will lay a wreath at the crypt of Dr King and visit the church where he was once a pastor. King noted in his statement, “We are hopeful that after tomorrow’s trip to our home state, the President will honor my father’s legacy by traveling back to Washington and using every political chip he has to ensure the filibuster doesn’t obstruct the right to vote for Black and Brown Americans.” A coalition of influential political activists in Georgia that boosted turnout in a state crucial to Joe Biden’s victory in 2020 is refusing to attend the visit planned on Tuesday by the US president and Kamala Harris to speak on voting rights. The group had warned the president and vice-president that they needed to announce a specific plan to get national voting rights legislation passed or risk their high-profile trip to Atlanta being dismissed as “a waste of time”. On Monday evening, the coalition of activist groups – Black Voters Matter, Galeo Impact Fund, New Georgia Project Action Fund, Asian American Advocacy Fund, Atlanta-North Georgia Labor Council – along with James Woodall, the Georgia NAACP president, announced that “we will not be attending” when Biden and Harris speak. “Instead of giving a speech tomorrow, the US Senate should be voting tomorrow. What we need now, rather than a visit from the president, vice-president and legislators is for the White House and Senate to remain in DC and act immediately to pass federal legislation to protect our freedom to vote,” the groups said in joint statement. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Joe Biden will travel to Atlanta, Georgia, today to call on Congress to immediately pass national voting rights legislation, which has stalled in the Senate due to Republican filibustering. “The next few days, when these bills come to a vote, will mark a turning point in this nation. Will we choose democracy over autocracy, light over shadow, justice over injustice?” Biden is expected to say. “I know where I stand. I will not yield. I will not flinch. I will defend your right to vote and our democracy against all enemies foreign and domestic. And so the question is where will the institution of United States Senate stand?” Of course, the key question is whether Democrats will be able to amend the filibuster to lower the 60-vote threshold needed to pass voting rights bills. As of now, it remains unclear whether centrists Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema would support changes to the filibuster, and majority leader Chuck Schumer needs all 50 Democratic senators on board in order to move forward. Regarding what Biden will say on the filibuster, a White House official said, “After the GOP’s support for state attempts to undermine the rule of law based on simple majority votes around the country, he supports – as an institutionalist – changing the Senate rules to ensure it can work again and be restored and this basic right is defended.” The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.Thanks for following along – this blog is now closed. You can catch up with the latest coronavirus coverage here. We have also launched a new live news feed here with all the current developments. Here’s a quick summary of all the latest developments: People in NSW, Australia are to report all positive rapid antigen test (RAT) or face a $1,000 fine. German police have drawn criticism for using an app to trace Covid contacts from bars and restaurants. Bolivia’s vice president and six cabinet ministers are in isolation after testing positive for the coronavirus, the government said Tuesday. UK former health secretary Matt Hancock tests positive for Covid after contracting the virus for a second time. About three-quarters of teachers in France plan to strike on Thursday to protest against the government’s shifting rules on Covid forcing the closure of half the country’s primary schools, a union has warned. France’s health ministry is expected to announce a record of more than 350,000 new Covid infections over a 24-hour period, according to the health minister, Olivier Véran. Novak Djokovic’s defence of his Australian Open title remains in doubt after reports that he might have given misleading information to Australian immigration officials. Immigration Minister Alex Hawke is still considering whether to cancel Djokovic’s visa. Sweden announced a record 70,641 new Covid cases since Friday. It also said there were a 54 new deaths from Covid. The US recorded a record number of hospitalisations due to Covid-19, as the daily infection rate soared to more than 1.35m. There were 145,982 people hospitalised with coronavirus on Monday, according to the US Department of Health and Human Services. More than half of people in Europe could contract the Omicron in the next two months if infections continue at current rates, the World Health Organization has warned. The WHO also warned that it is too too soon to treat Omicron as a flu-like endemic illness. Senior emergency officer for Europe, Catherine Smallwood, said: “We still have a huge amount of uncertainty and a virus that is evolving quite quickly, imposing new challenges. We are certainly not at the point where we are able to call it endemic. The central Chinese city of Anyang has ordered five million people to begin home confinement in a new lockdown to curb the spread of Omicron variant. Here’s more on the announcement for those in NSW, Australia, to report all positive rapid antigen test (RAT) or face a $1,000 fine. State premier Dominic Perrottet has said it is mandatory to report a positive rapid antigen test (RAT) and there will be a $1,000 fine for those who fail to report their positive RATs result. Perrottet said anyone that has tested positive since 1 January will need to register their positive test. “This health order has been signed off this morning and in terms of enforcement if someone fails to register a positive rapid antigen test there will be a $1,000 fine and there will be a grace period”, the premier said. Watch the video below. German police have drawn criticism for using an app to trace Covid contacts from bars and restaurants. The case stemming from November last year began after the fatal fall of a man while leaving a restaurant in the western city of Mainz. Police seeking possible witnesses made use of data from an app known as Luca, which was designed for patrons to register time spent in restaurants and taverns to track the possible spread of coronavirus. Luca records the length of time spent at an establishment along with the patron’s full name, address and telephone number - all subject to Germany’s strict data protection laws. However the police and local prosecutors in the case in Mainz successfully appealed to the municipal health authorities to gain access to information about 21 people who visited the restaurant at the same time as the man who died. After an outcry, prosecutors apologised to the people involved and the local data protection authority has opened an inquiry into the affair, Agence France-Press reports. Samantha Lock back with you on the blog reporting to you from Sydney. Here’s a quick snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across Australia. The state of NSW has recorded 34,759 Covid cases and 2,242 hospitalisations on its deadliest day. Victoria has reported 40,127 cases with 946 in hospital. Both states recorded 21 Covid deaths. There are now $1,000 fines for not reporting positive rapid antigen tests in NSW. Brazil’s health ministry also recorded 147 further Covid-19 deaths, Reuters reports. The country has now registered 22,629,460 cases since the pandemic began, according to ministry data. The official death toll is now at 620,238. Almost twice as many people with Covid-19 are still infectious on day five of self-isolation compared to day seven, The Independent reports. New government analysis by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) shows that one in three people, or 31%, are still infectious five days after first testing positive for Covid. In contrast, just one in six, or 16%, are able to transmit the virus to others by the seventh day of self-isolation. Scientists concluded the findings show that ministers would be “shooting themselves in the foot” if they decide to cut the self-isolation period from seven to five days. Pfizer said it is reducing its US sales staff as it expects doctors and other healthcare providers to want fewer face-to-face interactions with salespeople after the pandemic ends, Reuters reports. The move comes as the company is expected to announce more than $80 billion (£59 billion) in revenue in 2021 on sales of the Covid-19 vaccine it developed with Germany’s BioNTech. In a statement, Pfizer said: We are evolving into a more focused and innovative biopharma company, and evolving the way we engage with healthcare professionals in an increasingly digital world. There will be some changes to our workforce to ensure we have the right expertise and resources in place to meet our evolving needs. The company did not specify how many sales jobs it was cutting but a source familiar with the matter said Pfizer was eliminating a few hundred positions. Here’s more Quebec’s plan to impose a “health tax” on residents who refuse to get the Covid-19 vaccination for non-medical reasons, by my colleague Leyland Cecco. Premier François Legault announced the new “contribution” for the unvaccinated on Tuesday, as the province reported 62 new deaths, bringing the total number of people killed by Covid-19 in the province to 12,028 – the most in Canada. “A health contribution will be charged to all adults that don’t want to get vaccinated. We are there now,” he said. “Those who refuse to get the shot bring a financial burden to hospital staff and Quebecers. The 10% of the population can’t burden the 90%.” The move follows the abrupt resignation of a senior health official in the province, amid mounting anger over new lockdown measures, hospitals at capacity and the slow rollout of vaccine boosters. Read the full article here: New Jersey’s governor Phil Murphy has reinstated a public health emergency amid the state’s record number of cases and a sharp increase in hospital admissions. In a statement, he said: While we hope to return to a state of normalcy as soon as possible, the step I am taking today is a commonsense measure that will protect the safety and well-being of all New Jersey residents while allowing state government to respond to the continuing threat that Covid-19 poses to our daily lives. On Monday, Murphy described the state as being in the middle of an “Omicron tsunami” with more residents – including children – being hospitalised than at any point since April 2020. Bolivia’s vice president and six cabinet ministers are in isolation after testing positive for the coronavirus, the government said Tuesday. The news comes just a week after Vice President David Choquehuanca received his first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, following widespread criticism over his decision to wait to get a jab, Associated Press reports. The other ministers who tested positive are ministers of the interior, Eduardo del Castillo; defense, Edmundo Novillo; foreign relations, Rogelio Mayta; education, Edgar Pari; justice, Iván Lima, and planning, Gabriela Mendoza. Matt Hancock has tested positive for Covid-19 after contracting the virus for a second time. Writing on Twitter, he said he has been isolating at home since testing positive for the virus yesterday afternoon. Hancock first contracted the virus in April 2020 at the height of the first wave of the pandemic. The UK’s prime minister Boris Johnson needs to spend the next six months rebuilding public trust in his government, a senior Conservative MP has said. Sir Charles Walker, the vice chairman of the influential backbench 1922 Committee, said an invitation to Downing Street staff to attend a drinks party in the garden of No 10 in May 2020 had been a “huge error of judgment”. He told Channel 4 News: I think there was probably a bunker mentality in No 10, in and around Downing Street. It is highly possible there was some really poor decision-making around this. I don’t think it was malicious, I just think it was a mistake. I think the Prime Minister needs to spend the next six months restoring trust in No 10 and making some good and strong decisions. I think that is the challenge for him. The World Health Organisation (WHO)’s technical lead for Covid-19, Dr Maria Van Kerkhove, has described so-called Covid parties as “dangerous” and warned of the threat of long Covid. Images and videos have appeared on social media purportedly showing people purposefully trying to catch Covid at a time convenient to them. Catching the virus at one of these events could lead to a “real” chance of developing severe disease as well as passing it on to someone who is more vulnerable, she warned at a briefing today. We don’t know the implications of Omicron, which replicates in the upper respiratory tract as opposed to the lower respiratory tract and if that has any implication on your chances of developing longer-term effects. I’ve heard some very scary stories about, you know, parties of people and trying to get infected. Please, that is very unsafe. Good evening from London. I’m Léonie Chao-Fong, taking over from Matthew Weaver to bring you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next few hours. Do get in touch with tips and stories on Twitter or via email. We’ll start in Quebec, Canada’s second-most populous province, where residents who refuse to get vaccinated against Covid for non-medical reasons could face a “significant” financial penalty. Quebec’s premier François Legault made the announcement today, describing the measures as a “health-care contribution” though the exact amount has not yet been determined. He told reporters: A health contribution will be charged to all adults that don’t want to get vaccinated. We are there now. Only 10% of the population is unvaccinated but they make up 50% of patients in intensive care beds, Legault said, adding: Those who refuse to get the shot bring a burden to hospital staff and an important financial burden for the majority of Quebecers. The health tax will apply to all adults in Quebec who refuse to get their first vaccine dose “in the next few weeks”. The new measure comes as Quebec’s hospitals find themselves increasingly stretched with more admissions driven by the Omicron variant and staff absences. Ireland is expected to lift restrictions on the movement of people who have been in close contact with someone suffering from Covid, Reuters reports. In a radio interview with Newstalk, the minister for health, Stephen Donnelly, said he had received updated advice on coronavirus restrictions that would be considered by his cabinet colleagues on Wednesday. He said: The main change and recommendation is as follows: if you have boosted immunity currently you are asked to restrict your movements for five days. That requirement would go completely. So no restricted movement if you have boosted immunity. Boosted immunity means people who have had two doses of a vaccine and a confirmed diagnosis of Covid in the last three months, Donnelly said. Ireland’s health department reported 19,290 new cases on Tuesday, with tOmicron accounting for 92% of all infections in the country. Donnelly said he would also propose that certain age groups with a positive rapid antigen test no longer need a PCR test to confirm the result. The isolation period for those who test positive is set to be standardised at seven days, regardless of whether they have received a booster vaccination. France has reported a record of more than 350,000 new cases as health minister Olivier Véran warned. The confirmed record figure for new cases is 368,149. About three-quarters of teachers in France plan to strike on Thursday to protest against the government’s shifting rules on Covid forcing the closure of half the country’s primary schools, a union has warned. The strike led by the Snuipp-FSU union, the largest among primary school teachers, comes after the latest of several changes on testing and isolation requirements for potential Covid cases announced by Prime Minister Jean Castex on Monday. After seeing long queues of parents outside pharmacies and labs in recent days to test children in classes where a case was detected, Castex said home tests could now be used to determine if a student could return to school. But teachers say class disruptions have become unmanageable with the spread of the highly contagious Omicron coronavirus variant, especially since many parents remain unable to get vaccination appointments for children over five, available only since late December. “Students cannot learn properly because attendance varies wildly, and a hybrid of in-house and distance learning is impossible to put in place,” the Snuipp-FSU said, adding that absent teachers are not being replaced. It is also demanding the government provide facemasks for staff, including the more protective FFP2 masks, and CO2 monitors to check if classrooms are sufficiently ventilated. “Not only does the current protocol not protect students, staff or their families, it has completely disorganised schools,” the union said, claiming that classes have effectively been turned into “daycare centres.” The education minister, Jean-Michel Blanquer, has said the government is doing everything possible to avoid outright school closures that could cause havoc for parents and jeopardise learning for thousands, especially those in low-income families. Turkey has become the latest country to announce a record number of cases, with 74,266 new infections. There were 137 deaths related to coronavirus in the same period, the data showed. In late December, daily cases stood at around 20,000. The health minister, Fahrettin Koca, said: As cases due to the Omicron variant become dominant, Omicron will be a source of danger for those in risk groups and it may lead to death among the elderly and the chronically ill. Italy has reported record 220,532 new cases, more than double the figure announced on Monday. It also announced another 294 Covid-related deaths. Italy has registered 139,559 deaths linked to the virus since its outbreak emerged in February 2020, and has reported 7.77 million cases to date. Patients in hospital with Covid – not including those in intensive care - stood at 17,067 up from 16,340 a day earlier. There were 185 admissions to intensive care units, against 114 on Monday. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 1,677 from a previous 1,606. Public health leaders have called for greater support for those affected with long Covid, warning that the surge in cases risks exacerbating existing health inequalities between rich and poor. Speaking at a webinar organised by the Local Government Association, they noted that, just as those from poorer backgrounds suffered a disproportionately high number of Covid infections, many of those affected by long Covid also came from lower socioeconomic backgrounds. Dr Aiden Fowler, the national director of patient safety in England, said: Because there is the highest prevalence in areas of deprivation, long Covid has the potential to worsen the health and wider socioeconomic inequalities that already occur, which could prove a challenge for local authorities. Dr Dagmar Zeuner, the director of public health in the London borough of Merton, added that people working in occupations that brought them into contact with infected individuals, and who had little control over their environment, had already borne the brunt of infections. She said: “Now, these are also the ones that carry the burden of long Covid, so they are suffering to keep their jobs.” Yet, they were not necessarily getting equal access to the long Covid clinics set up to help rehabilitate them. Zeuner said: The people we are see now coming through are not mirroring those communities that are hit hardest. We should unashamedly say that the main challenge and also the main opportunity is that we really use this new condition to focus on equity. We all want to reduce inequality, and these have been desperately exacerbated by Covid. Their comments echo the findings of a report published last year, which suggested towns in north-west England were facing a growing health and economic crisis due to high numbers of long Covid cases. Here’s a round up of Tuesday’s developments: France’s health ministry is expected to announce a record of more than 350,000 new Covid infections over a 24-hour period, according to the health minister, Olivier Véran. Novak Djokovic’s defence of his Australian Open title remains in doubt after reports that he might have given misleading information to Australian immigration officials. Immigration Minister Alex Hawke is still considering whether to cancel Djokovic’s visa despite his court victory on Monday. Officials are concerned about Djokovic’s claim on his entry form that he had not travelled in the 14 days prior to his arrival in Australia on January 6. Sweden has announced a record 70,641 new Covid cases since Friday. It also said there were a 54 new deaths from Covid. The US has recorded a record number of hospitalisations due to Covid-19, as the daily infection rate soared to more than 1.35m. There were 145,982 people hospitalised with coronavirus on Monday, according to the US Department of Health and Human Services. The UK has recorded another 379 deaths within 28 days of a positive test. It also reported another 120,821 new cases, down on Monday’s new cases total of 142,224. Some local authorities in Finland are defying government isolation measures in schools. Taina Isosomppi, Helsinki’s chief epidemiologist, said: “It would be disproportionate to implement large-scale quarantines at schools when they have not been a high-risk environment to begin with.” More than half of people in Europe could contract the Omicron in the next two months if infections continue at current rates, the World Health Organization has warned. Regional director Hans Kluge said: “At this rate, the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) forecasts that more than 50% of the population in the region will be infected with Omicron in the next six to eight weeks.” The WHO also warned that it is too too soon to treat Omicron as a flu-like endemic illness. Senior emergency officer for Europe, Catherine Smallwood, said: “We still have a huge amount of uncertainty and a virus that is evolving quite quickly, imposing new challenges. We are certainly not at the point where we are able to call it endemic. Mexico’s President Andrés Manuel López Obrador said he was hoarse and had a sore throat after testing positive for Covid for the second time. “It’s like a cold” he told reporters in a video message. Germany has reported a daily rise of 45,690 new confirmed coronavirus cases and 322 deaths, according to the latest figures released by the Robert Koch Institute. Germany’s health minister, Karl Lauterbach, has called England’s relatively lax Covid rules an “unethical bet”. He warned against copying England’s pandemic response. Poland’s death toll from Covid has surpassed 100,000. health minister Adam Niedzielski announced the grim milestone, saying: “Today we can say it is another sad day, but especially so because we have passed the level of 100,000 Covid deaths.” The central Chinese city of Anyang has ordered five million people to begin home confinement in a new lockdown to curb the spread of Omicron variant. Residents are not to leave their homes or drive cars on the roads, while all non-essential businesses have been closed and outbound travel is restricted, state news agency Xinhua reports. Slovenia and Serbia have both reported record numbers of new cases amid the spread of Omicron, Reuters reports. Slovenia, which has vaccinated 67.3% of its about 2 million-strong population with at least two dozes so far, reported 5,164 new cases, up 52% from a week before, according to the National Institute for Public Health. Serbia reported 13,693 new cases and 22 deaths. The total number of registered cases in Serbia is 1,359,544, while 12,958 people have died since the outbreak nearly two years ago. Mexico’s President Andrés Manuel López Obrador said he was hoarse and had a sore throat after testing positive for Covid for the second time, AP reports. The president’s reinfection mirrored a spike in coronavirus cases in Mexico that appears to be due to the spread of the omicron variant. But López Obrador predicted that “this virus is on its way out” and that “things will get back to normal very soon.” The president appeared on a video feed at the morning press briefing he normally runs at the National Palace in Mexico City. He was isolating after testing positive Monday, days after at least two members of his cabinet also tested positive. López Obrador said he would wear a mask — something he has been loath to do — and suggested he had the omicron variant, saying “fortunately, this variant does not have the degree of danger that Delta did, and I am experiencing that.” López Obrador said he had no fever, and his oxygenation was good. “It is like a cold,” he said of his symptoms. The president is fully vaccinated, and has had a booster shot. Health Secretary Jorge Alcocer said López Obrador could return to the briefings as early as next week. The tennis star Novak Djokovic has been training with coach Goran Ivanisevic in Melbourne. Djokovic’s participation at the Australian Open remains in doubt while he awaits a verdict from Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke. The Australian Border Force is investigating whether Novak Djokovic incorrectly declared he had not travelled and would not do so for two weeks before his flight to Australia. Questions have been raised about the declaration completed by an agent for Djokovic, with social media posts seemingly showing he was in Belgrade on Christmas Day before flying to Australia, from Spain, on 4 January. Police in Germany have criticised for using a Covid contact tracing as part of an investigation into a fatal fall, AFP reports. The case stemming from November last year began after man fell to his death after leaving a restaurant in the western city of Mainz. Police seeking possible witnesses made use of data from an app known as Luca, which was designed for patrons to register time spent in restaurants and taverns to track the possible spread of coronavirus. Luca records the length of time spent at an establishment along with the patron’s full name, address and telephone number - all subject to Germany’s strict data protection laws. However the police and local prosecutors in the case in Mainz successfully appealed to the municipal health authorities to gain access to information about 21 people who visited the restaurant at the same time as the man who died. After an outcry, prosecutors apologised to the people involved and the local data protection authority has opened an inquiry into the affair. “We condemn the abuse of Luca data collected to protect against infections,” said the company that developed the Luca app, culture4life, in a statement. It added that it had received frequent requests for its data from the authorities which it routinely rejected. Konstantin von Notz, a senior politician from the Greens, junior partners in the federal coalition, warned that abuse of the app could undermine public trust. “We must not allow faith in digital apps, which are an important tool in the fight against Covid-19, to disappear,” he told Tuesday’s edition of Handelsblatt business daily. Serbia’s prime minister, Ana Brnabić, says she is neither optimistic nor pessimistic about Novak Djokovic being allowed to play in the Australian Open. Speaking to Reuters she said: I hope that final decision will be announced soon. Uncertainty is not good for any of the stakeholders, neither Djokovic nor the Australian Open. She said she was “neither optimistic nor pessimistic” as to whether Djokovic would be permitted to stay in Australia, where he would be bidding for a record 21st grand slam title. Brnabić, who spoke to her Australian counterpart, Scott Morrison, late on Monday, said her government was ready to provide guarantees that Djokovic would respect local regulations while in Australia. Non-residents who are unvaccinated against Covid cannot enter Australia unless they are exempted. Djokovic, who is not vaccinated, based his exemption on contracting the virus last month. The government argued his exemption case was inadequate, but the court overturned that decision. Asked about Djokovic’s attending a Belgrade Tennis Association event on 17 December a day after he tested positive, Brnabić said the star would have “clearly violated the rules” had he known of the test result before he participated. However, additional clarification was needed, she said. I don’t know when he received the test result, when he read it. The UK has recorded another 379 deaths within 28 days of a positive test. It also reported another 120,821 new cases, down on Monday’s new cases total of 142,224. A total of 19,828 people were in hospital in the UK with Covid-19 as of 10 January, the government’s figures show. This is up 21% week on week and is the highest number since 16 February 2021. It is also just over half the peak recorded during the second wave of coronavirus, which was 39,254 on 18 January 2021. Russia has warned it could face a “very intense” rise in Omicron cases in the coming weeks, Reuters reports. Speaking at a televised meeting of the government’s coronavirus task force, Anna Popova, a top consumer health official, said Russia had so far recorded 305 cases of Omicron across 13 of its regions. “The risk of a very intense rise in (cases) of the disease is real,” she said. Omicron has pushed case figures to record highs in parts of western Europe and the US, while cases in Russia have generally been declining from a peak of 41,335 registered in early November. Officials said they now feared the trend could rapidly reverse and Popova warned that daily infections could hit “six figures” if proper sanitary measures were not observed. Moscow’s mayor, Sergei Sobyanin, told Prime Minister Mikhail Mishustin at the televised meeting that the capital, which has a population of 12.7 million, was already seeing a significant increase in Omicron cases. He said special measures would be taken to tackle the rise in cases, without elaborating. “It’s necessary to mobilise more hospital beds, to mobilise the health system,” Sobyanin said. The Kremlin has frequently expressed frustration at the slow uptake of the domestically-made Sputnik V vaccine against Covid-19, with many citing distrust of the authorities and fear of new medical products. The risk of a hard landing for large parts of the global economy is rising as countries struggle to cope with the triple threat of Covid-19, inflation and higher interest rates, the World Bank has warned. In its half-yearly forecasts, the Washington DC-based Bank said it expected a “pronounced slowdown” in growth in the next two years, with the less well-off parts of the world especially hard hit. David Malpass, the World Bank’s president, called for action to reduce the debts of poor countries and said he was “very worried” about the permanent scarring of development caused by the pandemic. Read the full story here: Restrictions on large outdoor events in Scotland will be lifted from next Monday, Nicola Sturgeon has told the Holyrood parliament. See more here: The US has recorded a record number of hospitalisations due to Covid-19, according to the US Department of Health and Human Services as the daily infection rate soared to more than 1.35m. There were 145,982 people hospitalised with coronavirus on Monday, according to HHS data. Reuters reported that the previous high was 132,051, set in January 2021. According to Reuters there were 1.35m new Covid infections on Monday, also a record high. Measures vary and observers point out that many home tests are not officially logged. But NBC News reported at least 1,343,167 new infections. Read the full story here: A technical advisory group established by the World Health Organization has warned that current vaccines may need to be updated to ensure they are effective against new variants like Omicron. In a statement the group said: The composition of current Covid vaccines may need to be updated, to ensure that Covid vaccines continue to provide WHO-recommended levels of protection against infection and disease by VOCs, including Omicron and future variants. [The group] will consider a change in vaccine composition to ensure that vaccines continue to meet the criteria established in WHO’s Target Product Profile for Covid-19 vaccines, including protection against severe disease to improve vaccine-induced protection. Finland’s local authorities have refused to implement strict isolation measures to stem coronavirus infections in schools despite advice from the government, Reuters reports. Finland’s minister in charge of the Covid response, Krista Kiuru, warned on Friday that long Covid could become Finland’s largest chronic disease and that children were also at risk. She said she feared returning to school was not safe and called for local authorities to implement strict quarantines at schools, in which one pupil’s Covid infection would result in quarantine for the entire exposed class. But Taina Isosomppi, Helsinki’s chief epidemiologist, told Reuters the capital region’s municipalities were not going to follow the minister’s advice. Isosomppi said: It would be disproportionate to implement large-scale quarantines at schools when they have not been a high-risk environment to begin with. Mandating quarantines is no longer an effective way to control the epidemic. Last week, Isosomppi and nine other leading Finnish infection specialists published an open letter against a plan proposed by Kiuru’s ministry to reintroduce school closures and going back to remote learning. France’s health ministry is expected to announce a record of more than 350,000 new Covid infections over a 24-hour period, according to the health minister, Olivier Véran, Reuters reports. The previous record of 332,252 daily new cases was set on 5 January and since then France has had two more days of more than 300,000 new cases over 24 hours as the highly contagious Omicron has become the dominant variant. The seven-day moving average of new cases rose to nearly 270,000 on Monday. Veran told lawmakers: Another 350,000 new infections will be reported this evening, even a little more than that. We have never before seen such numbers since the start of the health crisis. By mid-January, the French government hopes to introduce a vaccine pass that will make vaccination mandatory for anyone wanting to go to restaurants or attend indoor events. Until now, proof of vaccination or a recent negative test were sufficient. Cold weather in the north-east of the US has forced the closure of some Covid testing centres. New Hampshire’s health department announced that four Covid-19 testing sites would be closed because of the cold. The sites are in Claremont, Manchester, Nashua and Newington. Coronavirus loses 90% of its ability to infect us within five minutes of becoming airborne, the world’s first simulations of how the virus survives in exhaled air suggest. The findings re-emphasise the importance of short-range Covid transmission, with physical distancing and mask-wearing likely to be the most effective means of preventing infection. Ventilation, though still worthwhile, is likely to have a lesser impact. “People have been focused on poorly ventilated spaces and thinking about airborne transmission over metres or across a room. I’m not saying that doesn’t happen, but I think still, the greatest risk of exposure is when you’re close to someone,” said Prof Jonathan Reid, director of the University of Bristol’s Aerosol Research Centre and the study’s lead author. Read the full story here: Sweden has announced 70,641 new cases since Friday, which is believed to be a record rise. It also announced 54 new deaths from Covid. On Monday, Sweden set out stricter pandemic measures in response to a rising number of Covid cases and pressure on hospitals. The prime minister, Magdalena Andersson, said: “The situation has deteriorated, without doubt. The level of infections in Sweden is at a historically high level.” The rise in cases means Sweden’s new cases have doubled in five days. Spain’s foreign minister, Jose Manuel Albares, has said he does not have any information on whether tennis star Novak Djokovic visited Spain before travelling to Australia. Asked by a reporter if he knew whether Djokovic had entered Spain in December, potentially invalidating a declaration the player completed on travelling to Australia, Albares responded: I have no record of this presence of Djokovic. We have not been contacted by the Australian government to request such documentation. Australian media reported that officials are concerned about Djokovic’s claim on his entry form that he had not travelled in the 14 days prior to his arrival in Australia on 6 January. Social media posts have appeared to make clear that Djokovic attended events in Belgrade and Marbella during the period in question. Djokovic has reportedly claimed that Tennis Australia filled in the form on his behalf. Djokovic took part in a Davis cup tournament in Madrid in early December. Mexico’s president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, is “doing well without serious symptoms” after being diagnosed with Covid for the second time, the country’s interior minister, Adán Augusto, said on Tuesday. Augusto would take over a regular morning news conference while López Obrador, 68, recovered, the president said after announcing he tested positive on Monday. New Delhi ordered the closure of non-essential offices and restaurants and bars but offered free online yoga classes to those in home isolation, as Covid cases soar, AFP reports. With case numbers rising six-fold over the past week, the Indian government is terrified of a repeat of last year when thousands died of the virus every day and the health system teetered on the brink of collapse. While stopping short of a full lockdown, authorities have steadily increased restrictions nationwide and capacity at private offices and eateries in the capital was already restricted to 50%. But those in home isolation can take free online yoga classes, with Delhi’s chief minister, Arvind Kejriwal, saying that it would help patients “boost their immunity and attain mental and spiritual peace”. India’s capital registered 17 deaths each on Saturday and Sunday, the biggest single-day toll in more than 200 days. Every fourth person tested is coming back positive. Nationally, India recorded almost 170,000 new cases on Monday, almost half the daily number recorded during the surge of last April and May. Deaths remain a fraction of what they were but are rising. Meanwhile, the Indian Council of Medical Research, the government’s apex scientific body, on Monday tweaked its mandatory testing guidelines to ease the strain on the testing infrastructure. Healthy, asymptomatic contacts of confirmed coronavirus patients no longer require mandatory testing. Experts say that India is better prepared to deal with the latest coronavirus wave, driven by the Omicron variant, than last year. The country has now administered more than 1.5bn vaccine shots and recently opened the programme to teenagers. It has also begun giving boosters to vulnerable groups. The US has agreed to buy 600,000 more doses of GSK and Vir Biotechnology’s Covid antibody therapy for an undisclosed sum, according to the drugmakers, Reuters reports. The additional doses of sotrovimab would be supplied to the US in the first quarter of 2022, the companies said, taking the tally of doses secured by nations worldwide to roughly 1.7m. In November, the US government signed contracts worth about $1bn for an unknown number of doses of the treatment, after saying it would control the distribution of sotrovimab. Sotrovimab, given via an infusion, belongs to a class of medicines called monoclonal antibodies, which are lab-generated compounds that mimic the body’s natural defences. Tests have indicated that it works against the fast-spreading Omicron variant. Scientists and governments are scrambling to bolster defences against Omicron with testing, shots and therapies, as the variant threatens to become dominant globally by evading protection offered by current vaccines and drugs. GSK and Vir said they expect to produce roughly 2m doses of sotrovimab globally in the first half of 2022. Brazil has become the latest country where Omicron has become the dominant Covid variant. The health minister, Marcelo Queiroga, told reporters: “It already is the predominant variant in Brazil, we are seeing cases rising.” He said Brazil did not expect to see higher hospitalisation and death levels, citing Brazil’s vaccination programme. Shares in the Spanish drugmaker PharmaMar jumped almost 20% after it said lab trials suggested its Plitidepsin drug was effective against Covid variants including Omicron, Reuters reports. Results from in-vitro tests published in the Life Science Alliance journal showed that Plitidepsin, also known as Aplidin, had a potent antiviral effect in all variants and decreased the viral load detected in animal lung tissue by 99%, the company said. The same paper also included previously published positive effects in Phase I and II clinical trials carried out on patients who were hospitalised with Covid. The drug, originally developed as a cancer treatment, is now undergoing Phase III trials. “All data we have seen so far with Plitidepsin corroborate our initial hypothesis about its antiviral activity,” PharmaMar’s chairman, Jose Maria Fernandez Sousa, said in a statement. Shares in the company rose 19% in early afternoon trade, on track for their best day in nearly a year. The shares had gained about 20% in January last year, also following encouraging news on Plitidepsin. Germany’s health minister, Karl Lauterbach, has called England’s relatively lax Covid rules an “unethical bet”, Politico reports: The Social Democrat health chief is known for his tough approach to the pandemic, including a pro-mandatory vaccination position. After advocating for stricter rules in the hospitality sector last Friday and facing rapidly increasing case numbers, Lauterbach warned against copying England’s pandemic response. “From my point of view, it’s an unethical bet,” he said, of England’s laissez-faire approach to the Omicron wave of coronavirus. The Wellcome Trust, Britain’s biggest charity, is ramping up spending on science research to £16bn over the next 10 years, with a focus on funding next-generation Covid-19 vaccines, after it reaped the highest investment returns in a quarter of a century. Read the full story here: It is too soon to treat Omicron as a flu-like endemic illness, the World Health Organization has warned, Reuters reports. On Sunday, the UK’s education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, called for the UK to show the rest of the world how to move from pandemic to endemic Covid. But that is “a way off”, WHO’s senior emergency officer for Europe, Catherine Smallwood, said at a news briefing today. She adding that endemicity requires a stable and predictable transmission. Smallwood said: We still have a huge amount of uncertainty and a virus that is evolving quite quickly, imposing new challenges. We are certainly not at the point where we are able to call it endemic. It may become endemic in due course, but pinning that down to 2022 is a little bit difficult at this stage. Omicron has become the dominant variant in the Philippines, according to the health minister, Francisco Duque. He said Omicron replaced Delta as the dominant variant in the country on Monday, with 60% of the samples in the most recent genome sequencing testing positive for Omicron. Bulgaria’s prime minister Kiril Petkov, President Rumen Radev and other officials have gone into quarantine after being in contact with the parliamentary speaker, who tested positive for Covid, AFP reports. Bulgaria has the lowest vaccination rate in the European Union, with experts blaming low trust in the authorities and widespread conspiracy theories. “Prime Minister Kiril Petkov is self-isolating ... he continues to work remotely,” the government press service said. Radev’s office also said the president and members of his administration were isolating but added they were “all in good health.” Parliament speaker Nikola Minchev tested positive for Covid-19 after attending a five-hour meeting of the National Security Council hosted by Radev on Monday afternoon. The talks were attended by key ministers - including those of the interior, defence and finance - as well as lawmakers and security sector officials. Chief health inspector Angel Kunchev said all of them had gone into quarantine. The Omicron variant is fuelling a fresh surge in cases, with 5,219 patients in hospital on Tuesday and 570 in intensive care. A west-to-east “tidal wave” of Omicron infections risks submerging health systems across Europe, the World Health Organization has said, warning that more than half the region’s population will be infected with the variant in the next two months. Hans Kluge, the WHO’s Europe director, said the region had recorded more than 7m new cases in the first week of 2022, double the rate a fortnight previously, with more than 1% of the population catching Covid-19 each week in 26 countries. Kluge said the variant had now been reported in 50 of the Europe region’s 53 states and was becoming dominant in western Europe. “At this rate, more than 50% of the population in the region will be infected with Omicron in the next six to eight weeks”, he said – a scale of transmission he described as unprecedented. Its impact would be deadliest where vaccination rates were lower such as central and eastern Europe, Kluge warned, saying he was “deeply concerned” that as the variant moves east, “we have yet to see its full impact in countries where levels of vaccination uptake are lower, and where we will see more severe disease in the unvaccinated”. In Denmark, he said, where Omicron cases had “exploded in recent weeks”, the Covid-19 hospitalisation rate for unvaccinated patients during Christmas week had been was six times higher than for those who were fully vaccinated. Read the full story here: More than half of people in Europe could contract the Omicron coronavirus variant in the next two months if infections continue at current rates, the World Health Organization has warned, AFP reports. Speaking at a press conference, regional director Hans Kluge warned that the Omicron variant represented a “new west-to-east tidal wave sweeping across” the European region. He said: At this rate, the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) forecasts that more than 50% of the population in the region will be infected with Omicron in the next six to eight weeks. The WHO’s European region comprises 53 countries and territories including several in Central Asia, and Kluge noted that 50 of them had confirmed cases of the Omicron variant. According to the WHO, 26 of those countries reported that over one percent of their populations were “catching Covid-19 each week,” as of January 10, and that the region had seen over seven million new virus cases reported in the first week of 2022 alone. Referencing data collected over the last few weeks, Kluge said the variant was confirmed to be more transmissible and “the mutations it has enable it to adhere to human cells more easily, and it can infect even those who have been previously infected or vaccinated.” However, Kluge also stressed that “approved vaccines do continue to provide good protection against severe disease and death, including for Omicron.” Here is a round-up of the top Covid stories from the day so far: Scars left by the Covid-19 pandemic have deepened the divide between rich and poor countries and will make it harder to find common cause in the fight against global heating, according to the World Economic Forum. The UK’s main statistical body has reported more than 175,000 deaths involving Covid since the start of the pandemic where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate. Germany is reporting a daily rise of 45,690 new confirmed coronavirus cases and 322 deaths, according to the latest figures released by the Robert Koch Institute. Porfirije, the 46th Patriarch of the influential Serbian Orthodox Church, the country’s largest Christian denomination, has tested positive for Covid, his office said on Tuesday. Poland’s total Covid-19 death toll has surpassed 100,000. Health officials have clarified that the recommended Covid self-isolation period in the US is shorter than in the UK at a time when the prime minister is considering reducing it to five days. Nearly 1 million Hindu worshippers are expected to gather on the banks of the Ganges River this Friday and Saturday for a holy bathe despite soaring Covid infections across the country, an official told Reuters. The central Chinese city of Anyang has ordered five million people to begin home confinement today in a new lockdown to curb the spread of Omicron variant. Residents are not to leave their homes or drive cars on the roads, while all non-essential businesses have been closed and outbound travel is restricted, state news agency Xinhua reports. France announced an easing of Covid rules for schools as record-high case numbers shut down thousands of classes across the country. At least 600,000 passengers cancelled plans to fly from Heathrow in December due to the Omicron coronavirus strain and the introduction of tougher travel restrictions, the airport said. Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau has said the government has secured enough Covid-19 vaccine doses for all eligible Canadians to receive a booster as well as a fourth dose. Mexican president Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador announced he has tested positive for Covid-19 for a second time, saying that he only has light symptoms. Taiwan has tightened its entry requirements for new arrivals in the latest move to head off a large-scale Omicron outbreak. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, for today. My colleague Matthew Weaver will be along shortly to pick up to global Covid live blog. Goodbye for now. Slovenia reported a record 5,164 new Covid cases on Tuesday, a 52% rise from a week before, amid the spread of the Omicron variant. Slovenia has vaccinated 67.3% of its population with at least two doses so far, according to the National Institute for Public Health. The UK’s main statistical body has reported more than 175,000 deaths involving Covid since the start of the pandemic where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate. The ONS has reported 176,035 deaths since March 2020, a figure that differs significantly from the government’s official count – which exceeded 150,000 deaths over the weekend – which requires patients to have had a positive test within 28 days of their death. The ONS figures are considered to be more accurate. However, due to delays in death registration they are not as up-to-date as the government figures. A total of 3,891 people have died of Covid since the first case of the Omicron variant was discovered in the UK on 27 November. However, the average lag between infection and deaths is 16-18 days and can be up to eight weeks, according to the ONS, so the Omicron death toll may increase further in coming weeks. Scars left by the Covid-19 pandemic have deepened the divide between rich and poor countries and will make it harder to find common cause in the fight against global heating, according to the World Economic Forum. A WEF report puts climate or environment-related threats in the top five slots in its list of the 10 long-term risks but warned a “vaccine divide” was making collaboration to limit temperature increases more difficult. In its annual global risks survey, the WEF – which has postponed its annual meeting in Davos until the summer because of the rapid spread of the Omicron variant – said the mood among its members was downbeat. Only 16% of those who responded to the survey said they were optimistic about the outlook for the world, while 11% believe the global recovery will accelerate. Most respondents envisaged the next three years to be marked by either volatility and shocks or by a widening of the gap between winners and losers. Porfirije, the 46th Patriarch of the influential Serbian Orthodox Church, the country’s largest Christian denomination, has tested positive for Covid, his office said on Tuesday. Porfirije, 60, “remains with very mild symptoms and … will be treated at home”, his office said in a statement. “His Holiness has … has been prescribed appropriate therapy,” it said. “He prays for doctors and medical staff and especially for everyone affected by the epidemic.” Last year, Porfirije also went into isolation after being in contact with an infected priest. Health officials have clarified that the recommended Covid self-isolation period in the US is shorter than in the UK at a time when the prime minister is considering reducing it to five days. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) previously said the isolation period was in effect the same in both countries. It said the recommended minimum of six full days in the UK was counted from the onset of symptoms, while in the US the five-day isolation began from the day of a positive test, which could be several days after the first symptoms. However, the UKHSA has updated its blogpost, which now states: “In the UK our advice is to self-isolate for at least six full days from the point at which you have symptoms or get a positive test, whichever is first.” It continued: “In the United States, the advice is to isolate for at least five full days from the same point.” In the US, students are set to return to Chicago public schools after leaders of the teachers’ union approved a plan with the nation’s third-largest district over Covid safety protocols, ending a bitter standoff that cancelled classes for five days. The deal approved late on Monday would have students in class Wednesday and teachers back a day earlier. It still requires approval with a vote of the union’s roughly 25,000 members. Issues on the table have been metrics to close schools amid outbreaks and expanded Covid testing, the Associated Press reported. Neither side immediately disclosed full details of the proposal on Monday evening, but leaders generally said the agreement included measures to close individual schools and plans to boost district Covid testing. The district notified parents in the largely low-income black and Latino school district of about 350,000 students that classes would resume Wednesday. “We know this has been very difficult for students and families,” mayor Lori Lightfoot said at an evening news conference. “Some will ask who won and who lost. No one wins when our students are out of the place where they can learn the best and where they’re safest.” At least 600,000 passengers cancelled plans to fly from Heathrow in December due to the Omicron coronavirus strain and the introduction of tougher travel restrictions, the airport said. Fears over the Covid variant meant that, from late November, all travellers arriving in the UK were required to take a pre-departure lateral flow test and self-isolate until they received a negative result from a post-arrival PCR test. This led to many people scrapping their travel plans over the festive period, PA Media reported. The new rules were relaxed for fully vaccinated arrivals last week after travel firms said they were ineffective due to Omicron spreading widely within the UK. A total of 19.4 million people travelled through Heathrow across the whole of last year. This was less than a quarter of the pre-pandemic level in 2019, and 12.3% down on 2020. Travel to and from the Asia/Pacific region in 2021 was down 40.3% year-on-year. The other markets with double-digit reductions were non-EU Europe (down 13.8%) and North America (down 13.6%). Domestic travel bucked the trend, with a 21.1% boost in passengers compared with 2020. Allegations of parties at British prime minister Boris Johnson’s Downing Street office will have caused hurt to people who lost loved ones to Covid but there must be time for a full investigation to establish what happened, a minister said. “I can understand the hurt that these reports, these allegations, will have caused, particularly for those who’ve lost loved ones,” junior health minister Edward Argar told Sky News on Tuesday following a new report of alleged rule breaking, adding it was right that Johnson had previously commissioned a civil servant to investigate similar allegations. “It wouldn’t be appropriate … for me to comment on those ongoing conversations or her ongoing investigation. We’ve got to give a space to conclude that investigation.” The Covid pandemic has made the outlook worse for people in the UK with the least survivable cancers, such as pancreatic, stomach and brain cancer, campaigners have said. A quarter of cancers in the UK have an average five-year survival rate of only 16% and are often diagnosed late in emergency departments, the Press Association reported. The Less Survivable Cancers Taskforce (LSCT) has launched its first awareness day to ask for greater focus on early diagnosis and more research, as well as a government commitment to increase survival rates for less survivable cancers to 28% by 2029. It said data shows that around 3% of breast and 8% of prostate cancers are diagnosed in an emergency, but this jumps to 53% for pancreatic or central nervous system cancers including brain, 45% for liver, 35% for lung, 30% for stomach and 21% for oesophageal cancers. Screening programmes for these less survivable cancers do not exist and many people are unaware of the symptoms. LSCT chairwoman Anna Jewell said: We know that delays in diagnosis lead to much poorer outcomes for patients with these rapidly-advancing cancers. We also know the trauma associated with receiving a diagnosis in an emergency setting for both patients and families. These cancers are currently difficult or impossible to treat at later stages and the time from diagnosis to death is often brutally short compared to more survivable cancers. The situation is critical and has been exacerbated by the Covid-19 pandemic. The taskforce is calling for a significant increase in research funding as well as a commitment to increasing resources for early diagnosis for less survivable cancers so we can close the deadly cancer gap. Nearly 1 million Hindu worshippers are expected to gather on the banks of the Ganges River this Friday and Saturday for a holy bathe despite soaring Covid infections across the country, an official told Reuters. India reported 168,063 new coronavirus cases on Tuesday, a 20-fold rise in a month despite testing being well below capacity. However, most infected people have recovered at home and the level of hospitalisations has been less than half of that seen during the last major wave of infections in April and May. Many states have announced night curfews while the capital Delhi has also imposed a weekend lockdown, closed private offices as well as restaurants and bars in a bid to rein in the fast-spreading Omicron variant. But tens of thousands of pilgrims have already reached the site of the annual Ganges ritual on an island in the eastern state of West Bengal, which is reporting the most number of cases in the country after Maharashtra state in the west. “The crowd may swell to anywhere between 800,000 to one million. We are trying to implement all Covid protocols,” Bankim Chandra Hazra, a West Bengal minister in charge of organising the festival known as the Gangasagar Mela, told Reuters. “We have also arranged for sprinkling of the holy water from drones so that there is no crowding … but the sadhus [Hindu holy men] are bent on taking the dip. We can’t prevent them.” Hello, I’m Tom Ambrose and will be bringing you all the latest Covid news from around the world over the next few hours. We begin with news that people living in the England who test positive for Covid on a lateral flow device but do not develop symptoms will no longer need to take a PCR test to confirm their result while they self-isolate. The new approach has now come into force after it was announced last week by the UK Health Security Agency, Sky News reported. Most people who receive positive lateral flow results can now be confident they have Covid, with infection rates high across the country, according to health chiefs. Will Covid-19 become less dangerous as it evolves? Linda Geddes, the Guardian’s science correspondent, attempts to answer this question in light of recent warnings from experts that viral evolution is not a one-way street and a continuing fall in virulence cannot be taken for granted. The pandemic has been awash with slogans, but in recent weeks, two have been repeated with increasing frequency: “Variants will evolve to be milder” and “Covid will become endemic”. Read the full story here. Poland’s total Covid-19 death toll has surpassed 100,000. In an interview with broadcaster TVN24, health minister Adam Niedzielski announced the grim milestone, saying: “Today we can say it is another sad day, but especially so because we have passed the level of 100,000 Covid deaths.” An additional 11,400 coronavirus infections and 493 deaths were recorded in the last 24 hour reporting period, local media report. Ukraine also reported another 5,429 new confirmed coronavirus cases and 219 deaths, according to health ministry data. The House of Lords commissioners for standards are considering a complaint against the Conservative peer Michelle Mone, relating to the PPE business awarded £203m government contracts after she referred it to the Cabinet Office in May 2020. The Labour peer George Foulkes complained to the commissioners on 6 January after the Guardian reported that leaked files appear to suggest Mone and her husband, the Isle of Man-based financier Douglas Barrowman, were secretly involved in the company, PPE Medpro. After the company was awarded contracts in May and June 2020, Mone and Barrowman have consistently denied any “role or function” in PPE Medpro. Lawyers for Mone, who ran the lingerie company Ultimo before David Cameron made her a peer in 2015, have said she “was not connected to PPE Medpro in any capacity”. Read the full story here. Germany is reporting a daily rise of 45,690 new confirmed coronavirus cases and 322 deaths, according to the latest figures released by the Robert Koch Institute. If you’ve just joined us, hello and welcome to the Covid live blog. Here’s a quick rundown of everything you might have missed. Europe: Boris Johnson was accused on Monday night of an “utterly outrageous” breach of lockdown rules as a leaked email showed one of his top officials invited more than 100 Downing Street staff to a “bring your own booze” party during the first lockdown. The police are now investigating. Boris Johnson has ordered officials to examine plans to cut Covid isolation to five days in England as scientists urged caution over the lack of evidence to support a change. NHS England has struck a deal with private healthcare providers under which their hospitals will be ready to start treating NHS patients who cannot get the Covid or non-Covid care they need because their local NHS hospital is under too much pressure. France announced an easing of Covid rules for schools as record-high case numbers shut down thousands of classes across the country. Asia: The central Chinese city of Anyang has ordered five million people to begin home confinement today in a new lockdown to curb the spread of Omicron variant. Residents are not to leave their homes or drive cars on the roads, while all non-essential businesses have been closed and outbound travel is restricted, state news agency Xinhua reports. Taiwan has tightened its entry requirements for new arrivals in the latest move to head off a large-scale Omicron outbreak. Beijing will not adjust its Covid-19 prevention measures for the Winter Olympics unless there are many cases inside the “closed-loop”, an official said on Tuesday. Hong Kong will begin offering Covid-19 vaccines for children over the age of five, as the city-state suspends classes in kindergartens and primary schools, its chief executive Carrie Lam said on Tuesday. Japan will maintain its tight entry restrictions until the end of February, prime minister Fumio Kishida said on Tuesday. Americas: Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau has said the government has secured enough Covid-19 vaccine doses for all eligible Canadians to receive a booster as well as a fourth dose. Mexican president Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador announced he has tested positive for Covid-19 for a second time, saying that he only has light symptoms. Pfizer Inc chief executive Albert Bourla has said a redesigned Covid-19 vaccine that specifically targets the Omicron variant is likely needed and his company could have one ready to launch by March. Novak Djokovic’s family confirmed the tennis star had tested positive for Covid-19 on 16 December. However, they shut down a press conference after reporters asked if he then attended an event on 17 December where parents posted photos on social media showing Djokovic and children not wearing masks. Returning to the Djokovic drama briefly, Guardian reporter Tumaini Carayol attempts to unpack the mayhem, posing the question: does the case create more questions than answers? Read the full story below. Taiwan has tightened its entry requirements for new arrivals in the latest move to head off a large-scale Omicron outbreak. Beginning today, passengers on long-haul flights from the Americas, Europe, the Middle East, Australia and New Zealand will be given a rapid PCR test at the airport immediately upon arrival. Those who test positive will be taken directly to hospital with their luggage. Those who test negative will be allowed to continue through the arrival process, which includes a non-rapid PCR test at the airport (with results sent later), being sprayed with disinfectant, and put in designated transport to a quarantine hotel or facility. Health and welfare minister Chen Shih-chung said: We hope to move the ‘line of defense’ to the front line to reduce the risk of infection during the entry process. As the incubation period of the Omicron variant [of SARS-CoV-2] is much shorter, we believe a large proportion of infected travellers will be detected at the airport under the new policy.” Taiwan’s entry requirements are already extraordinarily strict. No non-residents/citizens are allowed in without prior exemption, and everyone must have a negative PCR test taken no more than 48 hours before their flight. On arrival passengers are tested and ordered into a quarantine hotel or government facility for 14 days (or currently, temporarily, for seven, if they have an eligible home they can complete the second seven days in). They then have another seven days of self-health management avoiding crowds and restaurants. Across the three weeks they must have three PCR tests and three rapid tests. Taiwan has been one of the world’s most successful preventers of large-scale outbreaks and recently went more than a month without a single locally transmitted case. However with Omicron spreading around the world, and higher numbers of arrivals due to the Lunar New Year festival at the end of the month, there has been a rise in imported cases and a domestic cluster of at least 31 people linked to the international airport. Six new local cases were reported on Monday. Mask rules have been tightened again, with exceptions removed for exercise, giving speeches, taking photos and other specific circumstances. People can still take their mask off in some scenarios, including eating or drinking at venues, in forest recreation areas, and in spas and saunas. Beijing will not adjust its Covid-19 prevention measures for the Winter Olympics unless there are many cases inside the “closed-loop”, Huang Chun, an official with the Beijing Games organising committee, said on Tuesday. China has reported some cases of the Omicron variant as it battles small-scale outbreaks in several regions, less than a month before the Games are due to kick off on 4 February. The “closed-loop” bubble, in which participants can only leave if they are exiting the country or undergo quarantine, was activated earlier in January. Restrictions at Games venues in Beijing and Zhangjiakou in neighbouring Hebei province will be much tighter than those during last summer’s Tokyo Olympics. But organisers have room to make adjustments to Covid-19 control measures if necessary, said Huang, at a briefing in Beijing. As in Tokyo, no international spectators will be allowed at the Beijing Winter Games, and local attendance at event sites is likely to be curtailed, although specific arrangements have not been released. Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau has said the government has secured enough Covid-19 vaccine doses for all eligible Canadians to receive a booster as well as a fourth dose, according a statement from Trudeau’s office. Trudeau made the comments in a call with Canada’s provincial and territorial premiers. The Prime Minister provided reassurance that the federal government has secured enough vaccine doses for all eligible Canadians to receive a booster as well as a fourth dose, if that becomes necessary,” the statement read. Trudeau said the government also plans to deliver 140 million rapid Covid tests to provinces and territories in January, according to the statement. This month, Canada broke its one-day record for the highest number of people hospitalised with Covid-19. Last Friday, officials said new daily cases had soared by 65% in the previous week, threatening healthcare systems. Official data show that as of Dec. 18, 87.3% of Canadians aged 12 and older had received two shots while the figure for children aged 5 to 12 was just 1.3%. China reported 110 new locally transmitted Covid-19 cases for Monday, the National Health Commission said in its daily report on Tuesday. Of the new local cases, 87 were reported in Henan, 13 in Shaanxi, and 10 in Tianjin, the commission said. A further 82 new imported cases were detected in 11 provincial-level regions, according to the commission. No deaths were recorded. Five million residents in the central Chinese city of Anyang have started home confinement today in a new lockdown to curb the spread of Omicron variant, according to state media and as reported by Agence France-Presse. Two Omicron cases were detected in the city in Henan province, prompting authorities to announce a lockdown late Monday, issuing a notice ordering residents not to leave their homes or drive cars on the roads, state news agency Xinhua reported. All non-essential businesses have been closed, outbound travel restricted and a mass-testing drive has been launched “to respond to the severe epidemic control situation and strictly prevent the spread of the Omicron virus outbreak”, Xinhua reported. There were 58 new local infections reported in Anyang, state broadcaster CCTV said Tuesday, bringing the city’s total caseload to 84 since Saturday. It was not immediately clear whether the new cases were tied to the Omicron variant. At least three cities in Henan are battling emerging outbreaks, with provincial capital Zhengzhou closing schools and kindergartens, and stopping restaurants from accepting dine-in customers. Last week, one million people in the city of Yuzhou were put under stay-at-home orders. Elsewhere, Tianjin - a major port city just 150 kilometres from Beijing - has barred people from leaving without official permission, ordered the testing of all 14 million residents, and cancelled trains into the capital. Tianjin confirmed another 10 new locally transmitted cases after citywide mass testing. The northern city of Xi’an is in its third week of lockdown as it attempts to stamp out a 2,000-case outbreak. And after logging a handful of cases in recent days, Shenzhen - a southern tech hub just across the border from Hong Kong - has locked down some housing compounds, launched a mass-testing initiative and shuttered some long-distance bus stations. The latest Covid numbers are now being reported across Asia. South Korea is reporting a daily rise of 3,097 new confirmed coronavirus cases and 43 deaths, according to the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Thailand is reporting a daily rise of 7,133 cases and 12 deaths, according to the Department of Disease Control. Malaysia is reporting a daily rise of 2,641 cases and 18 deaths, according to government data. India is reporting a rise of 168,063 new Covid cases and 277 deaths, according to health ministry figures. As the world watches in wait for an outcome to Novak Djokovic’s visa controversy, here is a quick video detailing how the saga has unfolded so far. Hong Kong will begin offering Covid-19 vaccines for children over the age of five, as the city-state suspends classes in kindergartens and primary schools, its chief executive Carrie Lam said on Tuesday. Lam, who was speaking at a weekly press briefing, said kindergartens and primary schools must stop face-to-face classes by Friday at the latest and suspend classes until after the Lunar New Year period at the start of February. Pupils in secondary schools, however, would be not affected, according to the South China Morning Post. Lam said: Stopping in-person classes is the hardest decision for me to make. On one hand, stopping classes will protect them from infections, but on the other hand it will be to the detriment of their physical and psychological wellbeing.” The chief executive added that the government has at least HK$4 billion for new economic relief measures. Hong Kong reported 24 new Covid infections on Monday, bringing the total to 12,959 infections and 213 deaths. Officials in San Francisco in the US are asking residents not to call 911 except in dire emergencies to avoid further straining emergency resources, as coronavirus cases deplete the ranks of health workers, ambulance crews, firefighters and other essential workers. The Omicron variant, which appears more likely to cause breakthrough cases even among vaccinated people, has begun to thin the ranks of those most needed to fight this latest wave of infections. San Francisco mayor London Breed said on Friday that about 400 city employees, including emergency responders, had either tested positive for Covid-19 or were isolated at home due to exposure. “Only call 911 or go to the emergency [department] for life-threatening medical emergencies,” the San Francisco Department of Emergency Management tweeted this weekend. “Keep medics available for life-threatening situations.” Read the full story here. Japan will maintain its tight entry restrictions until the end of February, prime minister Fumio Kishida said on Tuesday, adding that some exceptions for humanitarian issues may be considered. The country adopted some of the strictest border controls in the world when the Omicron variant emerged late last year, banning all new entry by non-Japanese, including students and foreign family members of Japanese or permanent residents, unless in exceptional circumstances. The rules have sparked protests and a petition drive calling for change, and media reports on Tuesday said the government was considering easing some of the rules in exceptional cases, Reuters reports. Kishida told reporters: Thanks to the toughest border rules in the G7 nations, we’ve been able to keep the spread of Omicron to a minimal level, giving us time to prepare to deal with domestic infection. We’ll maintain the current framework of measures until the end of February for the time being, while taking necessary measures from the perspective of humanitarian and national interests.” Entrance to Japan is currently limited to citizens and permanent residents, even they face strict testing and quarantine rules. Kishida added that Japan would start vaccinating children under age 12. More on the situation unfolding surrounding Novak Djokovic’s Australian visa. Djokovic’s family have confirmed the tennis star had tested positive for Covid-19 on 16 December. However, they shut down the press conference after reporters asked if he then attended an event on 17 December. That event was covered by local media, and parents posted photos on social media showing Djokovic and the children not wearing masks. “OK, so this press conference is adjourned,” Djordje Djokovic said after being pressed on the matter. Despite the government agreeing to release Djokovic from detention and quash the original decision to cancel his visa, the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, is yet to decide whether to use a separate power to deport the tennis star. A decision is expected as early as Tuesday but the government faces internal division over whether to enforce Australia’s hardline border policies against Djokovic. Watch the video from the press conference below. Pfizer Inc chief executive Albert Bourla on Monday said a redesigned Covid-19 vaccine that specifically targets the Omicron variant is likely needed and his company could have one ready to launch by March. Bourla said Pfizer and partner BioNTech SE are working on both an Omicron-targeted vaccine version as well as a shot that would include both the previous vaccine as well as one targeted at the fast-spreading variant. “I think it is the most likely scenario,” Bourla said on Monday. “We’re working on higher doses. We’re working different schedules. We’re doing a lot of things right now, as we speak.” Bourla said Pfizer could be ready to file for US regulatory approval for a redesigned vaccine and launch it as soon as March and with so much manufacturing capacity for the vaccine it would not be a problem to switch immediately. The vaccine could be ready to distribute by June, Bourla added in an interview with CNBC. This vaccine will be ready in March. We [are] already starting manufacturing some of these quantities at risk. The hope is that we will achieve something that will have way, way better protection particularly against infections, because the protection against the hospitalisations and the severe disease – it is reasonable right now, with the current vaccines as long as you are having let’s say the third dose.” France has announced an easing of Covid rules for schools as record-high case numbers shut down thousands of classes and sparked concern among parents and teachers. Prime minister Jean Castex told France 2 television on Monday that more than 10,000 classes - 2% of the total - had to be cancelled because of Covid outbreaks, but that the government would not “shut down the schools or the country”, Agence France-Presse reports. France on Monday reported more than 125,000 new coronavirus cases as the Omicron variant drives up daily infections to record highs. Under the first change, from Tuesday, parents will no longer be obliged to pick up their child immediately for Covid testing if he or she is a contact case of a virus sufferer. Home-testing will be deemed sufficient in such cases rather than testing at an officially approved site, with the parents signing a certificate to confirm the result. The test kits, available from pharmacies, will be free. Castex announced the news on Twitter on Monday evening, saying: The school health protocol will be simplified: if a positive case is detected in a class, the students can stay there until the end of the day, 3 negative self-tests will suffice for contact cases [and] only one parental certificate will be necessary.” Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog, ready to take you through all the Covid news this Tuesday. Let’s dive right in with the news that Pfizer Inc chief executive Albert Bourla on Monday said a redesigned Covid-19 vaccine that specifically targets the Omicron variant is likely needed and his company could have one ready to launch by March. Bourla said Pfizer and partner BioNTech SE are working on both an Omicron-targeted vaccine version as well as a shot that would include both the previous vaccine as well as one targeted at the fast-spreading variant. “I think it is the most likely scenario,” Bourla said on Monday. “We’re working on higher doses. We’re working different schedules. We’re doing a lot of things right now, as we speak.” Bourla said Pfizer could be ready to file for US regulatory approval for a redesigned vaccine and launch it as soon as March. Mexican president Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador also announced he has tested positive for Covid-19 for a second time, saying that he only has light symptoms. Lopez Obrador, who had tested positive for the virus in January last year, sounded hoarse in his morning press conference earlier in the day, prompting reporters to inquire about his health. “Although the symptoms are mild, I will remain in isolation and will only do office work and communicate virtually,” until recovering, Lopez Obrador said in a tweet. Mexico has recorded more than 300,000 deaths since the pandemic began, according to health ministry data. Here’s a quick rundown of all the latest headlines: Boris Johnson was accused on Monday night of an “utterly outrageous” breach of lockdown rules as a leaked email showed one of his top officials invited more than 100 Downing Street staff to a “bring your own booze” party during the first lockdown. The police are now investigating. Boris Johnson has ordered officials to examine plans to cut Covid isolation to five days in England as scientists urged caution over the lack of evidence to support a change. NHS England has struck a deal with private healthcare providers under which their hospitals will be ready to start treating NHS patients who cannot get the Covid or non-Covid care they need because their local NHS hospital is under too much pressure. Pfizer Inc chief executive Albert Bourla said on Monday that moving toward a redesigned Covid-19 vaccine that is specifically targeted to combat the Omicron variant is the “most likely scenario.” The small number of people in Italy’s population who refuse to be vaccinated against Covid-19 are largely responsible for the continued health crisis, prime minister Mario Draghi said on Monday. In the US, a new record has been set for the number of people admitted to hospital with Covid-19, with 132,646 currently on wards, according to Reuters. The latest figure, which comes as the highly contagious Omicron strain spreads across the country, surpassed the record of 132,051 set in January last year. Moderna has announced it expects record sales of about $18.5bn (£13.6bn) in contracts for its Covid vaccine in 2022. Novak Djokovic’s brother reportedly ended a press conference after questions about why the tennis ace appeared in public in Belgrade a day after he had tested positive for Covid-19. Emmanuel Macron has condemned protesters on the French overseas territory of Saint Pierre and Miquelon who pelted an MP with seaweed and dirt during a protest against vaccine passes. Stricter pandemic measures are to be introduced in Sweden in response to a rising number of Covid cases and pressure on hospitals, the prime minister has said. The prime minister of Spain, Pedro Sánchez, has called for European officials to consider ditching detailed pandemic tracking for Covid in favour of a flu-like monitoring system. The change would mean treating Covid-19 as an “endemic illness” rather than a pandemic, Sánchez said on Monday. He pointed out that deaths as a proportion of recorded cases has fallen since the pandemic began.Toilet Feelings is an illustrator based in Sydney. She is on Instagram @toiletfeelingsBoris Johnson’s grip on the prime ministership is openly questioned on the front pages, as unease in Tory ranks grows over the latest revelations of garden parties at No 10 at a time when gatherings were limited to one person. After smaller stories acknowledging the discontent a day earlier, the broadsheets splash on the backbench rebellion on Wednesday, with the Times’ headline saying: “Say sorry or doom us all, ministers tell Johnson.” The Telegraph sends a steady but clear message to the PM with the headline: “Johnson losing Tory support”. Its full-width front page picture is of a lonely looking junior minister, Michael Ellis, sent out to bear the brunt of MPs’ anger. The Guardian also captures the Tory anger in its headline and gives prominence to the suggestion of Douglas Ross, the Tory leader in Scotland, that Johnson should resign if he broke Covid rules. Several papers riff off the party aspect. The Daily Mail asks: “Is the party over for PM?”, saying his future as leader was being openly questioned and calling it the “gravest crisis of his premiership”. The Mirror is more emphatic, saying “The party’s over, Boris” and makes note of the families who grieved alone on the day the party is said to have happened. The Metro focuses on the reaction from people who lost loved ones to Covid, plus a snap poll suggesting majority support for a change of prime minister. “Contempt for the victims” is the headline, alongside an image of Johnson showing him appearing to “smirk” during an interview about the crisis. The Financial Times says “Johnson faces ‘potentially terminal’ showdown over Downing Street parties” and notes the grilling he faces at prime minister’s questions today, plus two polls showing majority support for his resignation. The Sun tries out the strapline of “No 10 garden partygate” and reports Johnson “went into hiding” and that donors and senior Tories are questioning his future. “It’s my party and I’ll lie low if I want to” is the headline. The i says “PM’s future in jeopardy as Tories rage at lockdown drinks party”, based on MPs saying they feel a “creeping doom” about the prime minister’s future. The Daily Record quotes a woman who couldn’t be there for her dying brother, saying Johnson should resign. The Express does its thing and claims support within the party is still strong for Johnson after “delivering Brexit and winning the war against Covid”. “Don’t blow it now, PM!” it urges in the headline.New Zealand’s navy has conducted an unusual mercy mission to retrieve two people stranded in Singapore for 18 months due to Covid-19. A medical condition meant the two could not fly to New Zealand, and their shrinking bank balance made staying in Singapore difficult. According to documents released under the Official Information Act, the mission occurred after an adviser to New Zealand’s high commission to Singapore interceded on the pair’s behalf, saying their position was “very unique” and he feared “their situation could turn into one that is even worse”. The couple, whose case was first reported by Stuff, received a special exemption to travel on board the HMNZS Canterbury, which was being refurbished in Singapore at the time. The ship left Singapore in November 2021. The journey took 19 days, meaning the couple did not need to quarantine upon arrival in New Zealand. Disclosed government emails demonstrate a concern the mission could set an inconvenient precedent. However, one official wrote: “It is not a Dunkirk-style evacuation of [New Zealanders] from south-east Asia.” In a separate email the official wrote: “If we establish a precedent whereby people who have no ability to fly find themselves at a place where there is a [navy] vessel, that is heading for [New Zealand], with available space and medical staff on board, I can live with that.” New Zealand’s foreign ministry noted that the case involved a “very specific and unusual set of circumstances” and declined to comment further.Half the little penguin chicks from this year’s breeding season on Penguin Island in Western Australia have died, as the colony dwindles and researchers accuse the state government of failing to act. It is thought up to 20 chicks, which represented 10% of the colony, were lost after New Year’s Day when their parents were unable to feed them, resulting in the worst breeding season since 2011. Penguins in the colony, where numbers have dropped from around 2,000 birds 15 years ago to around 250, began the breeding season late after heavy rains brought by La Niña improved their food supply. The resulting chicks survived a heatwave over the Christmas weekend with the help of ice blocks dropped into their nests by researchers – anything above 35C can be lethal, as temperatures inside nests can be up to 3C higher – but things quickly took a turn. Adult penguins must replace their feathers once a year, usually in December and January, and are unable to enter the water to hunt during this time. When this occurs, they cannot feed their chicks and the birds begin to starve. When their parents do not return to feed them, the chicks will leave their nests to enter the water before they are strong enough. While it is impossible to know the fate of every individual bird, Dr Erin Clitheroe, who has been conducting surveys of nests on Penguin Island for 14 years and wrote her PhD on the colony, said underweight chicks have a slim chance of survival. “If they’re abandoned and are leaving the nest at a weight under 900g, they don’t have very much chance of survival, but under 800g is a death sentence,” Clitheroe said. During the recent survey the lightest chick weighed just 400g and was found dead a few days later near its nest. The colony is the second northernmost population to be found in Australia. To remain stable at its current size, every breeding pair must successfully raise one chick each season. Dr Joe Fontaine from Murdoch University described the deaths as “unnecessary”. “It was already going to be a really bad year, then it got worse,” Fontaine said. “The simplest way to explain it is that demography is inescapable. “When you wipe out half the year’s reproduction and the population is already in trouble, you’re making it that much harder for the population to ever recover.” Clitheroe first recommended the WA Department of Biodiversity, Conservation and Attractions (DBCA) set up an emergency feeding program in September to ensure the birds’ survival and the continuation of the colony. When it was learned the chicks were in trouble, Fontaine made a formal request with DBCA for an emergency response but no action was taken in time. The Guardian has seen an email from DBCA rejecting the request as the department believed it was illegal for researchers to take the birds for longer than a 72-hour period. “They were reluctant to act and the consequence was a nondecision decision,” Fontaine said. “This is a slow-moving mess that consigned half of this year’s reproduction to death.” The department was contacted for comment but did not provide a response by deadline. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Dawn Jecks, a councillor with Rockingham city council and the organiser behind the Save Rockingham’s Little Penguin campaign, said her “heart sank” when she learned of the deaths. “The bottom line is, unless responsive and accountable institutional processes are in place, decisions will be delayed and extinctions will occur,” she said. Jecks said that while DBCA has been actively promoting tourism on the island, plans to construct new infrastructure should be called off and foot traffic into the area should be stopped to take the pressure off the colony while it recovers. “At the moment there’s just inertia. It’s dire – how do we explain to our grandkids who ask why there are no penguins on Penguin Island and we did nothing to save them?” Clitheroe said while the colony’s circumstances were linked directly to climate change, it “was not inevitable” the colony would die out. She said catch, feed and release conservation programs in South Africa offered a “fantastic example” that could be followed, or birds could be fed in their nests. She also said a broader climate change adaptation strategy should be considered – a call echoed by Nic Dunlop, citizen science program coordinator with Conservation Council WA. “We need to give it a go and even if we fail, there’s a lot to be learned which may be useful in protecting other species,” Dunlop said. “We hope the agency will come along with it but that remains to be seen.”Job vacancies surged across Australia as the lockdowns ended last year, highlighting staff shortages that are now crippling economic activity as Covid cases soar. In the September-November period, job openings jumped almost a fifth or 18.5% from the previous three months, to 396,100, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said on Wednesday. That tally was almost three-quarters higher than February 2020, prior to the Covid pandemic disruptions, Bjorn Jarvis, head of the ABS’s labour statistics unit, said. “These figures continue to show the high demand for workers from businesses emerging from lockdowns, together with ongoing labour shortages, particularly in lower-paying industries,” Jarvis said. All sectors of the economy reported higher vacancies, led by the private sector with job openings at 361,700, or up 19.4% from August. Public sector vacancies were up 9.7%. “Job vacancies were also elevated in all states and territories, ranging between Western Australia, where job vacancies were 120% higher than before the pandemic, and 49% in the Australian Capital Territory,” Jarvis said. Arts and recreation, and accommodation and food services had the biggest increases in job openings, rising about 260% and 210% respectively, compared with February 2020. While the figures pre-date the rapid spread of the Omicron strain, they underscore how tight the labour market was prior to the latest economic distortions, with companies now struggling to fill for staff who have Covid or are in close contact with those who do. Tim Nieuwenhuis, managing director of Workfast Australia, a company that recruits staff for firms ranging from warehousing to mines and other major projects, said the current job shortages were “way worse” than during the depths of the Delta wave that kept Victoria, New South Wales and the ACT locked down for months in 2021. “We’re getting a phenomenal amount of calls,” he said, with the well-publicised logistics bottlenecks just part of the problem. “Everything’s hit equally across the board.” Fears for construction industry Major construction projects, such as new roads and other infrastructure, have been gearing up to start in early 2022 as part of state and federal economic stimulus plans, Nieuwenhuis said. These were now being stalled as developers find their work rosters depleted by absentees, or they can’t secure the necessary materials or equipment because of distortions affecting suppliers. “If they continue on this path they are going to kill businesses faster than lockdowns,” he said. Nieuwenhuis predicted that because there is less government support now workers will simply decline to take Covid tests if all the symptoms they have are similar to flu. A common response increasingly will be, “If they’re sick, stay at home, if you’re not, go to work,” he said. “Don’t worry about getting tested.” The decision announced by the NSW premier Dominic Perrottet on Wednesday to threaten a fine of $1,000 for those who test positive to a rapid antigen test but don’t report it will only encourage people to avoid tests. “Logic would have it that to avoid penalties and to continue working, workers will not have the test,” Nieuwenhuis said. “We advise all workers to follow instructions but judging by what employers are telling us, workers are desperate to work.” ACTU boss Sally McManus also expects the construction industry to see knock-on effects from the choked supply chains. “It’s closed, major construction is closed,” McManus said, noting the industry and many others typically close over the Christmas-New Year period and these would normally be firing up now. “Tied to the construction industry is a massive amount of jobs,” she said, with downstream effects on all manner of manufacturing from carpets to other furnishings or equipment. “All of those places have yet to be hit by the same issue,” McManus said. “And that’s around the same time the peak of the infections are meant to be happening.” Belinda Allen, a senior economist at the Commonwealth Bank, said the November vacancies figures reveal how the labour market “was in a very strong position” pre-Omicron. “Demand for labour was exceptional, staff shortages could be seen across most industries and the participation rate was already back to its pre-Delta outbreak level,” Allen said in a note. “It is still early days on the possible impact of the Omicron outbreak on the labour market, but with staff shortages clearly evident, businesses may be reluctant to shed staff if demand slows given the shortages in the labour market,” she said.Novak Djokovic has blamed his agent for an “administrative mistake” when declaring he had not travelled in the two weeks before his flight to Australia and acknowledged an “error of judgment” by not isolating after he tested positive for Covid. The world No 1 released a statement on Wednesday in a bid to address what he called “continuing misinformation” about his activities in December before he came to Australia in a bid to retain his Australian Open crown. But Djokovic’s statement, posted to Instagram, did not address reports by Der Spiegel claiming apparent anomalies with his 16 December PCR test result. The reporting has raised questions about the positive Covid diagnosis that forms the basis of his exemption to travel to Australia. Wednesday’s statement claims he wasn’t notified of his positive result until 17 December despite Djokovic’s affidavit to the federal circuit court that he was both “tested and diagnosed” on 16 December. Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, has confirmed he is still considering re-cancelling Djokovic’s visa, citing “lengthy further submissions and supporting documentation” from the player’s lawyers as the cause of delay. Djokovic had his visa restored by the federal circuit court on Monday but his ability to stay in Australia was put in doubt by the ministerial review. On Tuesday, it was revealed the Australian Border Force was investigating his pre-flight declaration after images emerged suggesting he was in Belgrade less than two weeks before his flight from Spain to Australia on 4 January. On Wednesday, Djokovic said he wished to correct “misinformation … in the interest of alleviating broader concern in the community about my presence in Australia”. “I want to emphasise that I have tried very hard to ensure the safety of everyone and my compliance with testing obligations,” he said. “I attended a basketball game in Belgrade on 14 December after which it was reported that a number of people tested positive with Covid-19. “Despite having no Covid symptoms, I took a rapid antigen test on 16 December which was negative, and out of an abundance of caution, also took an official and approved PCR test on that same day.” Djokovic said on 17 December he attended a tennis event in Belgrade to present awards to children, after testing negative again on a rapid test. “I was asymptomatic and felt good, and I had not received the notification of a positive PCR test result until after that event.” Djokovic said after receiving the positive result he nevertheless attended his tennis centre in Belgrade on 18 December to uphold a “longstanding commitment for a L’Equipe interview” because he “felt obliged” to and “didn’t want to let the journalist down”. Djokovic says he socially distanced and wore a mask except while photos were taken. “While I went home after the interview to isolate for the required period, on reflection, this was an error of judgment and I accept that I should have rescheduled this commitment.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Djokovic said the incorrect pre-travel declaration of 1 January was “submitted by my support team on my behalf”. “My agent sincerely apologises for the administrative mistake in ticking the incorrect box about my previous travel before coming to Australia. This was a human error and certainly not deliberate.” Djokovic said he has “provided additional information to the Australian government to clarify this matter” but would not be making further comment “out of the utmost respect for the Australian government and their authorities and current process”. Djokovic did not address the Der Spiegel report which claimed the QR code for his 16 December PCR test showed a negative result when they scanned it earlier this week before subsequently giving a positive result. It also claimed to have uncovered anomalies between the paper version of the PCR test result shown to be positive and the digital version of it as presented by the tennis player’s lawyers. The paper version reportedly suggests that the alleged positive test result is not from 16 December but – according to the time stamped on it – from 26 December. Spiegel acknowledged the timestamp could also reflect when the result was downloaded by the tested person. According to findings by the IT research group Zerforschung, and shared with Spiegel, the positive test from 16 December had the Serb testing system number 7371999. Djokovic’s negative test result, carried out on 22 December, reportedly had an identification number that was about 50,000 positions lower. The Zerforschung researchers have told Spiegel they have confirmation that the test ID numbers rise, rather than fall, raising questions that the test allegedly from 22 December was carried out prior to the test allegedly from 16 December. Spiegel put questions to both Djokovic and Serbian health authorities but by Tuesday evening had yet to receive a response. The Guardian has also contacted Djokovic for comment. A spokesperson for the Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, said he was still considering use of his personal power to cancel Djokovic’s visa. “Mr Djokovic’s lawyers have recently provided lengthy further submissions and supporting documentation said to be relevant to the possible cancellation of Mr Djokovic’s visa,” he said on Wednesday. “Naturally, this will affect the timeframe for a decision.” Around the same time that Djokovic’s statement was released, the world No 1 continued his tournament preparations by holding his first open training session on Rod Laver Arena with Tristan Schoolkate, a young Australian player. Djokovic’s first two practices since his release from detention had been held in private with the doors of Rod Laver Arena locked and the court’s live feed turned off on Tuesday.World Health Organization experts have warned that repeating booster doses of the original Covid vaccines is not a viable strategy against emerging variants and called for new jabs that better protect against transmission. “A vaccination strategy based on repeated booster doses of the original vaccine composition is unlikely to be appropriate or sustainable,” the WHO Technical Advisory Group on Covid-19 Vaccine Composition (TAG-Co-VAC) said in a statement published on Tuesday. The group of experts, who are working to assess the performance of Covid-19 vaccines, called for the development of new vaccines that not only protect people who contract Covid against falling seriously ill but also better prevent people from catching the virus in the first place, in order to deal with emerging Covid variants such as Omicron. “Covid-19 vaccines that have high impact on prevention of infection and transmission, in addition to the prevention of severe disease and death, are needed and should be developed,” the advisory group said. This, it said, would help lower “community transmission and the need for stringent and broad-reaching public health and social measures”. It also suggested that vaccine developers should strive to create jabs that “elicit immune responses that are broad, strong, and long-lasting in order to reduce the need for successive booster doses”. As the virus evolves and until new vaccines are available, “the composition of current Covid-19 vaccines may need to be updated”, the group said. According to the WHO, 331 candidate vaccines are being worked on around the world. The UN health agency has so far given its stamp of approval to versions of eight different vaccines. A growing body of evidence indicates that the Omicron Covid variant is not only far more transmissible than previous variants, but also better at dodging some vaccine protections. Earlier this week, Pfizer Inc chief executive Albert Bourla said a redesigned Covid-19 vaccine that specifically targets the Omicron variant is likely to be needed and his company could have one ready to launch by March. Bourla said Pfizer and partner BioNTech SE are working on both an Omicron-targeted vaccine version as well as a shot that would include both the previous vaccine as well as one targeted at the fast-spreading variant. “I think it is the most likely scenario,” Bourla said on Monday. “We’re working on higher doses. We’re working different schedules. We’re doing a lot of things right now, as we speak.” The vaccine could be ready to distribute by June, Bourla added in an interview with CNBC. Meanwhile, a “tidal wave” of Omicron infections risks infecting more than half the population of Europe in the next two months and could submerge health systems across the region, Hans Kluge, the WHO’s Europe director, warned. In a statement on Tuesday, Kluge said the region had recorded more than 7 million new cases in the first week of 2022, double the rate of a fortnight previously, with more than 1% of the population catching Covid-19 each week in 26 countries. “At this rate, more than 50% of the population in the region will be infected with Omicron in the next six to eight weeks,” he said – a scale of transmission he described as unprecedented. Infectious disease epidemiologist and WHO Covid-19 technical lead, Maria Van Kerkhove, provided an update during a live Q&amp;A session broadcast on Tuesday. “More than 15 million cases were reported in the last seven days. That’s a record high in this pandemic. We’ve actually had to readjust the scale in the figures in the epi curve [epidemic curve],” Van Kerkhove said, adding that more than 43,000 deaths were also reported and figures were likely to be an underestimate. “This is up from 9.5 million that were reported last week so we are seeing a sharp increase in cases being reported around the world. About half of those have been reported from Europe, about 40% of all cases reported from the Americas with a high burden of cases from the US.” The WHO has resisted the push to roll out blanket booster programmes in the battle against new concerning variants like Omicron, saying it makes no sense as many people in poorer nations are still waiting for a first jab, dramatically increasing the chance of new, more dangerous variants emerging. So far, more than eight billion doses of Covid-19 vaccines have been administered in at least 219 territories, according to a count by Agence France-Presse. While more than 67% of people in high income countries have received at least one jab, fewer than 11% have in low income countries, according to UN numbers. With Agence France-PresseThe world’s most optimistic garment hangs in my wardrobe. Maybe it hangs in yours, too? Mine is a cocktail dress. A shimmering, silk-satin tube the same shade of pink as a strawberry milkshake. It’s tight and long with a bow at the back. I bought it on the insistence of two friends and two strangers from a bit-of-everything shop in the old Daylesford convent. This was just a few weeks and a thousand lifetimes ago – before the Omicron wave smashed the Australian east coast. I have been unlucky with lockdowns; I was caught in Victoria’s for months, and then a short trip to Sydney lasted more months when last June’s lockdown started there, too. Meetups with friends used to be casual. They’ve since become precious – and though their rituals are half-remembered, their energy’s been ferocious. So, in the convent shop change room, I wrangled my hair into a French twist with the same intensity I put into believing that parties, launches, opening nights – anything, any event at all involving crowds of people and dressing up – may yet be imminent again. I strutted out to front the gang, and there were two details I failed to appreciate properly. The first was that everyone was still firmly masked. The second was that the dress was marked down to $40. Whoever had priced it had a wiser eye on the future than I did. Two weeks later, the dress is untouched in the wardrobe, it’s unlikely to be touched … yet coronavirus seems to be touching everyone, everywhere. Once, cases in the hundreds terrified Australians; now virulent Omicron delivers daily infections here in the tens of thousands. Social media’s become a public rollcall of infected Australians, famous and not. This week, former PM Malcolm Turnbull has the virus. So does my partner’s mum. A friend’s mother and her son. Another household of friends, including a briefly hospitalised baby. Australians find themselves in the Clayton’s lockdown – the lockdown you have when you’re still desperate to avoid the virus but the federal government’s not paying jobkeeper. Sickness has crippled supply chains, bare supermarket shelves have returned. The streets of our town are silent again … and I am back to wearing thongs with pyjama pants around the house and pretending they are clothes. Over these last, thousand-year weeks, the unworn pink dress has become an unnerving symbol of my newest phase of plague distress. Today I worked out why. The return of New York’s infamous Met Gala last September featured singer Billie Eilish in a peach tulle gown of a square-footage bigger than the average home office. Whether you liked the frock or not, the impracticality of its size and scale of its fluffiness imparted a striking reminder of what it was like to enjoy what you wore – not for comfort or practicality – but for the raw social pleasure of just being seen. For a few hopeful months, fashion played to the idea we could once again perform our clothes to an audience. The Guardian heralded “colour as the new black”. Vogue offered bright, attention-getting “sweaters to make you smile”. We bled back out into the social world and wild swathes of puffed sleeves were everywhere. Then suddenly we were sick, isolating or trying to source unsupplied rapid antigen tests … masked up, staying in and invisible to one another once more. The wearer of my own favourite outfit to last year’s Gala has the virus and now isolates at home. I admire the fortitude of the iconic Laura Lippman. Back when the lockdowns began in March 2020, the American wrote in Glamour about “how good it felt, getting dressed up and putting on makeup, even if I never left my bedroom”. Nearly two years later, she maintains the ritual. The virus may be the story of the times, but Lippman told me her outfits are “a teeny tiny narrative I create for the day”. Impressive, too, is the insistent visibility of Ireland’s Taryn De Vere. Ireland experienced some of the harshest lockdowns in Europe and, like Australia, has since been shredded by Omicron; one person in five has tested positive for the virus. Charity shop addict De Vere told me she thought “OK, I’m going to be stuck in the house. Why not be inspired by the things in the house?” She created the #ObjectDressChallenge and now appears on Instagram as pot noodles, milk cartons and even sanitary pad packets, but fashion. In America and Ireland, at least, style mavens don’t bear the existential burden of wondering where their next RAT is coming from. A local friend’s confession of being “back in my undies and a singlet I can wear straight from bed to Zoom” speaks more to the present Australian sense of ennui. Omicron spreads, I’m bunkered down in a house which stores an entire adulthood of going-out clothes I have now not worn in years. It’s not that today’s mirror reflects some pale slob in her jim-jams that saddens me, though. It’s the new pink dress that hangs in the wardrobe, and the ongoing sense of remaining unseen. Van Badham is a Guardian Australia columnistYouTube is a major conduit of online disinformation and misinformation worldwide and is not doing enough to tackle the spread of falsehoods on its platform, according to a global coalition of factchecking organisations. A letter signed by more than 80 groups, including Full Fact in the UK and the Washington Post’s Fact Checker, says the video platform is hosting content by groups including Doctors for the Truth, which spread Covid misinformation, and videos supporting the “fraud” narrative during the US presidential election. “YouTube is allowing its platform to be weaponised by unscrupulous actors to manipulate and exploit others, and to organise and fundraise themselves. Current measures are proving insufficient,” states the letter to YouTube’s chief executive, Susan Wojcicki, which describes YouTube as a “major conduit” for falsehoods. The letter urges YouTube, which is owned by Google, to make four changes to its operations: a commitment to funding independent research into disinformation campaigns on the platform; providing links to rebuttals inside videos distributing disinformation and misinformation; stopping its algorithms from promoting repeat offenders; and doing more to tackle falsehoods in non-English-language videos. “We hope you will consider implementing these ideas for the public good and to make YouTube a platform that truly does its best to prevent disinformation and misinformation being weaponized against its users and society at large,” the letter states. Disinformation is the deliberate distribution of false information that intends to cause harm, whereas misinformation is when false information is shared but no harm is meant. The letter from the factcheckers, who challenge claims made by domestic governments, online posts and media organisations, states that YouTube’s failure to tackle disinformation and misinformation is especially marked in the global south, a term that refers to nations in Latin America, Asia and Africa. Frances Haugen, the Facebook whistleblower, has referred repeatedly to concerns over safety controls in non-English language markets as a key factor in her decision to go public about problems at the social media company. The signatories, who include factchecking groups in India, Nigeria, the Philippines and Colombia, include examples of false content about the reign of the former Filipino president Ferdinand Marcos – whose son is running for office – and the amplification of hate speech against vulnerable groups in Brazil. The signatories are from more than 40 countries with a range of funding backgrounds. They include: Full Fact, a UK charity, Washington Post Fact Checker, funded by the eponymous newspaper, Spain’s Maldita, a factchecking foundation; and India Today, a unit within the privately owned TV Today Network. YouTube’s community guidelines state that “certain types of misleading or deceptive content with serious risk of egregious harm” are banned from the platform, which includes promoting harmful remedies or treatments and election interference. YouTube also points to the top ten countries for removed videos, which is dominated by non-English language-speaking countries such as Vietnam, India and Brazil. YouTube has taken action to quell Covid misinformation and in October 2020 banned misinformation about Covid vaccinations, soon after Facebook had taken similar action on its own platform. A year later, it said it would remove videos that spread misinformation about all vaccines. Responding to the letter, Elena Hernandez, a YouTube spokesperson, said the company had invested heavily in policies such as reducing the spread of “borderline” misinformation, a term for content that comes close to – but doesn’t quite cross the line of – breaching the platform’s guidelines. “Over the years, we’ve invested heavily in policies and products in all countries we operate to connect people to authoritative content, reduce the spread of borderline misinformation, and remove violative videos,” said Hernandez. “We’ve seen important progress, with keeping consumption of recommended borderline misinformation significantly below 1% of all views on YouTube, and only about 0.21% of all views are of violative content that we later remove. We’re always looking for meaningful ways to improve and will continue to strengthen our work with the fact checking community.”As Covid-19 swept across the world in the spring of 2020, Mo’min Swaitat, a Palestinian actor and filmmaker living in London, found himself stranded in his hometown, the West Bank city of Jenin. On walks through the quiet streets, he was drawn to the shuttered Tariq Cassettes, a music shop and record label he remembered from childhood that had closed down years ago. Intrigued, Swaitat got in touch with the former owner, who let him while away the days of the pandemic searching through the dusty archive of tape cassettes on the second floor. In the process, he uncovered a treasure trove: long-forgotten music that animated Palestinian life during the 1980s, when the first intifada (uprising) broke out. After purchasing many of the tapes and bringing five suitcases full of them back to London, it became his mission to digitise and re-release this window into the past. “I listened to 10,000 tapes over eight months – lots of synth stuff and funk and disco, wedding music, revolutionary tracks. I even found recordings made by my uncle, who was in a Bedouin wedding band,” the 32-year-old said. “One of the most special finds was this bright yellow tape with no information on it except a sticker with the hand-written word ‘intifada’.” Swaitat listened to the album several times, captivated by the poetic lyrics describing a lost homeland and the struggle for freedom. On one occasion he left the tape rolling and realised that, after a few minutes of silence, the composer named himself as Riad Awwad. Awwad then thanked his sisters Alia, Hanan and Nariman for their help in creating the album, as well as Mahmoud Darwish – the Palestinian national poet – for writing the lyrics to one of the songs. Swaitat couldn’t find any information about Riad online, but he did manage to get in touch with his sister Hanan, a famous writer and activist now in her 70s. She told him more about how the tape, called The Intifada Album, was created. “My brother was a very talented musician. He was very moved by the intifada and the week it began [in 1987] he gathered us as a family in the living room in Jerusalem and asked us to help him ‘sing the song of the intifada’,” she said. “He had a unique style and he made music about identity, which resonated with our people a lot. If you went down Salah al-Din Street in the old city, everyone was playing it.” As the intifada grew increasingly bloody, Awwad ended up paying a high price for his art. Israeli forces confiscated most of the 3,000 tapes he had made from music shops, as well as cafes and businesses playing them, over fears the lyrics – some of which mention Molotov cocktails and throwing stones – would incite people to violence. The 30-year-old was detained for several months, during which time he was tortured. “He was never actually charged with anything, which was very common in the intifada,” said Hanan. “They asked him a lot about why he made the music, what he wanted to do with it.” An electrical engineer by training, after his release Awwad started a music school for children in the West Bank, and went on to form a band called Palestinian Union. Awwad died in a car accident in 2005. While Hanan wishes her brother was still alive to see his music being rediscovered, she said he would be thrilled to know his work is reaching new audiences. “I was so happy when Mo’min got in touch to ask about re-releasing the album. It has historical significance and with the internet, anyone can find it,” she said. On his return to London, Swaitat received funding from Jerwood Arts to start the Majazz Project, an online platform dedicated to restoring Palestinian musical heritage. The digital release of Awwad’s Intifada Album was launched through the Majazz Project label at the end of 2021. The vinyl version, scheduled for launch in April, has already sold half of its run. “The response has been amazing. I’ve had messages from young Palestinians and those in the diaspora telling me they loved it, or they bought it as a present for their parents who were young when it was originally released,” Swaitat said. “We have plans to reissue more of the music – some rock, traditional Bedouin recordings and newer electronica. “So much Palestinian culture has been lost or locked up in Israeli military archives, so it was magical to find this. It’s a journey through the past and the future of a whole people.”The current confrontation between Russia and the west is fuelled by many grievances, but the greatest is the belief in Moscow that the west tricked the former Soviet Union by breaking promises made at the end of the cold war in 1989-1990 that Nato would not expand to the east. In his now famous 2007 speech to the Munich Security Conference, Vladimir Putin accused the west of forgetting and breaking assurances, leaving international law in ruins. Does the betrayal claim matter? It matters desperately to Russia since it fuels distrust, feeds Russia’s cynicism about international law and is the central motive behind Russia’s draft security treaties calling for a reversal of Nato’s extension, due to be discussed on Wednesday at the Nato-Russia Council. The betrayal theory is not confined to Putin, but was supported by Boris Yeltsin, and from mid-1995 right across the Russian political elite. A new book, Not One Inch: America, Russia, and the Making of the Cold War Stalemate, by the prize-winning historian Mary Elise Sarotte, charts all the private discussions within the western alliance and with Russia over enlargement and reveals Russia as powerless to slow the ratchet effect of the opening of Nato’s door. The author concludes the charge of betrayal is technically untrue, but has a psychological truth. What is the basis of the complaint? At one level it narrowly focuses both on verbal commitments made by the US secretary of state James Baker under President George HW Bush and the terms of a treaty signed on 12 September 1990 setting out how Nato troops could operate in the territory of the former East Germany. Putin claims that Baker, in a discussion on 9 February 1990 with the Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, made the promise that Nato would not expand to the east if Russia accepted Germany’s unification. The following day Chancellor Helmut Kohl, ambiguous about Germany remaining in Nato after unification, also told Gorbachev “naturally Nato could not expand its territory to the current territory of the GDR”. The promise was repeated in a speech by the Nato secretary general on 17 May, a promise cited by Putin in his Munich speech. In his memoirs, Gorbachev described these assurances as the moment that cleared the way for compromise on Germany. Were these promises ever written down in a treaty? No, largely because Bush felt Baker and Kohl had gone too far, or in Baker’s words he had “got a little forward on his skis”. The final agreement signed by Russia and the west in September 1990 applied only to Germany. It allowed foreign-stationed Nato troops to cross the old cold war line marked by East Germany at the discretion of the German government. The agreement was contained in a signed addendum. Nato’s commitment to protect, enshrined in article 5, had for the first time moved east into former Russian-held territory. Did Russia see the implications of the 1990 agreement for Warsaw Pact countries? Yes, many Russian policymakers opposed the concessions being made at the time by Gorbachev in part because of the implications for eastern Europe. Russia was given verbal assurances about the limits of Nato’s expansion, but no written guarantees. In March 1991 John Major, for instance, was asked by the Soviet defence minister, Marshal Dmitry Yazov, about eastern Europe’s interest in joining Nato. Major, according to the diaries of the British ambassador to Moscow, Rodric Braithwaite, assured him “nothing of that sort will ever happen”. Did Russia complain about the ‘betrayal’? Repeatedly. In 1993 Boris Yeltsin, angling for Russia to join Nato, wrote to President Bill Clinton to argue any further expansion of Nato eastwards breached the spirit of the 1990 treaty. The US state department, undecided at the time about Poland’s call to join Nato, was so sensitive to the charge of betrayal that Clinton-era officials even asked the German foreign ministry formally to report on the complaint’s merits. The German foreign minister’s top aide replied in October 1993 that the complaint was formally wrong but he could understand “why Yeltsin thought that Nato had committed itself not to extend beyond its 1990 limits”. Did the deceit narrative poison relations? Yes. In 1997 at the time of the Nato-Russia Founding Act, a treaty designed to create a new relationship between the alliance and Russia, foreign minister Yevgeny Primakov again raised Baker’s “double dealing” 6 years earlier. It prompted the then US secretary of state, Warren Christopher, to commission an internal report into the claim. The report drew a distinction between side comments made by German politicians, such as Hans-Dietrich Genscher, ruling out Nato expansion, and what was agreed in the treaty text. So did Russia at some points sanction Nato expansion? Yes. In August 1993 Yeltsin, in talks with the Polish leader, Lech Wałęsa, conceded Poland’s right to join Nato, a concession that left his colleagues thunderstruck. More formally Russia did the same with the Nato Russia Founding Act in 1996. Was there an alternative? Some say yes. Sarotte argues Washington won its power battle over enlargement, but in a way that led to confrontation, not cooperation, with Moscow. Russia throughout presented itself as a potential Nato member, but the US always saw this as a fantasy that would paralyse the alliance. The US often preferred to deflect rather than reject. The US administration in 1993 could have delayed Nato expansion, but supporters who saw it as a democratic right of the former Warsaw Pact countries defeated those who argued it would weaken both Russian support for arms control and the forces of reform inside Russia. Was Russia in a true position to negotiate? Russia’s economy and politics were in ruins. “Not One Inch” details how Russian openness to Nato’s expansion often turned on the level of financial support provided by the US or Germany, support neither side described as bribes. Such were the levels of Russian corruption that much of this money just went missing as soon as it was transferred.Not for nothing is the parish church of the Spanish village of Villamorón known as la catedral del páramo – the Cathedral of the Moorland. For eight centuries, the church of Saint James the Apostle has held out in the northern wilds of Castilla y León, a Romanesque-creeping-into-Gothic treasure that sits beneath a low sky, amid endless fields and at the edge of a village that gave up the ghost almost 50 years ago. Around it, save for a handful of painstakingly renovated holiday homes, crouch the roofless, broken-backed houses whose gaping doorways and rotting beams offer a mute lesson in depopulation and demographic shifts. Although the church stopped being a place of worship in the late 1970s, it could yet help reverse Villamorón’s decline. A campaign group, the Friends of Villamorón, is working to undo the damage wreaked by decades of neglect, snow, rain, woodworm, owls and pigeons. It hopes the over €30,000 it raised in a recent crowdfunding appeal will go some way to restoring the church’s magnificent interior by repairing its crumbling choir and conserving the paintings that decorate the walls and ceiling. The association’s president, Pedro Moreno, believes the church’s unusual and mysterious history could lure tourists, pilgrims from the nearby Camino de Santiago, and perhaps even the occasional permanent resident. The building, begun in the mid-13th century, was measured out in French, rather than Castilian, feet, suggesting its designs came from the other side of the Pyrenees. Like some other churches in the region, Saint James’s is thought to have served as a model for churches built in Seville and Córdoba after King Ferdinand III’s successful reconquista campaigns in Andalucía. “We’ve done some small repairs and bits of restoration, like replacing the sacristy floor, putting new doors on the towers and protecting the belltower from the damage done by pigeons,” says Moreno. “But we’re just a small association with very limited economic resources.” While the group is hugely grateful for the €1m the regional government of Castilla y León has spent on shoring up the building’s exterior, it thinks further investment will allow the church to operate as a cultural centre where concerts, exhibitions and book launches can be held. That, in turn, will bring people and money into one of the emptier parts of a country that during the Franco era saw huge numbers of inhabitants desert rural areas to find work in the cities. As Moreno notes, páramo can mean wasteland as well as moorland. “It’s not just called la catedral del páramo because of all the plains that surround it; it’s also in a demographic sense because there’s no one here now. The region as a whole offers a very clear illustration of what’s going on across inland Spain.” The idea, he says, is also to “bring a little hope to what people have recently taken to calling the ‘hollowed-out Spain’”. His fellow volunteer Enrique Gutiérrez is equally smitten by the building and its transformative potential. He argues the church is too large and too exquisite to have served such a tiny community and that it may once have been connected to a small, now vanished, monastery on the Camino de Santiago. “There isn’t another church like this that has stood untouched for 800 years – it’s just as the stonemasons left it,” Gutiérrez says. “You can see the transition from the Romanesque to the Gothic, and how smooth, elegant and harmonious it is.” Besides, he adds, pointing at the heavy machinery outside the parish house: “There’s a lot of land and there are houses that could be restored. It would be great to get people back here.” Some are already drifting back. José María Bustillo, who was born in his great-grandparents’ house in the village in 1957, has renovated the property and now splits his time between it and his home in Barcelona. Others come for the summer, but he is the only official resident of the village he left with his parents when he was seven. “We need capital here to revitalise the whole place, but that’s been done in other places not too far away, where they’ve set up a hotel and a restaurant,” Bustillo says. “I think that model could work here, too. Things are very quiet around here – which is good – but it would be nice if there was a bit more life from March to September.” Bustillo concedes it is a little harder in the village in winter, “but if you have decent heating you’re fine. And the internet isn’t bad.” Moreno, who co-founded the Friends of Villamorón 18 years ago, is practised, and patient, enough not to expect miracles. But neither he nor his fellow campaigners will allow the church to slip back into neglect. “Quixotic is the right word when it comes to describing projects like this,” he says. “We know how difficult they can be when we embark on them, but we still do it. And this isn’t just about restoring a building, no matter how beautiful. It’s about trying to take something that’s centuries old and giving it life, use – and a future.”Three Australian music festivals have been cancelled or postponed in the past 24 hours, amid increasingly desperate calls from organisers and musicians for a federal insurance scheme to protect live events, which has still yet to be introduced as the pandemic enters its third year. On Wednesday, touring metal and punk festival Full Tilt announced that it would be cancelling its Adelaide concert, which was due to be held on 29 January. Earlier in the week, organisers announced that its Brisbane concert would be postponed until the end of April. The news comes a day after the cancellation of NSW’s Grapevine Gathering festival, just four days before the event was due to start, with the Veronicas, Peking Duk, the Jungle Giants and San Cisco on the bill. Organisers estimate that $5.2m will be lost to the greater Hunter Valley region, with 1,400 jobs and 16,000 ticket holders affected. Both events cited new state restrictions that banned singing and dancing at unseated outdoor events, a restriction that had previously only applied to indoor events. Full Tilt promoter Chris O’Brien said the Adelaide show couldn’t be converted into a seated show. Before the Omicron wave, South Australia had been set to ease restrictions on large outdoor events when the state hit 90% double vaccination. “A postponement into a time where we have zero confidence in the state government to remain true to their word has forced this decision,” O’Brien said. “We are devastated for the artists, contractors, crew and event staff who will all miss out on the income, many of whom have barely worked since March 2020. We are also gutted for the thousands of fans that have purchased tickets.” Also on Tuesday, Victoria’s heavy metal festival Unify Forever announced it would be postponed until March. Other live events hit in the last week include Sydney’s King Street Carnival, which is postponed indefinitely; and the Tamworth Country music festival, which is postponed until April. An Australian tour by Israeli-British chef Yotam Ottolenghi, which had been due to begin on Sunday, is also indefinitely postponed, as is singer Belinda Carlisle’s national tour, which will now happen in 2023. Musicians including Jimmy Barnes, the Hoodoo Gurus and Faith No More have also recently called off shows. ‘Omicron has played out worse than anyone expected’ The $15bn music and live entertainment industry has been devastated by omicron, with many state Covid restrictions affecting standing and large-scale outdoor events that could promote singing or dancing, while large sporting events have mostly gone ahead as planned. New density limits across different states have sent venues and promoters scrabbling, while the variant has spread rapidly among crews and cast, with positive cases shutting down an unprecedented number of stage shows. Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning In December, Victoria introduced Covid-19 Event Insurance, the first scheme of its kind. But despite calls for a national insurance scheme to protect live events, the federal government has continued to delegate responsibility to the states. In March, it was discovered that the majority of a $250m federal rescue package for the sector had not been allocated to those in need. Evelyn Richardson, chief executive of Live Performance Australia, said the LPA met with arts minister Paul Fletcher in December to lobby for a federal scheme but that there was currently “no appetite” for it. “Omicron has played out worse than anyone expected. We appreciate the support we’ve had, but the government needs to step up and introduce a national scheme,” Richardson said. “Yes the states have a role, but it has been very disappointing that the federal government hasn’t led and pulled the states together and worked with them. “We have people that haven’t been able to work for two years. Before Omicron, workers could get daily PCR tests to keep working, now they can’t even get rapid antigen tests. We’ve fallen into an abyss … the notion that it is all over and that we’ll ride through this, but that is not the reality we’re living in right now. We need support until things settle down.” Support Act, a non-profit for the music and performance industry, received a $40m funding boost from the federal government and has paid out 15,000 crisis grants to roadies and crew. The organisation has seen a rapid rise in callers reporting suicidal thoughts and mental health issues due to the lack of available work. “The mood is pretty desperate,” said Support Act CEO Clive Miller. “The summer was shaping up to be an opportunity for people to return to work but it’s all come to a crashing halt once again, and that puts enormous pressure on the artists, on crew, on promoters. So many of them are also testing positive, it’s happening at a much higher rate than ever before. “When you put it all together – the cancellations, the postponements, the new restrictions, the case rate, the low consumer confidence – it is a perfect storm on steroids.”Every derelict farm building houses tangible memories of lost lives or livelihoods. A chipped teacup from the last cuppa, a key without a lock, a horseshoe on the floor of a Hebridean blackhouse. Abandoned, discarded and forgotten objects spark my imagination with stories that can become more real than the buildings themselves. Ever since the pandemic began, I have puzzled over one such object in a tumbledown ruin a 10-minute walk from my house. Before then, the onion barn – a two-storey weatherboarded wooden structure – had rarely received more than a sideways glance from the wheel of my car, for it was marooned on the shoulder of a dual carriageway. But when the rivers of traffic ran dry during the first lockdown, the A1 reverted in character to the old Great North Road, and the approach of a vehicle became an event. My daily exercise sometimes took me along the verge to the fence around this barn, a rare survivor out of dozens that sprang up in the 19th century, during Sandy’s onion-growing heyday. Decades of gales and gravity have pulled down the rear half, unclad cladding from the front, exposed timbers, shed clay pantiles from the roof, and dislodged others to hang precariously over the eaves. Posts along the open-fronted ground floor still support the loft, where the onions were hung up to dry and stored. Long metal hooks hang useless over a band of narrow slats, where shutters once opened to air the crop. In common with other onion barns of the area, there are no stairs from ground level to the first floor, only a small rectangular hatch through which workers would poke a ladder to ascend into the reeky upper storey. Standing before the doorless frame of the loft, I spied the oddest of leftovers. Facing towards the hatch, as if awaiting a head poking up through the gap, is a simple but elegant chair. It has a high back with gentle curvature and a carved pattern where a tired labourer’s spine would rest. Why was it left here? That question will gnaw at me long after the whole barn has fallen. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryNo good deed goes unpunished – as is the case with Wordle, the viral linguistic guessing game which found itself with a deluge of apparent clones flooding Apple’s App Store this past week. Initially created by software engineer Josh Wardle for his partner, a puzzle aficionado, the brainteaser skyrocketed in popularity earlier this year, blooming from just 90 daily players in November to now more than 2 million. While Wardle’s game is entirely housed in a web browser, a host of apps – in an apparent effort to capitalise on Wordle’s popularity – soon sprang up with names like What Word – Wordle, Wordus and Wordle 3D. All of them appeared to mirror the mechanics – and even look – of the original puzzle, where players have six tries to guess a five-letter word each day. In the most striking example, titled Wordle – The App, users were offered a free trial as well as a US$30 annual subscription for a premium-tier version. Its developer, New York-based entrepreneur Zach Shakked, bragged on his Twitter account about monetising Wardle’s game, which is completely free. It was later taken down, and Shakked said he had “crossed a line” but maintained that it was a generic word game, that the name Wordle was not trademarked and claimed he had not made any money from his app. “I am a bit suspicious of mobile apps that demand your attention and send you push notifications to get more of your attention,” Wardle has previously said in a BBC Radio interview. “There are also no ads and I am not doing anything with your data, and that is also quite deliberate.” Many apparent copycats have since been removed from the App Store, though not before users took to social media to lament the murkiness of copyright laws. Others viewed the clone apps as a direct assault on the nature of Wordle, which is “simple, fun, satisfying and free” and an antidote to cynicism, as described in the Guardian. “This is why tech culture sucks,” read one tweet. Others have pointed out that Wordle itself seems to draw inspiration from other language puzzles, including American TV show Lingo – which also featured a five-letter guessing game. It is a testament to Wordle’s virality that it has spawned so many replicas and spin-offs – some of which have, themselves, achieved a level of popularity. Among the free-to-play Wordle-style games online are Queerdle, which describes itself as a “yassification of Wordle” with a pink background and more risque solutions; Sweardle, dedicated to four-letter expletives; and the infuriatingly absurd Letterle – where users have 26 tries to guess just a single letter.When Covid hit in 2020, it was a nerve-racking time for many urban developers. As gardens – or the countryside – seemed ever more important for locked-down house hunters, some wondered if their half-finished city apartment blocks would ever find residents. But almost two years into the pandemic, the speculation about “the death of the city” have been proven wrong. Exclusive figures gathered by the Guardian suggest thousands more people are now living in the biggest English city centres since Covid first hit the UK – mostly in flats, often without balconies or outdoor space. In Liverpool, the city centre population increased by almost 6% in 2020 to 48,594, up 2,754 on 2019, according to the local authority. Leeds city council estimates that 5,000 more people are living in its centre now than in 2019, among them staff at Channel 4, which opened its “national headquarters” in the city earlier this year. “We estimate the total population to now be around 38,000,” said a spokesperson. Demand is rising in central London as renters return to the city centre, according to the Greater London Authority’s December 2021 housing report. Data from Rightmove shows a rent price increase of 11.1% since November 2019 and an annual increase in house prices of 2.7%. In Manchester, the city centre population is now 69,835, up 4.9% on 2021, according to estimates from the council. “Despite Covid-19, Manchester remains the fastest growing city in England – and the population of the city centre is expected to be close to 100,000 by 2025,” said Gavin White, the council’s executive member for housing and employment. “The pandemic has not deterred people wishing to live in the city and this is because of a combination of factors. The number of jobs being created (including specialist sectors like advance manufacturing, digital and tech), culture, sport – and not just football – along with a rate of graduate retention not seen previously; these are all reasons why Manchester continues to enjoy enviable city growth.” Others point out that a city centre exodus may not have come to pass because some flat owners are stuck, unable to sell up because of issues with cladding and fire safety. In Manchester city centre there were only 870 properties sold in 2020-21, a 75% reduction on 2019-20. In its annual State of the City report, the council blames the drop on “significant constraints on the supply of suitable accommodation to buy (linked primarily to cladding and fire-safety concerns)”. On Monday the government unveiled a £4bn package designed to let more leaseholders escape costs for replacing combustible cladding and pledged new laws to protect them from other safety defect costs. Many of the new city centre residents are renters rather than buyers, often living in luxury blocks with gyms and paying £2,000 a month for a two-bed flat. A lot of these flats are bought “off-plan” by investors. Off-plan purchases (before construction) are particularly booming outside London. Figures from Hamptons estate agents showed 40% of new homes were sold off-plan in the capital in 2021, compared with 61% in Birmingham, 58% in Manchester, 60% in Liverpool and 45% in Leeds. The rapid rate of development in Manchester’s centre led to fears of “zombie blocks” left unoccupied. But according to the State of the City report, only 1% of properties there have remained empty for more than six months. A growing number of family homes have also been constructed in Manchester, prompting the council to build its first city centre primary school for generations. The 210-place school and 26-place nursery will be located at Crown Street, a new development in the Deansgate ward, and is expected to open in September 2023. Leeds is also planning major city centre expansion over the next decade. A council spokesperson said: “Up to 2033, the local plan has capacity for a further 18,000 new homes in the city centre and its fringe across 110 sites, which is consistent with the council’s strategy to maximise the capacity of sustainable locations and the re-use of brownfield sites for residential use. “Over half of these homes already either have detailed planning consent or are under construction. Based on current occupancy assumptions, this would see growth of 27,000 additional city centre residents.”The UK government is being sued over its net zero climate strategy, which lawyers argue illegally fails to include the policies needed to deliver the promised cuts in emissions. Court papers were filed on Wednesday by ClientEarth (CE) and, separately, by Friends of the Earth (FoE). CE also claims the failure to meet legal carbon budgets would contravene the Human Rights Act by impacting on young people’s right to life and family life. The net zero strategy was published in October and included commitments to end the sales of new fossil fuel cars by 2030 and gas boilers by 2035. But it did not spell out how the strategy would be delivered or specify the cuts in emissions to be achieved in each sector. Instead, the lawyers said, it relied on speculative technologies such as zero-carbon aviation fuels and extracting carbon dioxide directly from the air and burying it. ClientEarth has defeated the government three times in court in recent years over inadequate air pollution policies, while court victories by Friends of the Earth include a case about the cost of bringing environmental claims against ministers. Both CE and FoE argue that the Climate Change Act requires ministers to set out policies to meet carbon budgets “as soon as reasonably practicable” after they have been set. The assessment included in the net zero strategy shows UK emissions being double the level allowed in 2035 and also missing targets in 2025 and 2030. “A net zero strategy needs to include real-world policies that ensure it succeeds,” said lawyer Sam Hunter Jones at CE. “Anything less is a breach of the government’s legal duties and amounts to greenwashing and climate delay. The government’s pie-in-the-sky approach pushes the risk onto young people and future generations who stand to be hit hardest by the climate crisis.” The FoE action also claims that another government strategy, on heat and buildings, failed to assess its impact on groups protected in law, including children, people of colour and those with disabilities. FoE previously found that people of colour were twice as likely to be living in fuel poverty as white people. “We know that those who do least to cause climate breakdown are too often the hardest hit,” said Katie de Kauwe, an FoE lawyer. “Climate action must be based on reversing these inequalities, by designing the transition with the most vulnerable in mind. Not even considering the implications of the heat and building strategy on such groups is quite shocking.” The government’s official advisers, the Climate Change Committee (CCC), said in October that the net zero strategy was a “big step forward” and the most comprehensive among G20 countries. But its assessment said: “The government has not quantified the effect of each policy and proposal on emissions. So … it is not clear how the mix of policies will deliver on its ambitions.” The CCC highlighted a lack of policies on energy efficiency in homes following a botched green homes grant scheme, on farming, and on reducing the amount of meat and dairy people eat and the number of flights taken. “It’s a very market-led strategy,” said the CCC chief executive, Chris Stark. “We shall see how that fares.” “While the government should of course invest and encourage innovation, the early-stage solutions featured in the strategy can’t make up for the lack of credible near-term action,” said Hunter Jones. He added: “Energy bills are currently soaring, in part because of the UK’s over-reliance on fossil gas for heating and poor levels of insulation. Government failure to deliver real climate action is resulting in higher bills for people.” Following the filing of the claims, and the submission of the government’s defence, the high court will decide whether to grant full hearings of the cases. A government spokesperson said: “The net zero strategy sets out specific, detailed measures we will take to transition to a low carbon economy, including helping businesses and consumers to move to clean and more secure, home-grown power, supporting hundreds of thousands of well-paid jobs and leveraging up to £90bn of private investment by 2030.”Police officers who saw laws broken while on guard duty at Downing Street would be expected to report it, a former Scotland Yard police chief has said. The former assistant commissioner Robert Quick was head of specialist operations at the Metropolitan police from 2008 to 2009, including counter-terrorism and protection officers for Downing Street. His comments come after a huge backlash erupted to an email from a top aide to the prime minister, Boris Johnson, which invited more than 100 people to a party in the Downing Street garden in May 2020, at the height of lockdown restrictions. About 30 to 40 are believed to have attended and the Met is under pressure to investigate. Quick said: “The garden at Downing Street would be monitored by police officers. You would have thought the police would be reasonably aware of what was going on there.” Quick said those guarding sensitive sites, especially those guarding prominent people, had to show good judgment, but the law was paramount. He said: “When you are in a protective environment, then there is a huge amount of discretion required, but that does not extend to looking the other way if the law is broken.” Asked if officers could be told by their bosses to prioritise their protective duties and ignore the law, Quick said: “You could not give that advice to a police officer.” Quick said the Met was in a difficult position after the latest furore over Downing Street parties flouting lockdown rules that everyone else was expected to obey, and if not, be punished by fines levied by the police. Quick said the “layers of emotion” the row attracts make it more difficult for the Met, and added: “When you get these public controversies you do not want to overreact, but public confidence has to be a big part of any decision. “Your first touchstone is the law itself; public confidence is a big part of that equation and your decision-making.” Quick added that the damage to public faith in institutions by the lockdown parties scandal, as well as damaging politicians, could menace policing’s reputation: “This is a seminal moment and people are looking at the system and wondering, does it work? “If the public en masse decide the police have made the wrong decision, it could be very damaging to public confidence.” Quick ran foul of senior Conservative politicians when he launched an inquiry into the leaking of sensitive documents that saw the office of the then Tory frontbencher Damian Green arrested in 2008. No charges followed. That saga helped oust Quick from office in 2009, and his deputy was Cressida Dick. Asked if the experience may have affected the appetite of Dick, now the Met commissioner, for investigating the politically powerful, Quick said: “She saw what happened to me.”Pooja Ghai struggled to find her footing as a professional actor at first. It was the early 1990s and she wasn’t given many auditions. When parts were offered, they were limited to older Indian aunties or grandmothers. “My first role on television was on Holby City playing a 60-year-old woman. I was 23,” says Ghai. Then she discovered Tamasha theatre company, set up in 1989 by Kristine Landon-Smith and Sudha Bhuchar, and everything changed. Originally offering opportunities to south Asian artists (the company has since broadened its reach to all global majority artists), Tamasha instantly felt like a home, says Ghai, now an award-winning director as well as an actor. “They were telling stories that encapsulated migrant, colonial and postcolonial experiences and I thought ‘This is why I want to do what I’m doing.’ I’d found a space for telling stories that mattered.” More than two decades later, Ghai, who has worked as an associate director at Theatre Royal Stratford East in London, and associate artist at Kali theatre company, is Tamasha’s new artistic director and she has big plans for its future. One recurring, and problematic, feature of organisations dedicated to global majority artists is their perennial status as “emerging” companies, she says. It is something she wants to address. “Tamasha’s been around for over 30 years and it’s still an emerging company that looks at talent development. My ambition is to keep growing that foundation but to elevate it to a mid-scale touring company that’s promoting and working with mid-career and established artists as well. There is no reason that Tamasha shouldn’t be on a par with English Touring Theatre or Headlong.” That does, of course, require more financial backing, she adds, along with support from established institutions. Would she want to stage work by Tamasha at our biggest venues, such as the National Theatre? “I absolutely think we should be on at the National, and I would welcome a conversation between the two organisations. In my 20-year career, the National hasn’t felt like the natural home for stories from the global majority that celebrate the multiculturalism of our nation.” She does, however, think there has been a breakthrough with black diaspora stories. “Seeing this work on our stages is amazing, but we still have a long way to go. It’s about opening up that thinking to all other global majority artists and challenging what we deem to be a ‘risk’.” Clint Dyer, a black Briton, was appointed deputy artistic director at the National last year. Does this make her more hopeful? “Clint is a brilliant artist and a warrior. It’s an exciting thing to see him there and, yes, I hope it shifts the conversation.” Stories about the British empire, its colonial history and postcolonial experiences are vital to her, and she would like to see these issues explored on stage. “We are not taught our colonial histories in schools. We don’t talk about the darker side of the British empire and we need to.” To that end, she wants to revive Tanika Gupta’s Lions and Tigers, originally staged at the Sam Wanamaker Playhouse in London in 2017, and directed by Ghai. “It was about young revolutionaries from the 1930s trying to overthrow British rule in India and it was one of the most important pieces of theatre I have ever done.” She also wants to examine what it means to be Asian in Britain today and is directing Lotus Beauty, a Hampstead theatre production in association with Tamasha, this spring. Serendipitously, Ghai was invited to direct Satinder Chohan’s play before she took over Tamasha (Chohan had originally been commissioned by Tamasha 10 years ago). Lotus Beauty follows the lives of five multigenerational women at a beauty salon in Southall and touches on identity, female friendship, domestic violence and suicide. “It’s very funny, moving and deeply honest about the complexity of being a migrant and building a community together,” she says. It is the job of theatre-makers to grapple with difficult topical conversations, she believes, especially when there are so many divisions in society and when “cancel culture” poses a threat to artistic freedom. “The question is how to hold the space for difficult conversation and debates with opposing opinions respectfully, and find common ground to move forward, so we’re not just staying in our silos and echo chambers.” What difficult debates does she mean? Stories of racism, colourism and misogyny within global majority communities as well as Islamophobia: “Since 9/11, we have seen the capitalisation of fear culture. For me, having conversations around Islamophobia and what it means, not only though the impact of a white supremacist system but around attitudes within our own community – what’s going on inside and how it impacts our young people – feels important.” Ghai was born in Kenya, to Kenyan Indian parents, and spent her first 14 years there. She signed up for her first play at the age of 11 while at boarding school and was instantly hooked. “It was Tom Sawyer and I was playing Aunt Polly. I fell in love with what I’d experienced after our first performance. And looking at the cast around me, there was every creed, culture and colour. We all celebrated each other’s differences and thrived off that. I couldn’t imagine it any other way.” She encountered a very different world after coming to Britain and launching her career as an actor. She set up a university drama society while studying psychology and sociology at Oxford Brookes and took shows to the Edinburgh festival fringe every year, producing, directing and acting. “It gave me a real sense of building something. It was exhilarating.” But on a drama course elsewhere, her eyes were opened to the limits and labels imposed on her. She remembers being told: “You’re quite a good actress but you’re Indian and you’re fat so you won’t work.” It left her feeling “floored”, she says. “I didn’t know I didn’t belong. It’s only as I moved in the profession that I thought ‘Why is everything so limited for me?’” Fifteen years on as an actor, she was still feeling confined: “I did a lot of radio, TV and theatre but I could see I was never going to be really challenged as an actor because of the roles I was getting or being seen for.” She was so disheartened she decided to leave the industry but after a heart attack and being diagnosed with lupus, she returned, now more determined to campaign for change. “I felt like I couldn’t be away from acting and storytelling. I felt we needed more pathways, we needed to give more voice to people of colour, we needed to have new leadership at the table, to diversify our boards. I couldn’t sit back and complain about what I wasn’t getting. I needed to go out and understand how we could make change and not feel that because we weren’t white we didn’t have a voice.” She signed up to the campaigning group Artistic Directors of the Future, where she is co-chair, which aims to demystify leadership. The silver lining to the pandemic is that it has given us a chance to re-evaluate and rebuild, she thinks. Just as she saw solutions, and gained strength, after hitting rock bottom, she thinks we can do the same thing collectively. “It’s been a tough time for the sector but we as artists are challenging the structures. We are thinking about how we level up and of the systems and structures in place that won’t allow for that levelling up. There’s a long way to go.” Lotus Beauty is at Hampstead theatre, London, 13 May-18 June.When Lloyd Williamson lay on his back in a GP’s clinic late last November, it was for the surgical culmination of years of soul searching. Williamson, who is 30 and from Essex, remembers wanting a family as a child, but something changed in his early 20s. “I thought: you know what? I don’t want to bring a life into this world, because it’s pretty shitty as it is and it’s only going to get worse,” he says, two weeks after his vasectomy. Williamson was largely motivated to sterilise himself by the climate crisis. Given the link between fossil-fuelled economic growth and population growth, he believes that having fewer children is one thing individuals can do to help. “We can’t offset our carbon problem on to the next generation, because it’s not fair on them,” he says. Williamson, who works as a data support officer for Essex county council (he stood unsuccessfully as a Green party councillor in Chelmsford in 2019), says he knows of other young, childless men who are thinking of doing the same thing. While reliable data on vasectomy numbers and motivations is scant, there is growing evidence to suggest that, all over the world, men without children are taking direct action. Nick Demediuk, an Australian GP and one of the world’s most prolific vasectomy clinicians, says most of his patients are fathers over the age of 35. But the doctor, who has completed more than 40,000 procedures since 1981, now estimates that about 200 of the 4,000 patients his clinic sees each year are younger men without kids. About 130 of them say they are doing it for the planet. “In the old days, it was purely lifestyle,” Demediuk says of his younger, childless patients. “They wanted to travel the world, work hard and not be stuck with a kid. And that has shifted, probably over the past three or four years, to where the environment is the dominant reason.” It should not be surprising that a generation with increased awareness of the climate emergency is asking big questions about traditional family structures. In 2019, the then 29-year-old US congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez held back tears as she gave a speech about the climate emergency. “I speak to you as a human being, a woman whose dreams of motherhood now taste bittersweet because of what I know about our children’s future,” she told a summit of mayors in Copenhagen. “Our actions are responsible for bringing their most dire possibilities into focus.” A study in 2017 said the single most effective action an individual could take in terms of helping the planet was having one fewer child; this would save more than 25 times the emissions of the next biggest undertakings (living without a car and avoiding long-haul flights). Prince Harry cited the climate when he revealed in a 2019 interview with Vogue that he would not be having more than two children. Matthew Schneider-Mayerson, an associate professor of environmental studies at Yale-NUS College in Singapore, is the author of a forthcoming book about “eco-reproductive” choice. Last year, he carried out a detailed survey of 600 people aged 27 to 45 who were worried about the climate crisis. Of these, 96% worried that their children would struggle to thrive in or even survive the worst-case climate scenarios, while 60% were concerned about the carbon footprint of their potential offspring. Schneider-Mayerson has not explored the rise of the climate vasectomy. It may still be a niche choice, often informed by other factors, including a broader ambivalence about raising children. But it raises ethical and political questions, including about controversial “overpopulation” ideologies, as well as the practical consequences of generationally imbalanced societies. Apart from anything, Schneider-Mayerson says, “it’s sad that people are being forced to factor climate change into this decision”. *** For Nate Miller (not his real name), a 36-year-old from Colorado, the election in 2016 of Donald Trump, a climate science denier, was the clincher. “I made an appointment to get a vasectomy later that week,” he says. Like Williamson, Miller, who works for an environmental charity, had grown up balancing an assumption that he would have kids with a deepening environmental conscience. “We’re driving ecosystems out of balance and causing mass extinction of countless species,” he says. “I think more people is the very last thing this planet needs.” Other forms of contraception had worked for Miller and his long-term partner, but getting a vasectomy felt like a definitive act. They found a urologist, who booked in Miller after checking he was certain of his decision. Miller also wanted to be reassured, given the widely held view that the procedure is bloody, painful and somehow emasculating. This perception is outdated, Demediuk says. The operation, which used to be more invasive and was carried out under general anaesthetic, is now typically bloodless; there is no scalpel involved. Instead, the scrotum is punctured under local anaesthetic with a tiny pair of forceps, creating a hole just big enough for the vasa deferentia – the two sperm-carrying tubes – to be drawn into the open air. The tubes are cut, sealed and popped back in. Demediuk says the hole rarely requires a dressing, much less a stitch. The process takes 15 minutes and is more than 99% effective. Miller and Williamson say they were back to normal in days. Vasectomies address the gender imbalance that still accompanies the choice and practice of birth control. They come with less risk than more invasive and less reliable methods of female contraception, including sterilisation and the coil. Yet they can be hard to come by, especially for younger, childless men. Williamson had thought about getting a vasectomy in his early 20s, but was put off by grisly stories he heard from older men who had had the procedure years ago. Williamson waited in vain for the still-elusive “male pill” until, at 25, he learned about advances in the vasectomy. He asked his GP if he could have one and was rebuffed. While there are no laws on the age at which men in the UK can get a vasectomy, the NHS advises that they may be more likely to be accepted if they are older than 30 and have children. “Your GP can refuse to carry out the procedure … if they don’t believe it’s in your best interests,” says the guidance, which also warns that reversals are unreliable, with a success rate of 55% within 10 years and only 25% thereafter. Williamson accepts that minds and circumstances can change, but he viewed the guidance as paternalistic. When he turned 30, he tried again. This time, his GP agreed, but said he would have to pay; the Mid Essex clinical commissioning group (CCG) – the GP-led body responsible for buying healthcare services in his area – withdrew funding for vasectomies in 2016 to save money. In an email, it says demand was low; it adds that vasectomies “can be accessed relatively easily without too much financial burden and there are freely available contraceptive methods for women”. Mid Essex was one of nine CCGs that cut or considered cutting funding around the same time, drawing heavy criticism from family-planning charities. When I contact NHS England to establish how widely the procedure has been withdrawn, it says I will need to speak separately to all of England’s 106 CCGs. Access and waiting lists also vary in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Reversals are rarely covered by the NHS and cost thousands of pounds. Williamson’s GP referred him to David Acorn, a GP in Essex who runs a private vasectomy clinic, one of dozens across the UK. Acorn, who charges £360 for the procedure, says Williamson was the first patient he saw who explicitly cited the climate as a reason. But he says he is getting more inquiries from younger, childless men. “I’m particularly keen to make sure they fully understand the potential permanence of what they’re asking for,” he says. Funding cuts may be part of the reason for an apparent decline in vasectomy numbers, but the privatisation of the procedure makes demand hard to track. According to NHS figures, there were almost 20,000 operations in 2010/11 and fewer than 4,500 in 2020/21. Whatever the true figure, family-planning groups are trying to rebrand “the snip” to tempt more men to share the burden of contraception. There is hope that the climate crisis may burnish the vasectomy’s progressive image. In 2012, Jonathan Stack, a 64-year-old American film-maker, co-founded World Vasectomy Day, a campaign dedicated to tackling the stigma and myths surrounding the modern vasectomy. Stack had one himself after having three children. “It’s about gender equity, family planning and more responsible masculinity,” he tells me from his home in New York. World Vasectomy Day is now an annual event and year-round programme that has worked with family-planning groups and public health bodies around the world. Clinicians, who are offered training in the latest no-scalpel technique, have performed almost 100,000 vasectomies as part of the campaign. Four or five years ago, Stack began to notice growing demand among younger, childless men. “A lot of it has to do with a feeling of economic instability and a general sense of uncertainty in life,” he says. Nonetheless, when we speak, he is surprised by an unpublished campaign report he has just received from a project in Bolivia run jointly by World Vasectomy Day, Marie Stopes Bolivia and Université Laval in Canada. In November, four Bolivian physicians received training, part of which involved performing 127 supervised vasectomies. The average age of the patients was 31 and 25% did not have children. When all the men were asked why they were getting a vasectomy, 48% said they didn’t want more kids. What stood out for Stack, though, was that 28% of the men said they were motivated by climate concerns. “Seeing this growing trend of people who don’t have enough faith in the future to believe having a child is a good decision is a little disturbing,” he says. Yet he adds: “What do we read in the news that would make us think this is a great time for kids?” Stack is not alone in having a sense of unease about the push to curb procreation. Demographers have already predicted that the global population will enter a sustained decline by the end of this century, easing demand for resources but fuelling far-reaching shifts in society. A care crisis among older people is already playing out in many parts of the world. In May, China announced it will allow couples to have three children, after the shift of its notorious one‑child policy to two children in 2016 failed to increase the plummeting birthrate. Stack is anxious to distance his campaign from theories of “overpopulation” and their longstanding overlaps with anti-immigration and often racist ideologies such as eugenics and eco-fascism. Paul Ehrlich’s landmark 1968 book The Population Bomb is credited with amplifying the environmental movement, but “populationism” has also been widely blamed for emboldening rightwing population-control and immigration policies. In 2018, the British songwriter and activist Blythe Pepino co-founded the BirthStrike movement, for people who had decided to forgo children in response to the coming “climate breakdown and civilisation collapse”. The well-meaning group made a splash, but shut its website in 2020 because the name BirthStrike “did no end of harm in allowing us to be aligned with the ‘overpopulation’ topic”. Another controversial moral philosophy, antinatalism, calls for the extinction of the human race by ending procreation. “I think there would be some concern if the climate movement becomes closely attached to antinatalism or an ethic that calculates the value of human life and carbon emissions,” says Schneider-Mayerson. *** Vasectomies don’t necessarily preclude parenting. Rodney Pohl, 26, an IT technician, is planning to foster or adopt with his wife, Carrie, who watched Pohl’s vasectomy at the SimpleVas clinic near their home in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, last June. The couple were motivated partly by weather extremes and what they foretold. A recent polar vortex had taken out the power on their street for 10 days. “We had neighbours breastfeeding small infants and we were sharing generators to try to keep their fridge going, to not waste [expressed] milk,” Pohl says. In Essex, Williamson, who is not in a long-term relationship, says he may also adopt one day. “There are more than enough children and young adults already out there who could have a loving home and family – it doesn’t have to be your own blood,” he says. Neither he nor Miller expect to regret their vasectomies. Pohl says he very occasionally feels pangs of broodiness. “But I quickly move on,” he says. Williamson says he cried after his procedure, but with relief. “It was such a weight off my mind after having all that uncertainty about bringing someone into this world,” he says. He says he wishes that governments were doing more to legislate for the climate crisis, before sharing his thoughts about what is known as “bystander apathy”. “A lot of people are happy to point and say: ‘That’s wrong,’ or film it on their phone,” he says. “I look at the world and say: ‘That’s not right; I’m going to try to do something about it.’”Soon after the brilliant It’s A Sin came out, Russell T Davies justified his decision to cast only gay actors in gay parts by saying: “They are not there to ‘act gay’ because ‘acting gay’ is a bunch of codes for a performance. You wouldn’t cast someone able-bodied and put them in a wheelchair … authenticity is leading us to joyous places.” It would be wrong to suggest that no one questioned this statement, but it became part of an ongoing conversation about casting and minorities. Davies was not, thankfully, mightily abused on social media for saying it – which is what happened last week to Maureen Lipman, after she suggested, on being asked about the casting of Helen Mirren in a biopic of Israel’s former prime minister Golda Meir, that Jewish parts should perhaps be played by Jewish actors. I’m going to claim some credit – or, for those (and it seems there are many) who hate this suggestion, responsibility – for this, because I’m aware that Lipman (like Sarah Silverman, who said something very similar as regards the castings of Kathryn Hahn as Joan Rivers and Felicity Jones as Ruth Bader Ginsburg) has read my book Jews Don’t Count. It’s a polemic expressing my opinion that, over a period of extreme intensification of the progressive conversation about representation and inclusion and microaggression and what is and isn’t offensive to minorities, one minority – Jews – has been routinely neglected. In the book, some time is devoted to the issue of casting. In terms of this conversation, casting is most directly an employment issue, a correction against previous traditions that have meant less work for minority actors. But it is also – and I would say, at its core more so – about respect. There is something disrespectful, this argument runs, about casting an able-bodied actor in a disabled part, or a cis actor in a trans part, and so on. The deaf actor Marlee Matlin expressed this well when she said: “Deaf is not a costume.” The deep truth of any marginalised identity is only available to those who live that identity. Casting a non-minority actor to mimic that identity feels, to the progressive eye, like impersonation, and impersonation may carry with it an element of mockery – or at least seem reductive, reducing the complexity of that experience by channelling it through an actor who hasn’t lived it. You may not agree with this – you may be one of those people who say actors should be allowed to act – but in the offices of casting directors, the progressive argument has been won. Even in animation, voice actors now need to correspond to the ethnicity or sexuality or gender preference or able-bodied status of their avatars. The risks of outrage if this stricture isn’t followed are too great. The Netflix animation BoJack Horseman is a stone-cold masterpiece, but the show’s creator, Raphael Bob-Waksberg, has apologised profusely because an Vietnamese American character in it, Diane Nguyen, is voiced by the not-Vietnamese at all Alison Brie. In BoJack Horseman, there is another character called Lenny Turteltaub. He’s a turtle, but a very Jewish one, a very Jewish Hollywood producer stereotype, and he’s played by JK Simmons, who is not Jewish. There has been no outcry about that, and Waksberg has seen no need to get anguished about it. This is true across the board: Jewish is the minority that you can cast with actors not of that minority, and hardly, until very recently, hear a whisper of concern. What you can hear, still, if you do raise the issue, is an extremely vehement reaction. This vehemence is about a number of confusions – many see Jews as whites, when it would be truer to say that, as far as racism goes, Jews are Schrödinger’s whites: white or non-white depending on the politics of the observer. Many instinctively see Jewishness as a religion, rather than an ethnicity, and therefore antisemitism as religious intolerance rather than racism, despite, as I’ve pointed out many times, my great-uncle being an atheist not getting him any free passes out of the Warsaw ghetto. But primarily, it’s about Jews being assumed, antisemitically, to be successful and privileged and powerful, and therefore not in need of the protections that identity politics affords other minorities. In the case of casting, that falls down as: “Well, Jews are everywhere in showbiz, so Jewish actors don’t need that leg-up.” It’s odd, then, that so many Jewish parts are not cast with Jewish actors, even when the characters and storylines are very Jewish indeed. Why, if there are so many Jews in showbiz, is Gary Oldman cast as Herman Mankiewicz, or Rachel Brosnahan as Mrs Maisel? Why did the makers of recent BBC drama Ridley Road, about antisemitism in London after the war, have to scrabble around, after I pointed out the lack of Jews in the cast, saying that the female actor playing the main character had just discovered that she had one Jewish grandfather? Why are the four main characters of the only recognisably Jewish sitcom on British TV, Friday Night Dinner, all played by non-Jews, apart from Tom Rosenthal who has said publicly that he doesn’t consider himself Jewish? If there are so many Jewish actors, they must all be quite shit, as they really aren’t getting the Jewish jobs. And more importantly, as I say, this issue is not really about who gets the work. It’s about the idea that minority experience should be expressed by those who truly know it, rather than caricatured by those who don’t. It would be an interesting conclusion, given 2,000 years of persecution, that the representation of Jewish identity doesn’t deserve this complexity. Despite the use in this argument of the term Jewface, when I watch non-Jews play Jews, it isn’t just about the face. The phrase I use, to cover the whole range of tics and shrugs and stooping and whining and kvetching like I saw in a recent production of Little Shop of Horrors for the playing of the character of Mr Mushnik by a non-Jewish actor – is Nebbish Being. Having a non-Jew do Nebbish Being – if you follow the same logic that would apply if this was a black, gay, trans, disabled or any other minority character, playing-up stereotypical aspects of that minority – is disrespectful, or at least not true, to Jews. It’s complex, all this. I note that many Jews themselves feel uncomfortable with the demand that Jews should play Jews, both for reasons to do with acting but also, more deeply, because many Jews are uncomfortable in general with asking for parity with other minorities within all the microaggressions and callings-out of identity-politics-land. My position on this lack of parity is: whether you want parity or not, it’s worth pointing out. It’s worth saying. I – and Maureen Lipman and Sarah Silverman – have stressed that, yes, actors should be allowed to act. But that isn’t the world we or casting directors live in now, and the question then has to be asked: why should things be different for Jews? In all the aggressive tweeting about Lipman, I saw many photos posted triumphantly of when she once played a vicar in a TV show. Social media loves of course an Aha! meme, and those who hated Lipman for saying her Golda Meir thing posted it luxuriously, as if it proved her bang-to-rights wrong. But minority casting is not a two-way street. Dev Patel can play, obviously, all the south Asian parts he gets offered, and he can also now play David Copperfield. Michael Fassbender, however, is not going to be up any time soon for Gandhi. The new casting is an industry-wide attempt to right a previous structural wrong, which means that minorities are now both given a fenced-off right to play themselves, and also allowed to play parts from the mainstream culture. If Jews are part of this, the same ring-fencing should apply to them as regards Jewish parts, but also shouldn’t stop them from being cast as non-Jewish characters from the majority Christian culture too. Which means Lipman can say this about Meir and Mirren – and play all the vicars and priests she wants. But this of course is to imagine that Jews are seen as a real minority. This is to imagine that Jews are understood as much in need of wrongs righting as any other minority. The dial is shifting a little. Tamsin Greig said recently that she “probably shouldn’t” have played a Jewish mother in Friday Night Dinner. This is not the kind of exhaustive apology that some performers, including myself, have given for the historic transgression of playing minorities when they are not a member of that minority. And here’s the thing. I don’t need or want Greig to apologise (she’s a unique case anyway, being a practising Christian with some Jewish ancestry). I think, in fact, that Greig was brilliant in Friday Night Dinner, that she got as close as possible, without caricature, to the reality of writer Robert Popper’s suburban Jewish mum. I believe two things at once – that in an ideal world, non-Jews should be allowed to play Jews, but the fact this allowance already exists, and has up to this point received very little pushback is, in the modern casting context, a discrepancy, and one that needs to be deconstructed, because it says a lot about how people see Jews. It is, as I say, complex. At the end of the day, I don’t know the answer. But I think that I – and Maureen Lipman and any other Jew – should not be abused for asking the question. • Jews Don’t Count by David Baddiel is available in hardback and published in paperback on 3 February. • This article was amended on 12 January 2022. An earlier version referred to Tom Rosenthal having publicly “disavowed” his Jewish heritage; this was revised to “does not consider himself Jewish”.The Bay 9pm, ITV It’s the third outing for this pleasing Morecambe-based detective drama, but there’s a big change – Marsha Thomason will be stepping into the lead as family liaison officer DS Jenn Townsend, taking over from Morven Christie’s DS Lisa Armstrong (who has left the show). In the first of six parts, Townsend is thrown straight into the deep end when a body is found on her first day on the job. It’s the kind of crime drama that is perfectly made for January nights. Hollie Richardson Kirstie and Phil’s Love It Or List It 8pm, Channel 4 Tonight, a pair of Baptist ministers with a four-bedroom house in Alnwick, Northumberland, turn to Kirstie and Phil for property help. Having grown up on the same street, Chris is ready for a change of scenery but Caroline is too attached to their home – and the neighbours who brought comfort when she had cancer treatment. HR Landscape Artist of the Year 8pm, Sky Arts Stephen Mangan and Joan Bakewell commence this year’s search for Britain’s best landscape painter; once again, the judges are artist Tai-Shan Schierenberg, curator Kathleen Soriano and art historian Kate Bryan. In tonight’s first heat, eight artists attempt to capture the mysterious beauty of the giant biomes at Cornwall’s Eden Project in just four hours. Ali Catterall Britain’s Most Expensive Houses 9pm, Channel 4 Property perusing at its most outrageous. Episode three takes a nosy around a £12m penthouse on the Thames, a Surrey house featured in Hollywood hits such as Beauty and the Beast and Star Wars, and a castle on a 12-hectare estate in Northumberland. HR Mandy 10pm, BBC Two Diane Morgan fans get two comedy doses tonight. First up, Mandy and Lola take a trip on a cruise ship and discover a sinister meaning behind choc-ices. Then, Anna Maxwell Martin guest stars in an episode that sees Mandy train to be an astronaut (yes you read that correctly). HR Jimmy Carr’s I Literally Just Told You 10pm, Channel 4 Is this newish Carr vehicle working? It certainly upends the usually rigid rules of quizzes by requiring four contestants to recall details of things that happen during the process of recording. But while the misdirects, fake-outs and Carr’s smarmy wit can be fun for the viewer, it all seems rather gruelling for those taking part. Graeme Virtue Film choice Eternals (Chloé Zhao, 2021), Disney+ Here, Marvel stirs a whole new set of myths into its melting pot of fantastical adventures. The Eternals – including Gemma Chan’s Sersi, Richard Madden’s Ikaris and Angelina Jolie’s Thena – are superpowered aliens who have protected humanity down the millennia from destructive beasts called Deviants. In the present day, the group assemble again to fight a resurgence of the creatures, while discovering the true reason behind their mission. It’s portentous stuff but has good action, a dab of wit (courtesy of Kumail Nanjiani) and a lovely gold filigree look to it. Simon WardellParents are being warned to look out for signs of a non-Covid virus that is “rife” in the UK amid a surge in reports of children struggling to breathe. The British Lung Foundation (BLF) said Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) is staging a comeback this winter after lockdown last year meant there were fewer infections than would normally occur. It is concerned that this year children will have “much lower immunity” at a time when the NHS is already under extreme pressure. “In the last few weeks, we have noticed a surge in calls from parents who are worried about their child’s breathing,” said Caroline Fredericks, a respiratory nurse who supports the BLF’s helpline. “Most of these parents have never heard of RSV which is worrying.” RSV is common in babies and children. Almost all will have had it by the time they are two. It may cause a cough or cold but for some it can lead to bronchiolitis, an inflammatory infection of the lower airways which can make it hard to breathe. The early symptoms of bronchiolitis are similar to those of a common cold but can develop over a few days into a high temperature, a dry and persistent cough, difficulty feeding, and wheezing. While many cases clear up in two to three weeks, some children will end up being hospitalised. “There are steps parents can take to make their child more comfortable at home if their RSV develops into bronchiolitis, such as keeping their fluid intake up, helping them to breathe more easily by holding them upright when feeding and giving them paracetamol or ibuprofen suitable for infants,” said Fredericks. The BLF has already seen a 400% rise in calls to its helpline from parents worried about their child having breathing difficulties in the last three months compared to the same period the year before. During that time an estimated 1,000 children have required hospital care in England alone, it said. It is issuing new guidance for parents which includes asking anyone who has a cough or cold to stay away from young children, making sure that anyone who handles their child washes their hands regularly and to avoid smoking around young children and babies. BLF clinical lead, Dr Andy Whittamore, said: “In general practice, we are seeing a lot of children with coughs and viruses that weren’t circulating last year and so their immunity is lowered. “Doctors on the ground are concerned that alongside a rapid increase in cases of Covid-19, we are also going to see a surge in diseases like bronchiolitis. Some babies do develop severe symptoms with the RSV virus, and warning signs to look out for include if they refuse to feed, are becoming very breathless or if they are breathing in a shallow or irregular way.” Chloe-Ann Ford, 22, from the Isle of Wight, said she knows first-hand how terrifying RSV can be as her baby Teddy, who is 12 weeks old, was hospitalised with bronchiolitis caused by RSV last November. “We had to spend five nights in hospital and Teddy was kept on oxygen,” she said. “On one occasion, he stopped breathing for 28 seconds which was terrifying. “I’d never heard of it [RSV] before and didn’t know how dangerous it could be. Thankfully, Teddy is now recovered but I want all parents of young children to be aware of RSV and to get medical help if their child finds it hard to feed, becomes very breathless or breathes in a shallow, irregular way. It could save their life.”There’s a rape alarm, stashed somewhere in a drawer in my bedroom. We – the young women – were given them in the first week of university, when some of us had just been released into the world for the first time. In a box under the drawer, there’s a small can of Elnett hairspray. I remember buying two: one for the beehive I was rocking at the time, the other for spraying a man in the face should he attack me, a tip I had read about in Cosmopolitan magazine, because pepper spray isn’t legal in the UK. For a while I kept these in the pocket of my vintage fur coat, until the coat fell apart as I stood on an escalator at Angel tube station (serves me right), and they were forgotten. I remembered the existence of these items, their ultimate futility, when I read about the new women’s safety app backed by the Home Office, created in response to last year’s huge outcry about violence against women. The app, which tracks users’ journeys home, has been rightly criticised by experts as doing nothing to solve the underlying problem of misogyny. As far as I can see, it simply codifies the safety behaviour in which women already engage: “Text me when you get home.” The app gives you a monitored route, and if you move more than 40 metres from it or are still for three minutes, the app asks you if you’re OK. If you don’t reply, it sends a notification to one of your “guardians” (a friend or family member, not patronising or loaded language at all), who can check on you and alert the police. The shadow minister for domestic violence and safeguarding, Jess Phillips, has referred to it as a “sticking plaster”. I have already mentally consigned it to the dressing table, along with the rape alarm and the hairspray and the myriad other inventions I’ve read about in the course of the 10 years since I was attacked by a stranger on a London street: the straw that tells you if you’ve been spiked, the anti-rape underwear. Please, spare me more attempts to “innovate” our way out of a problem that demands widespread structural change. This app would not have saved me the trauma of a stranger’s hands around my neck, slowly squeezing the life out of me. Perhaps it might have alerted my “guardian” to the fact that I hadn’t moved for three minutes, though if I hadn’t moved, I might have been brain-dead within five. While writing this, I Googled “how long does it take to strangle someone to death?”, but found myself having to close the tab – because, hoo boy, reading about it was still too much, and healing can never be total. In any case, there was an off-duty police officer living nearby who heard my screams and alerted his colleagues, who did not arrive in time. Did he come out of his house? No, he did not. No one did. A passerby came to my aid, eventually. I’m wary to say what else saved me, because the extended implication is that it could have saved other women too – and really, it’s a roll of the dice that depends on so many factors. How your fight or flight kicks in, how big the man is, whether he has a weapon. At about the same time, some other man was dragging women off the street into people’s front gardens and raping them, and some of them were freezing in fear. The fact that I did not freeze in fear is testament to nothing except the cocktail of chemicals in my animal brain at that time. It’s true that I had the self-defence skills, imparted by my mother (thanks, Mum!), and I do believe that self-defence should be taught in schools, but again, it hardly solves the underlying problem. And besides, how sad it makes me to think of all the women out there saying firmly to their little girls: “Knee him in the goolies, gouge him in the eyes, scream as loud as you can.” How sick it makes me, that I’ll probably have to say the same to my own daughter if I have one. I’m also tired of writing about this. I’d like my writing to be powered by joy – at least some of the time – but it’s hard, when you keep seeing the same ill-informed initiatives over and over again, the same mealy mouthed platitudes. Will I see a properly funded, cohesive violence against women strategy in my lifetime? Or will I have to carry on writing variations on the same theme for the rest of my writing career? When do I get to not feel this angry? It all makes me want to scream and shout. The extra police in nightclubs, the “flag down a bus” advice, the AI-operated drones, all of it. The only thing that I find encouraging is the increasing numbers of women, many of them young, who are sick to the back teeth of it all and are taking to the streets, boycotting clubs, raising their voices. The way the vigil for Sarah Everard was policed was a travesty, but the action itself gave me hope. We women at least have each other, though we could do with more men on board, as ever. I predict that these policies will eventually be consigned to a drawer, gathering dust like all those rape alarms, relics of another failed brainstorming session, leaving us where we were before, have always been, since the dawn of time: fighting, or fleeing, or freezing. Rolling the dice. Hoping to live. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support for rape and sexual abuse on 0808 802 9999 in England and Wales, 0808 801 0302 in Scotland, or 0800 0246 991 in Northern Ireland. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.html Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett is a Guardian columnistThe crane (Grus grus) is a very large bird – the tallest species in Europe – so you’d think it would be easy to find. But the RSPB reserve at West Sedgemoor is not only very large, but out of bounds to visitors, making my task a lot trickier. Fortunately, the viewpoint at the nearby Swell Wood reserve allows me to scan across this vast wetland. And usually, after a few minutes or so, I am able to pick up a pair or two of these stately waterbirds, feeding in one of the waterlogged fields below. Standing tall and proud, their feathers sticking out behind like a Victorian lady’s bustle, they look almost human. Perhaps that’s why cranes are so revered in cultures all over the world. For more than four centuries, after they were driven out by the draining of wetlands and hunting for medieval feasts, cranes were only an occasional visitor to Britain. But in the late 1970s they returned to the Norfolk Broads, establishing a small breeding population. The cranes here in Somerset were reintroduced a decade ago and are thriving. Seeing them take to the air, while uttering their haunting, echoing calls, reinforces the importance of restoring these wetlands and bringing back the birds that used to live here so long ago.One in seven people who have tested positive for Covid could still be infectious if released from isolation upon receiving a negative lateral flow result after five days, new data suggests. Across the UK people are now allowed to leave self-isolation on day seven, provided they have had two negative lateral flow tests in the past 24 hours and do not have a fever. However, the prime minister has indicated he is in favour of further reducing the quarantine time to five days, if backed by scientific evidence. Experts have cautioned there is presently little data to back the move. According to work previously released by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), the proportion of people estimated to remain infectious five days after the onset of Covid symptoms, or a positive Covid test, is 31%. A small Japanese study has similarly suggested a substantial proportion of those infected with the Omicron variant remain infectious at five days. New estimates, released by the UKHSA, have suggested the proportion may still remain high even if lateral flow tests are combined with at least five days of isolation. According to a new report, which is not based on data specific to Omicron, a number of scenarios were modelled including five days of self-isolation followed by five lateral flow tests on days five to nine, with self-isolation ending after a single negative test result. The team then compared the proportion of infectious people who would be released in this scenario with the situation after 10 full days of self-isolation. “This increased the proportion of people infectious when released from self-isolation from 5% to 15%,” the team write. The UKHSA has previously noted that a similar proportion of infectious people – 16% – would be released in a scenario of a seven-day self-isolation period alone, noting this would be “a notably poor solution”. Modelling from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine has found “the number of infectious days in the community can be reduced to almost zero” by requiring at least two consecutive days of negative lateral flow tests, “regardless of the number of days’ wait until testing again after initially testing positive”. However, the authors have cautioned that if most individuals are found to test positive for more than five days, the approach may not address the staffing crisis as desired. Prof Lawrence Young, a virologist from the University of Warwick, said: “As the UKHSA data attests, reducing the isolation period to five days runs the risk of highly infectious people returning to work or school and could only be introduced with strict enforcement of lateral flow test,” he said. “This raises a concern about compliance – will people use and report their lateral flow test – and requires plentiful supplies of these tests.” Prof Deborah Dunn-Walters, a professor of immunology at the University of Surrey, said “the public would need to be clearly informed” of the risks involved in leaving isolation early. “[I] can’t imagine anything worse than folks going to visit their vulnerable relatives thinking it is safe when it isn’t,” she said.Outside a small brick house shared by four families, Daniela Prada, who is heavily pregnant, gathers guava leaves to make a tea for her two-year-old son. “My baby gets sick a lot,” she says, boiling a pot of water in her outdoor kitchen. “He always has diarrhoea and last night he had a fever. Most of the time I give him natural medicine.” In an identical house nearby, town leader Oscar Lurici says fevers are a part of life in Eyiyo Quibo village on the Beni River in northern Bolivia. People of all ages suffer from debilitating head and body aches, bouts of vomiting and diarrhoea, memory loss and tiredness. Some children show signs of cognitive development delays. “We do not know for sure what causes these sicknesses,” Lurici says. “We are starting to think this is all because of water contamination from the mercury found in the mining waste.” Lurici’s 17-year-old son, also called Oscar, began suffering from exhaustion, aches and trembling in early 2019. Various doctors diagnosed ailments such as Parkinson’s disease and anaemia. One suggested the illness came from the contaminated river water. Before the year was out, Oscar had died. Bolivia has long been criticised for using mercury in small-scale gold mining, and growing evidence shows that mercury contamination is causing illnesses in poor communities. Mercury is used across the country, in mining projects in the cordilleras of the Andes and on dredgers extracting gold from the sediment at the bottom of waterways. The uncontrolled disposal of mercury waste creates toxic flows in Bolivia’s river systems. Known as the “people of the river”, the Esse Ejjas survived as nomads for generations, hunting and fishing along the region’s waterways. After settling in Eyiyo Quibo, men and boys continued to fish, spending days travelling the river, camping on its banks and working in pairs to fill their long, narrow wooden boats with catfish and piranhas. In cases around the world, including a study in the Brazilian Amazon published by the International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health in 2020, researchers have found fish to be heavily contaminated with mercury, and believe fish-based diets in mining areas are causing increased mercury levels in indigenous people. This could explain some of the illnesses in Eyiyo Quibo. In 2019, representatives of the Bolivian volunteer organisation Reacción Climática took hair samples from women at Euiyo Quibo, including Prada. In total, 64 samples were taken from Euiyo Quibo and Portachuelo, another Esse Ejja community 380km (235 miles) north, for a study by the International Pollutants Elimination Network (Ipen) to evaluate levels of mercury in people living near small mines in four Latin American countries: Brazil, Venezuela, Colombia and Bolivia. Published in June 2021, the study found that women from the Esse Ejja communities, the only participants not living near a mine, had by far the highest levels of mercury – on average almost eight times the accepted threshold of one part per million (ppm), with one sample reaching 32.4ppm. The results suggested a correlation between mercury in the body and fish consumed. The findings rang alarm bells internationally. In September, the UN special rapporteurs on toxics and human rights and on the rights of indigenous peoples, Dr Marcos Orellana and José Francisco Cali Tzay, submitted a letter to the Bolivian government calling out Bolivia’s inaction on the regulation, use, and trade of mercury, with a focus on small-scale gold mining. They gave Bolivia 60 days to respond. In Eyiyo Quibo, where families eat river fish daily, fear is rising. “Sometimes babies here are born disfigured, or sick,” Prada says, sitting on the dirt floor of her kitchen. “Now I worry about the health of my children. I worry that they get sick, that they will die from the contaminated fish.” On 8 December, on a hotel patio in Rurrenabaque, north Bolivia, a group of worried Esse Ejjas people huddled around a laptop to hear Orellana speaking at an online event hosted by Reacción Climática and the Bolivian Documentation and Information Centre (Cedib). “Here is where a community lives their life according to their ancient traditions in close relation to their natural resources, including rivers, and they may have been contaminated by activities that are being carried out in other places and for the benefit of other people,” Orellana said. “That is a clear example of environmental injustice.” Orellana’s main issue was the Bolivian government’s lack of engagement with the Minamata Convention on Mercury, an agreement of 128 countries to curb or eliminate almost all uses of mercury, including in small-scale gold mining, which came into force in 2017. Bolivia ratified the agreement in 2015, committing to develop and execute plans to reduce and control mercury markets and protect vulnerable populations from contamination. Yet while neighbouring countries such as Peru have been curbing or eliminating mercury imports, a Cedib report from September 2020 showed that the mercury economy in Bolivia was larger than would be required for the country’s gold output, suggesting Bolivia was now the regional hub of illicit sales. Two days after the online event, Orellana received a response from the attorney general of Bolivia. The letter highlighted state pilot programmes working with miners to promote new technologies to reduce mercury use, and reiterated the laws and Bolivian constitution that call for the protection of the rights and health of indigenous people. Importantly, the document referred to a two-year project to develop a national action plan to address mercury contamination under the Minamata agreement, and another to accelerate the meeting of the commitments of the convention through a multimillion-dollar regional project with its neighbours. The recent international attention has prompted regional and national mining cooperatives to ask the Bolivian government for alternatives to mercury to use in gold mining. “We do not intend to do more damage. On the contrary we want to do responsible mining,” Vicente Choque, president of the Federation of Gold Mining Cooperatives of the North of La Paz, said in a press conference after the government’s response. “We ask the mining authorities, the government and others to propose policies to solve these problems.” For now, the importation, sale, use and re-exportation of mercury in Bolivia remains uncontrolled and the Beni River continues to be poisoned by gold mining activity, its waters reaching some of the world’s most biodiverse regions, where mining activity encroaches on the homes of an unmeasurable number of indigenous people, including the Esse Ejjas. In Eyiyo Quipo, the fishers continue to bring in their catch for families who rely on the fish for food and income. Prada continues to pick medicinal plants to ease her son’s fevers and pains, and worries about what illnesses she may be passing on to her unborn child, due this month. Orellana welcomes the goldminers’ statement as a positive step, but says the government needs to “establish a policy that allows it to decisively control and reduce the use of mercury in small-scale gold mining”. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Top story: ‘No longer a question of if PM will go, it is when’ Hello, I’m Warren Murray and here’s what we have in front of us. Boris Johnson is facing intense pressure from senior Conservatives to publicly confess he attended a rule-breaking garden party in Downing Street, with the Scottish Tory leader suggesting the prime minister should resign if he broke Covid rules. They are awaiting his explanation at prime minister’s questions today. Senior Conservatives have said MPs are discussing who would replace Johnson. One said Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, could be prime minister within months: “It is no longer a question of if the PM will go, it is when.” It has been claimed that Martin Reynolds – Johnson’s aide who threw out the invitation for about 100 Downing Street staff for the “bring your own booze” party on 20 May 2020 – also attended another alcohol-fuelled gathering for No 10 staff on 18 December, the same night as a controversial press office party. A No 10 spokesperson said of the event allegedly attended by Reynolds: “A number of private office staff worked late into the evening on the Covid response.” If police officers saw laws broken while on guard at Downing Street they would be expected to report it, a former Scotland Yard assistant commissioner says this morning. With the Met under pressure to investigate, Robert Quick, who was once in charge of protection operations for Downing Street, said: “The garden at Downing Street would be monitored by police officers. You would have thought the police would be reasonably aware of what was going on there.” * * * Smart motorways brought to halt – The rollout of smart motorways has been suspended by the government until at least 2025. The motorways, which convert the hard shoulder to a live running lane, have been heavily criticised by safety campaigners and relatives of people who have died in crashes after being left unable to find safe refuge when their vehicles broke down. Schemes to convert stretches of the M3, M25, M62 and M40 will be put on ice until five years’ worth of safety data are available, ministers have said. The government has promised £900m for safety measures on existing smart motorways in the meantime, including more emergency refuge areas. * * * Midweek catch-up &gt; Novak Djokovic has blamed his agent for an “administrative mistake” in declaring he had not travelled in the two weeks before his flight to Australia and apologised for an “error of judgment” in attending an event after testing positive to Covid-19. &gt; The UK government is being sued over its net zero climate strategy, which lawyers argue illegally fails to include the policies needed to deliver the promised cuts in emissions. &gt; YouTube is a major conduit of online disinformation and misinformation worldwide and is not doing enough to tackle the spread of falsehoods on its platform, according to a global coalition of factchecking organisations. &gt; In the US, Joe Biden is pushing hard for the Senate to set aside the “filibuster” rule, which Republicans are using to block the protection of citizens’ voting rights. &gt; UK households have suffered the sharpest fall in the amount of cash they have available to spend for almost eight years, amid a worsening cost of living crisis driven by high inflation and rising energy bills. &gt; Waitrose is to start selling “tearless onions” that are the result of decades of selective cross-breeding. * * * Covid latest – One in seven people who have tested positive for Covid could still be infectious if released from isolation upon receiving a negative lateral flow result after five days, new data suggests. The prime minister has indicated he favours reducing the quarantine time from seven to five days. Britain’s parents are being warned to look out for signs of the Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV), which can leave children struggling to breathe. Covid lockdowns last year meant there were fewer RSV infections than normal, so this year there may be less immunity among children. Keep up with Covid developments at our live blog. * * * Tuition scheme branded failure – Labour says the national tutoring programme (NTP) is failing children and taxpayers, with just 10% of this academic year’s target for children receiving one-to-one or small group tutoring from NTP tuition partners reached so far. Official figures show headteachers in England are favouring their own school-led tuition programmes over the national scheme, which was controversially awarded to the Dutch multinational Randstad. The Department for Education has said pupils in England began just over 300,000 tutoring courses last term and insisted the NTP was on track to deliver its target of 2m courses this academic year. DfE figures also revealed that more children stayed off school last week because of Covid than at the end of last term. * * * Demining rat sniffs his last – A rat that won a British heroism award for finding landmines in Cambodia has died peacefully in retirement. Magawa, a giant African pouched rat originally from Tanzania, helped clear mines from about 225,000 square metres of land – the equivalent of 42 football pitches – over the course of his career after being trained to sniff out explosives. He was retired from the field in June of last year. Landmines and unexploded bombs remain a huge danger in Cambodia, with four reported deaths just in the last few days. Today in Focus podcast: The winter of Omicron Hospital trusts across England have declared “critical incidents” in record numbers as the Omicron wave brings rising admissions and staff sickness. But the strains on NHS capacity long predate Covid, says Denis Campbell. Lunchtime read: Vasectomies for the planet! With the climate crisis becoming ever more urgent, a growing number of young, childless men are taking the drastic decision of being sterilised for environmental reasons, writes Simon Usborne. Sport Trevor Bayliss, the World Cup-winning former England head coach, has emerged as the in-house favourite to take charge of the Australian men’s team should Justin Langer’s contract not be renewed after the Ashes. Goals from Jan Bednarek, Armando Broja and Che Adams alongside an own goal from Álvaro Fernández gave Southampton a 4-1 win over Brentford in the Premier League. Newcastle are poised to make Chris Wood their second January signing, with the striker scheduled for a medical after the club agreed to meet the release clause of about £20m in his Burnley contract. The Leicester captain, Ellis Genge, has apologised to his teammates for losing his head at Wasps on Sunday and collecting a yellow card which he believes “potentially cost us the game”. The Yorkshire interim coach Ryan Sidebottom has apologised for using “a poor choice of words” when suggesting in a television interview that the county should “forget” the racism scandal that has engulfed the club. Emma Raducanu, the US Open champion, lost her first match of the year in 55 minutes, falling 6-0, 6-1 to Elena Rybakina in Sydney, while Andy Murray defeated Viktor Durasovic in his first-round match. And Kelechi Iheanacho’s excellent first-half goal handed Nigeria a deserved 1-0 victory over a below-par Egypt in their Africa Cup of Nations Group D clash in Garoua. Business Asian stock markets followed Wall Street higher on Wednesday after Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell said monetary policy would return to normal and interest rates might be raised earlier than planned. Shanghai, Tokyo, Hong Kong and Sydney advanced. Oil prices edged higher. Futures trading suggests the FTSE should be half a per cent higher at the open as well. A pound is worth $1.364 and €1.199 at time of writing. The papers We have a separate round-up of the major front pages today – a summary follows. The Times’ headline says “Say sorry or doom us all, ministers tell Johnson”. The Telegraph says “Johnson losing Tory support” and the junior minister Michael Ellis is shown bearing the brunt of MPs’ anger in the Commons. The Guardian captures the Tory anger too and gives prominence to the suggestion of Douglas Ross, the Tory leader in Scotland, that Johnson should resign if he broke Covid rules. The Daily Mail asks: “Is the party over for PM?”, calling it the “gravest crisis of his premiership”. The Mirror is more emphatic, saying “The party’s over, Boris”. In the Metro, “Contempt for the victims” is the headline, alongside Johnson appearing to “smirk” during an interview about the crisis. The Financial Times says “Johnson faces ‘potentially terminal’ showdown over Downing Street parties” with PMQs taking place today and two polls showing majority support for his resignation. The Sun has the strapline “No 10 garden partygate” and reports Johnson “went into hiding” … “It’s my party and I’ll lie low if I want to” is the headline. The i says “PM’s future in jeopardy as Tories rage at lockdown drinks party”. The Express does its thing and claims support within the party is still strong for Johnson after “delivering Brexit and winning the war against Covid” … “Don’t blow it now, PM!” it urges in the headline. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendNovak Djokovic has released a statement he says will be his last before the Australian government decides whether to re-cancel his visa. In it, the world No 1 male tennis player blamed his agent for an incorrect declaration about his pre-flight travel and acknowledged an “error of judgment” in knowingly attending an event while Covid-positive. So what did we learn about the timeline of Djokovic’s diagnosis and movements before his travel to Australia – and what are the questions still unanswered in the visa cancellation saga? What did Djokovic say before arrival in Australia? On 1 January, Djokovic’s agent submitted an Australian travel declaration on his behalf, declaring “no” when asked: “Have you travelled or will you travel in the 14 days prior to your flight to Australia?” Djokovic had obtained an exemption to vaccination requirements from the Tennis Australia chief medical officer, approved by a Victorian government independent review board, stating that he had received a positive PCR test to Covid-19 “recorded on” 16 December. What did Djokovic say in court documents? Djokovic’s affidavit to the federal circuit court challenging his visa cancellation set out this timeline: 18 November – the Australian government granted him a visa. 16 December – he “was tested and diagnosed with Sars-CoV-2”. 22 December – his second PCR test returned a negative result. 1 January – he authorised his agent to submit his travel declaration. 2 January – he received a border travel permit from the Victorian government. 4 January – he flew from Spain to Melbourne via Dubai. 5 January 11.30pm – he arrived in Melbourne. 6 January – his visa was cancelled. What inconsistencies emerged? Guardian Australia and others reported that Djokovic appeared at public events in the days after his 16 December test result despite Serbia’s rules requiring 14 days of self-isolation. These included a ceremony for the unveiling of a stamp in his honour in Belgrade, which he posted about on Twitter, and an event at the Tennis Association of Belgrade for an award ceremony on 17 December. On 18 December, the French newspaper L’Équipe said he took part in an interview and its Champion of Champions awards photoshoot in Belgrade. Djokovic was pictured on the streets of Belgrade in a social media post dated 25 December, in apparent contradiction of his declaration form that stated he had not travelled in the two weeks before his flight to Australia, which Australian Border Force began to investigate. What does Djokovic say now? In Djokovic’s Instagram statement on Wednesday he set out the following timeline: 14 December – he attended a basketball game in Belgrade after which it was reported that a number of people tested positive with Covid. 16 December – he took a rapid antigen test which was negative and a PCR test. 17 December – he attended a tennis event in Belgrade to present awards to children, after testing negative again on a rapid test. “I was asymptomatic and felt good, and I had not received the notification of a positive PCR test result until after that event,” Djokovic wrote. 18 December – despite now knowing he had tested positive, he attended his tennis centre in Belgrade to uphold a “long-standing commitment for a L’Equipe interview” because he “felt obliged” to and “didn’t want to let the journalist down”. “While I went home after the interview to isolate for the required period, on reflection, this was an error of judgment and I accept that I should have rescheduled this commitment,” Djokovic said. Why does it matter? Djokovic’s statement on Wednesday that he did not learn of his positive test result until after the event on 17 December follows his own statement to the court that he was “tested and diagnosed” on 16 December and Tennis Australia’s chief medical officer’s letter that his positive result was “recorded on” 16 December. Djokovic’s acknowledgment that his agent made an “administrative mistake” in “ticking the incorrect box” on his Australian travel declaration will arm the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, with another potential ground to cancel his visa. Hawke has the power to cancel the visa if he is satisfied of a ground such as this, or the original ground that an unvaccinated person might pose a risk to public health, and that cancellation is in the public interest. What hasn’t Djokovic explained? Djokovic’s statement did not address a Der Spiegel report claiming anomalies in the apparently positive PCR test of 16 December. On Monday, Der Spiegel claimed that when it scanned the QR code belonging to Djokovic’s PCR test at 1.19pm German time it said: “Test result Negative.” However an hour later, after another scan, it said: “Positive.” On Tuesday, Der Spiegel said it had found an anomaly in the timestamp for the digital version of Djokovic’s positive test which, it claimed, indicated the result may actually be from 26 December and not 16 December. Spiegel acknowledged the timestamp could also reflect when the result was downloaded. When asked about Djokovic’s PCR test on Monday, his brother Djordje insisted the entire process was public and “all documents are legal”. Wednesday’s social media post also didn’t explain why Djokovic didn’t wear a mask when he visited the children while awaiting his PCR test result. He said he took a rapid antigen test before going to the event “and it was negative” – presumably a false negative. The Instagram statement further didn’t address why he didn’t tell L’Equipe he was positive at the time of the interview and photoshoot.Remember when the media were obsessed with murderous millennials? There was a period, some years back, when every other article was about how millennials were killing everything from the diamond industry to napkins to capitalism. (Alas, we didn’t quite manage to top that last one.) Anyway, we had a good run, but we millennials are old now; we have kids and cricks in our necks. It is gen Z’s turn to pick up the sword. And what do you know? It seems they already have. Their first victim? The word “diet”. According to CNN, diet drinks are disappearing from supermarket shelves and being replaced with identical products labelled as “zero sugar”. “Younger people just don’t like the word ‘diet’,” it reported the chief marketing officer at PepsiCo Beverages North America saying at an industry conference last month. “No gen Z wants to be on a diet these days.” According to a report by the market research company Mintel last year: “While the diet designation may be associated with strict regimes or deprivation, the ‘zero’ designation has fewer negative connotations, corresponding with simply a cleaner profile.” Credit where it is due: gen Z’s tastes have been shaped by their elders. The word “diet”, along with the strict calorie counting that went along with it, started going out of fashion years ago. “Body positivity” became all the rage and the idea that you might not feel good about your body became slightly embarrassing. Unrealistic beauty ideals were still being shoved down people’s throats, but you couldn’t really admit that they were influencing you. People stopped talking about dieting and starting gushing about woolly concepts such as “wellness” and “clean eating” – which are often just diets in disguise. “Diet” may have become a dirty word, but dieting is by no means dead – it has just gone into stealth mode. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistA couple of years ago, after a bad academic year, I’d thought things would get better over the summer. They didn’t. I kept walking out of shops without buying what I’d gone in for, because it felt wrong to be taking up space and expecting attention. I couldn’t buy train tickets, even at the machine, because other people deserved to go first and, as soon as there was someone behind me, I gave up mid-transaction. I wasn’t eating much – food was for other people – but at the same time I was travelling and appearing at literary events and festivals, confident on stage as I’d been confident in the classroom all year. It seemed to me that my low estimation of myself off stage was correct and so I didn’t think to seek help any more than I’d seek help for believing that rain is wet. One day in September (kids at school, students still on summer vacation, a time when work can be done from a train or hotel), I was in Paris, changing trains, really, but still with enough sense to know that a person arriving at night and leaving the next day might as well leave late the next day and give herself a day in Paris. I wasn’t sure it would work, knew myself perfectly capable of walking the streets hour after hour telling myself that any competent person would be enjoying museums and shops and cafes and what kind of privileged neurotic steals a day from her work and her family and then doesn’t even have the guts to buy a croissant, days off are wasted on me and I don’t deserve … I knew the city, a bit, from teenaged (mis)adventures, and I set off into the Marais, hungry from missed meals the day before and carrying a backpack too heavy with books. Sunlight through plane trees, the streets still quiet. Old stone, balconies, geraniums, city squares with those perfectly geometric arrangements of trees and municipal planting that we don’t do in England. I sauntered. I passed a couple of cafes where people sat outside with newspapers, café au lait, tartines. I paused to read menus, though I knew what they’d say and I knew what I wanted, une tasse de chocolat chaud et des tartines au beurre, the breakfast offered by my friend’s mamie every morning in the French Augusts of my teens – in delightful contrast to my sugar-free, wholegrain upbringing in Manchester. There was one cafe in a colonnade, overlooking a garden across which children hurried to school, several people breakfasting alone, and several free tables. I could maybe, I thought, I might not panic if – I did. The ancestral voices were too loud for chocolate and white bread but not so loud I couldn’t order fruit and tea (you do know you could buy that down the road for tuppence ha’penny, you know you’ve just spent all that money on some leaves and hot water). I sat there, in the sun, reading and sipping, almost like a real person who was allowed to be there. I tipped the waiter almost like someone who wasn’t raised by Yorkshire folk. I strolled on. The Picasso museum was closed, but I found it funny rather than another symptom of moral failure that I had, yet again, tried to go to a European art museum on a Monday. Shops began to open. Presents for the children, I thought. A box of patisserie – tissue paper, ribbon, smelling of French butter – that will be a nuisance on the train but a small miracle at home in Coventry after dinner tonight. I backed out of the first place I tried – too grand, not for the likes of me – but managed well enough at the second, and then, wandering into the Pletzl in the Marais, I found a Jewish bakery selling some of the cakes of the other side of my childhood, poppy seed and sour cherry. Another ribboned box. More strolling, and then a public garden glimpsed through the gap in an old wall, which turned out to be the memorial garden to the children of the ghetto. I knew about those children from researching a book I’d written and abandoned, and I sat there with their memories. New small children came to play. I wandered on, passed again the window of a silversmith where I’d admired a bracelet earlier. It was open now and I found I could go in, try on the bracelet. (How much? On yourself, just like that, for no reason? You want your head looking at. Who do you think you are?) I walked some more and sat in another park and watched people and ate a sandwich and a rather lavish piece of cake, and then I went back and bought the bracelet because that afternoon I did briefly know who I am: a woman with a silver dragonfly on her arm, a women who can buy herself a silver dragonfly. I don’t mean to say that shopping cures melancholy. I don’t mean that consumerism isn’t destroying the planet. I don’t mean that being privileged and sad is real suffering. Maybe I shouldn’t have bought my bracelet. Or maybe we’re allowed to find small joys, in proportion to our situations, on a burning planet with the ancestors howling in our ears. • Sarah Moss’s new novel The Fell (Picador, £14.99) is out now. Buy a copy for £13.04 at guardianbookshop.comAs Joe Biden and Kamala Harris readied to speak at the Atlanta University Center Consortium in Georgia on Tuesday, nearly a dozen protesters gathered outside the building, holding up signs that read “end the filibuster” and bore messages of support for federal voting rights protections. The president and vice-president were in Atlanta to bring urgent attention to the party’s efforts to pass new voting rights laws, but some activists who attended the event (and several who opted not to attend) have criticized Biden, claiming he was using the moment as a “photo op” instead of putting forth a solid plan of action. In a video posted to social media during the event, Sandra Williams, the executive director of the ATL North GA Labor Council, emphasized that the group supported the president but wanted strong action to ensure voting rights legislation is passed on the federal level. “It’s time for president Biden to do what he knows to do to pass the voting rights act,” she said. The John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act and the Freedom to Vote Act, two major Democratic bills, have been blocked by Senate Republicans using the filibuster, which requires 60 votes to advance a bill. The filibuster rule has become a major point of contention. Outside of the event, activist Porsha Miller chanted, “End filibuster, voting rights now” through a bullhorn. Both Biden and Harris pushed for changes to the Senate filibuster rules in order to pass the voting legislation, which is currently stalled in Congress. “I support changing the Senate rules, whichever way they need to be changed, to prevent a minority of senators from blocking actions on voting rights,” Biden said on Tuesday. “Let the majority prevail,” he also said, referring to the 60 votes currently required. “And if that bare minimum is blocked, we have no option but to change the Senate rules, including getting rid of the filibuster for this.” The move garnered support from the coalition of activists who had previously opted out of attending the event, worrying the president wouldn’t take a strong enough stance or reveal a solid plan of action to ensure the legislation is passed. “We appreciate President Biden and Vice-President Harris amplifying the urgency of protecting our freedom to vote, as they demonstrated today in Georgia,” the group of organizers including Fair Fight Action, New Georgia Project Action Fund, Black Voters Matter Fund, GALEO Impact Fund, Inc, Asian American Advocacy Fund, Asian Americans Advancing Justice-Atlanta, and former Georgia NAACP president Reverand James Woodall said in a statement. Many of the event’s attendees also seemed more supportive of the president, cheering for him when he evoked the two Georgia Senate runoffs that helped decide control of the US Senate, and applauding the vice-president when she criticized Georgia’s controversial SB202, an election law passed by the Georgia legislature last year. Specifically, she criticized a portion of the law that makes it illegal to pass out food and water to people who are waiting in line to vote. Cameron Randle, graduate SGA president at Clark Atlanta University, said he wanted the same justice that the activists were demanding, but he was ultimately pleased with Biden and Harris’ speeches. “John Lewis worked so hard for voting rights and (former) President Trump and his supporters, and the Republican senators are really trying to undermine our democracy. That’s why I’m here standing with President Joe Biden and Vice-President Kamala Harris to say ‘I stand with y’all.’ In the state of Georgia, democracy is on the line.” In addition to attending the event, he wrote a letter to the president thanking him for Higher Education Emergency Relief Fund, which saw the department of education invest billions of dollars in historically under-resourced colleges and universities, and also asking him to get rid of student loan debt for HBCU graduates. Sawyer Kovacs, a student at Columbus State University, said he traveled from north Georgia to hear Biden and Harris speak. He applauded the administration for hosting the event on a college campus. “College is one of the most important and crucial places to get people educated on things like voting,” he said. The student added that he believes Biden’s speech was a “stride towards progress in ensuring everyone has equal rights and availability to vote and achieve their goals”.Conifer plantations, which are being expanded around the UK to combat the climate crisis and foster biodiversity, are in danger of hurting one of the key species they were thought to protect: red squirrels. The threatened red squirrels, driven to near-extinction over most of the UK by grey squirrel incursion, were thought to thrive in conifer habitats as the food sources in such forests tend to be limited to small seeded cones, which red squirrels are better at exploiting than the more generalist grey squirrels. That should mean conifer plantations prove better for red squirrels than greys. But new research upends that perception by highlighting the role of pine martens. These native predators were until recently, like the red squirrel, in short supply. Recovery in their numbers has shown that pine martens are generally good for red squirrel populations, at least in native broadleaf woodlands, because they suppress the numbers of grey squirrels. The research, published in Proceedings of the Royal Society B, found this was not true in conifer plantations, where pine martens lack diverse sources of food and prey on red squirrels instead, turning them from a protector to a threat. To conduct the research, scientists from Queen’s University Belfast and the University of St Andrews, with Ulster Wildlife and the help of citizen scientists, used camera traps to survey more than 700 sites across Northern Ireland over a five-year period, looking for red squirrels, grey squirrels and pine martens. Dr Joshua Twining, lead author of the research, from Queen’s University in Belfast, explained the findings: “In natural woodland, there are diverse amounts of prey, and lots of refuges for squirrels, so red squirrels don’t get predated all that much. But in conifer plantations, where a single species is planted and of uniform age there is very little biodiversity or alternate prey, and an absence of refuges, so pine martens will eat red squirrels to survive here.” He said the research suggested that woodland managers should reconsider whether conifer plantations should be preferred over native broadleaf trees. “We need to adapt our strategy: if we keep planting conifer plantations, as opposed to native woodland, this saviour of the red squirrel may cause its decline in certain locations,” he warned. About three-quarters of the forested area of the UK and Ireland is made up of non-native timber plantations, of species such as the sitka spruce, according to the researchers. Conifer plantations were already a cause of concern to ecologists, as they tend to be monocultures, are often harvested after a few decades, and may provide less diversity than native broadleaf species. But government planting schemes in the UK and Ireland have tended to favour conifers, which are easier to plant and harvest. A spokesperson for the UK Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said: “We are committed to taking action to recover our threatened native species in England, such as the red squirrel. The planting of coniferous trees in England is at a low level, with our Nature for Climate Fund focusing on the establishment of native broadleaf woodlands at a large scale. Alongside our England Trees Action Plan, this will support the recovery of native red squirrel populations across the country.”At the water’s edge stands a second world war pillbox, a magnet for hundreds of roosting birds. A flock takes to the wing and, through my binoculars, I make out curlew and brent geese; in the distance a pink container ship slinks slowly along the horizon. There’s no one around, the clarity of the cold morning light on the Thames adding to the sense of remoteness. I’m on the Isle of Grain, at the tip of the Hoo peninsula in north Kent, being introduced to the newest section of the England Coast Path, officially open today (12 January). This 47-mile stretch runs west from the village of Grain to Woolwich and forms part of, eventually, a 2,800-mile national trail around the coast. “It’s exciting because it opens up parts of the Isle of Grain that the public couldn’t access before,” says my guide, Jenny Bowen from Natural England. “It also links with the existing Thames Path, which runs from the Cotswolds to central London, meaning there’s a ‘source to sea’ walking route along our most-famous river for the first time.” Our walk starts at the tiny hamlet of Grain, where the views stretch across the confluence of the Thames and Medway to Southend, sparkling in the winter sun, and Sheerness on the Isle of Sheppey. As we follow the route slightly inland, we pass a smattering of houses, a church and a pub before a new path leads up on to the sea wall. The Isle of Grain is not an island at all, but a vast, open expanse of pancake-flat saltmarsh, peppered with signs of industry and a defensive maritime history. Yantlet Creek meanders to our right, edged by reeds; ponies and sheep wander some of the most remote grazing land in the south-east; low tide reveals glistening mudflats stretching to the horizon. To the left, pylons and silhouetted gas works add a grittiness to the scene. We stop to picnic on one of the tiny beaches dotted along the river, a boundary stone nearby marking the end of the Thames estuary. Opening the new trail has been a long process, Jenny and her colleague Francesca Sanchez tell me, involving environmental assessments and countless meetings with landowners and local councils. While some of the route follows existing paths, access to some private land has been granted for the first time, eroded footpaths have been rebuilt and culverts added to drain waterlogged land. “It’s a complicated process, weighing up different interests – but the goal is to always keep as close to the coast as possible, without disturbing wildlife,” says Francesca. As we wander on we meet a local couple out for a walk – keen birders excitedly pointing out a rarely seen glossy ibis. The whole area is important for winter birdlife and pockets are protected. New signs tell walkers what to look out for, and our sightings include black-tailed godwit, ringed plover and dunlins, though marsh harriers remain elusive. The path sweeps close to the water once more as we pass the deserted Allhallows Holiday Camp. From here it’s a wild 12-mile stretch to the RSPB’s Cliffe Pools reserve, with no villages, car parks or connecting footpaths on the way. Further west the path takes walkers to Gravesend, with nearby Shornemead fort, installed to protect London in the 1860s, and the option of a ferry across to Tilbury and the Essex coastal path. Highlights for those who continue to Woolwich include the Swanscombe peninsula – newly designated a site of special scientific interest – and the Queen Elizabeth II bridge (the busiest estuarial crossing in Europe). From Woolwich, the Thames Path continues to the Cotswolds – meaning a 232-mile path now runs from its source to the North Sea. The England Coast Path itself will eventually be the longest coastal walking route in the world. Of the 67 sections, 16 are now open, with more to follow this year, and proposals for 65 stretches have been submitted to government for approval (just over 99.4% of the route). Our limited time means further exploration must wait for another day and we turn back towards Allhallows. The cries of seabirds fill the air, the incoming tide laps the shore – and this wild, forgotten edge of the country quietly bewitches with a peculiar beauty all of its own. • This article was amended on 12 January 2022. The new section of the path runs west from Grain to Woolwich, not east as stated in an earlier version. The Grain-Woolwich stretch of the England Coast Path is easily accessed via public transport. Stations along the route include Woolwich Arsenal, Erith, Slade Green, Greenhithe and Gravesend. Buses connect Grain and Allhallows to Rochester. For moreon the walking route, visit nationaltrail.co.ukIf you are a man who has failed in an attempt to launch a vodka brand, done the same with a line of steaks, and bankrupted several casinos and hotels, leaning further into the hospitality business might not seem the savviest move. But that’s exactly what Donald Trump, never one to listen to his haters, or to his advisers, has done, in opening a new bar in his eponymous midtown Manhattan tower. The bar, named 45 Wine and Whiskey, in a nod to Trump having served as the 45th president, promises handcrafted cocktails in “the most exclusive setting”. Opened in late November, it serves a range of president-themed drinks and is, according to the marketing material, a place to “relax and unwind”. That may have been the intention, but a recent visit by the Guardian revealed that 45 Wine and Whiskey mainly serves as an ode to narcissism, or as a world record attempt to cram the most black-and-white photos of one man into quite a small space. Behind the bar alone there are 15 gold-framed photos of Trump, whose penthouse apartment lurks 50 stories above. A giant picture of Trump sitting behind his presidential desk dominates the seating area. In total, there are 39 photos of the former US president in the bar, suggesting this may be a venue for people who are fond of the former Apprentice host. There’s a shot of Trump, the first president to be impeached twice, meeting the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un in the Korean demilitarized zone, while another photo shows Trump and Melania flanking an uninterested-looking Queen Elizabeth. One picture, a strange choice, shows Trump holding up a copy of the Washington Post with the headline: “Trump acquitted.” There are other things to look at. From the wooden bar-top a patron can take in the peach marble walls and plentiful golden banisters that mark Trump Tower as one of the leading homages to 1980s opulence. It’s part of a decor theme dubbed “dictator style” by the fashion writer Peter York. Given that 45 Wine and Whiskey replaces the “Trump bar” that previously occupied the same spot, it isn’t exactly a new venture. And much like its predecessor, 45 Wine and Whiskey boasts red velvet seating, marble tables and gold flourishes, in keeping with the rest of the building. The seating area scans out across the lobby, over to the famous gold-effect escalator that spewed Trump on to the political stage in 2015. The drinks follow the grandiose theme – at least in terms of the pricing, which is extortionate. The Forty Five – a whiskey with syrup and bitters, served with two small hamburgers and, bizarrely, a Diet Coke – is $45. The Flotus – a potent white wine and gin ensemble that could hint at Melania’s lack of activity while in the White House – is $29. The Mar-a-Lago spritzer, named after the Florida resort where Trump has been holed up since he left office, is a grift almost on a par with Trump University. The drink consists of white wine, soda water, and grapefruit juice. It is served with an orange wedge, and costs $29. The pricing might explain the fact that during a recent hour-long afternoon visit, the Guardian was the only customer – although it doesn’t explain the laissez-faire opening hours. According to the website, the bar is open from noon to 8pm, but at 1.50pm one day recently there was a red velvet rope guarding the entry, and no signs of life. After leaving Trump Tower and returning at 3pm, the bar was still closed; it was only at 3.45pm, during a third visit, that access was gained. Hopefully for the beleaguered former president, his well-wishers will visit the bar at more suitable hours. But some of his vaccine-skeptical supporters will face a major obstacle, in the form of a big blue sign at the bar’s entrance. “New York City requires you to be vaccinated against Covid-19 to enter this business,” it says. “Those five and older must show proof of Covid-19 vaccination.”In a weak moment after the break up of my 30-year marriage, I signed up for a dating site, eHarmony. After paying the subscription for the first month, I realised it wasn’t for me and cancelled that evening. The next morning my bank informed me that eHarmony had attempted to take £65 from my account. I then found lots of angry online reviews claiming that the company charges £65 for the “personality profile” based on a questionnaire that you have to fill out during the registration process. There’s no mention of this charge on the website, or in the terms and conditions. I’ve refused to pay, but have received several emails demanding it. MB, Totnes, Devon Amid the cyber-jungle of dating agencies, it’s easy to see why eHarmony was appealing. The company, which claims to have created 2 million successful relationships in 20 years, was founded in 2000 when online dating was in its infancy. At its zenith its revenue was reportedly $250m a year and actor Ben Stiller used its services in the 2013 film The Secret Life of Walter Mitty. Its UK website claims to be the “No 1 trusted dating app” according to an unspecified survey. But something is badly wrong. Online reviews tell the same story of customers drawn in by starry promises, then clobbered by a mysterious £65 when they cancel their membership within the statutory 14-day cooling-off period. To see for myself, I signed up to what is trumpeted as a free service. Integral to the registration process is a lengthy questionnaire about traits and tastes. This instantly generates a personal profile. There is no mention of a £65 fee. The terms and conditions allude to a deduction of “reasonable” costs if a contract is cancelled within the cooling-off period, but a profiling charge is not specified. The “free” service turns out to be almost useless. Photographs of matches are blurred out and customers can only communicate with potential suitors by designated emojis. For fuller interaction, customers are invited to pay a monthly fee with a 50% discount, but these fees are not what they seem. The recommended “premium plus” option promises 12 months of membership “from £9.95”. You have to squint at the small print beneath the payment form on the next page to discover that a £3-a-month instalment fee is added to this, and that the monthly cost nearly doubles to £22.90 three months in. A year’s membership, therefore, costs £244.95. And unless you remember to cancel at the end of the 12 months, it rolls over to the following year. What do you get for this? Not much, apparently. Reviewers complain of unsuitable matches from random parts of the country. I asked eHarmony why customers are not alerted to the £65 fee and it claimed they were required to tick a box accepting the charge during the membership purchase process. When pressed, it clarified that the box appeared after the payment had been completed. It ignored requests for a screenshot. “EHarmony honours all cancellation requests made during the cooling-off period, subject to deductions for services already provided,” it says. “Having purchased a premium membership, customers are presented with a dedicated web page that includes key membership terms and conditions. Here they are asked to tick a box confirming that they would like to access their subscription immediately, and therefore consent to the £65 charge for services received during the first 14 days.” This would appear to be in breach of the Consumer Rights Act, which requires key terms and conditions to be explained and accepted before a contract is agreed. Terms added afterwards are not legally binding. Moreover, if a customer cancels within 14 days, costs can only be deducted for services already rendered and those must be reasonable. I asked eHarmony how £65 was a reasonable sum for a computer-generated profile, but it did not respond. As for the sneaky £3 supplement added to the monthly membership charge, eHarmony explained it was a “small” sum for those who choose to pay in monthly instalments. It did not reply when asked whether the free service allows customers to arrange to meet potential matches and whether those who paid for membership were refunded if they cancelled within 14 days. You did, eventually, receive your subscription payment back and eHarmony agreed to waive the £65 as a “goodwill gesture” when you said you’d contacted the media. At the start of a new year there will be many people looking to start a new relationship. Don’t be beguiled by seductive websites until you’ve checked out the reviews. You should, of course, study the small print, but that wouldn’t have been of much help to MR, who should consider reporting her experience to trading standards. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsState and territory leaders will consider relaxing isolation requirements for the trucking and logistics sector, as the prime minister, Scott Morrison, calls for patience over the country’s disrupted supply chains. With estimates from industry that between 20% and 50% of the transport and logistics workforce is currently out of action as a result of Covid exposure, the government is also pushing for national cabinet to agree to scrap testing requirements for border crossings. The federal government is also set to allow international students to work more than 40 hours a fortnight in affected sectors, in an attempt to ease workforce pressures in critical industries. After urgent talks with industry groups and unions on Tuesday night and Wednesday morning, Morrison convened a meeting of the national coordinating mechanism on Wednesday, which was also attended by senior ministers and the heads of the infrastructure, treasury and health departments. Morrison said that the challenge being posed by escalating case numbers linked to the Omicron outbreak was “keeping things moving”. “That’s what riding this wave of Covid means, and of course … with so many cases appearing every day and that expected to continue until its peak, this will have an obvious impact right across our supply chains,” he said. “It’s important that we continue to problem solve right across all of these areas … in transport, health care, aged care, as we’ve already been doing. “But of course, we require a fair bit of patience through this process as well, because with so many people getting Covid, that is clearly going to take more and more people out of the workforce.” Morrison said the goal was to “get as many people” to work as possible, while continuing to roll out the booster shot program. “Keeping that rolling and keeping the country rolling by ensuring we keep these supply chains intact, is the task,” the prime minister said. Acting small business minister Anne Ruston, who held a roundtable meeting with representatives from the retail, grocery, farming, transport, pharmacy and aviation sectors on Wednesday, said the government was looking at ways to increase the number of people available to work. “[We are] making sure that we look at other innovative ways that we can activate or unshackle potential other employment opportunities,” Ruston told Sky News. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Many older Australians I’m sure would be happy to do a few extra hours work to help out at the moment so we’re looking at how we can help them do that [and] our temporary visa holders in Australia that are all still here. “But also making sure that anybody who is currently on unemployment benefits who are able to work, we’d be really keen for them to undertake some really active investigation about how they can help out with these workforce shortages as well.” Ruston said one of the key demands from industry was for national consistency and clarity around requirements and rules for isolation, testing and workplace activities. National cabinet will consider the changes to isolation requirements on Thursday, and will look to relax isolation rules for other areas deemed essential services, beyond frontline health workers and those in the food manufacturing and distribution sectors. While transport and logistics workers will be the priority, other sectors under consideration for eased isolation requirements also include teachers and childcare workers, mental health and physiotherapy services, veterinarians, and civic services such as rubbish collection and water and energy services. The government is also working on what other requirements should be in place for essential workers who return to work in such circumstances, including booster shots, social distancing measures and hygiene standards. National cabinet will also sign off on new arrangements for pharmacies to distribute rapid antigen tests free for concession card holders, amid concern from the sector that they would be forced to source their own supplies under the scheme. The government is yet to confirm a start date for the scheme. The Treasury secretary, Steven Kennedy, will give a presentation on economic impacts and the importance of keeping schools open, which will be considered along with health advice that has been finalised by state and commonwealth officials. Labor leader Anthony Albanese said that any changes to isolation requirements needed to be made on the basis of medical advice. “We need to take that advice because where medical advice has been ignored, or short-circuited, the end economic consequences have been more dire than if the medical advice had been followed,” Albanese said. He said workers were already stepping up to help, but were being let down by the federal government. “Working people have made incredible sacrifices and stepped up. They did their part of the bargain, the federal government has not done its part,” he said.The green-and-red Nana Female Mechanic Garage sign is visible from the main road into Sokoto city. Behind its sliding iron gate, Zainab Dayyabu stomps around in heavy work boots and a blue jumpsuit, her hands callused and oily. “I love the job I’m doing,” says the 23-year-old, as she opens the bonnet of a Peugeot van to test its battery. Zainab is one of 25 young apprentices at the first all-female garage to open in the northern Nigerian state of Sokoto. The workshop aims to provide jobs for women in an industry dominated by men and challenge traditional gender roles in this conservative and highly insecure region of the country. “It is not just an ordinary female mechanic shop,” says Fatima Adamu, founder of the non-profit organisation Nana: Girls and Women Empowerment Initiative, which opened the workshop in 2019. “We want it to be of international standard, where women specifically can get the best services. And for that to happen, we must really train the girls. We want to be scientific.” Apprentices were selected from a vast number of applicants, from unemployed graduates to women from poorer families with few opportunities in a state where less than 2% of girls finish secondary and the literacy rate for women is just 10% compared with 40% for men. About 35% of 15- to 34-year-olds across Nigeria are unemployed. Over a two-year apprenticeship, the women are trained and given a weekly allowance of 2,100 naira (£3.75). They also have access to a shared computer to browse learning resources online. The first cohort is coming to the end of their apprenticeship and most will stay on, says Adamu. “After being trained as mechanics, we are hopeful some of them would stay in the garage to work or set up a garage as a group, including selling vehicle spare parts.” She hopes plans for an automobile centre in Sokoto being considered by state authorities will provide further jobs for Nana mechanics. “I want our women to get out of the societal norms that bind them,” she says. “There are so many technology-related activities that women are excluded from in this part of the country. We cannot succeed in northern Nigeria without technology, and women must be part of that journey.” Adamu says the scheme has had support from the state’s traditional and Islamic leaders, who are beginning to recognise that women need to be economically independent. Customers such as Abba Lawal are convinced. He regularly brings his car to Nana’s and says they do better work than other places: “I come to the garage to encourage the girls and also I like the way they work on cars without delays.” The programme has been so successful that there is already a waiting list for the new apprentice scheme starting this month. Hindatu Dayyabu (no relation to Zainab), a supervisor at the garage, hopes to build up a customer base of female drivers. “We have many women who are car owners now compared with the 70s and 80s,” she says. “We did an assessment and realised that women find it difficult to take their vehicles to the garage for repair because it is a male-dominated space. They don’t feel comfortable.” Zainab’s parents were initially concerned when she told them she wanted to be a mechanic. “They [her parents] said I wouldn’t find a suitor, that it is heavy work for females. But I decided to apply,” she says from under the Peugeot bonnet. “My gender shouldn’t be a barrier to what I want to become in life.” Her parents are now her biggest cheerleaders. “At some point, I wanted to drop out … but my mum kept encouraging me. In the next few years, probably two or three, I want to be independent and have my own garage.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Roger Fischer, the civil servant husband in Tessa Hadley’s 1960s domestic drama Free Love, is a rather circumspect creature. In a conversation with his wife, Phyllis, the protagonist of Hadley’s eighth novel, the couple discuss Roger’s recent work. He has been preparing documents about security in the Middle East. Phyllis offers dutiful but uninformed optimism about the prospects for that troubled region. Roger responds: “I probably come down on the side of not hoping too much. It’s a botched old civilisation, you know. Rather imperfect.” Free Love initially purports to be a romantic novel, imagining a new kind of existence for Phyllis in opposition to the forces of Roger’s stiff-upper-lipped judiciousness. What might it mean to refuse the lot one has been assigned? What will happen if wild desires and aspirations are allowed to blossom? And how does it feel to be living a conventional life so close to the thrilling allure of swinging London, “a world turned upside down”, where such a sense of the possible was being embraced? At the beginning of the narrative, Phyllis and her family are in the green and pleasant outskirts of London. Theirs is an unremarkable life of middle-class decorum. Hadley subtly draws attention to the solidity of the Fischers’ home – with its “boxed-in oak staircase and panelled oak doors” – and these physical features echo the family’s solidly conventional setup: steady and reliable Roger works up in Whitehall; erudite daughter Colette drips with predictable adolescent antipathy; winningly charming eight-year-old Hugh is readying himself to attend the boarding school his father went to. Mingling with the neighbours (the Barnes-Pryces, the Chidgelys) and managing the domestic help, fragrant Phyllis prettily keeps things ticking over. But of course, as in the work of Richard Yates or AM Homes, “under the placid surface of suburbia, something [is] unhinged”. A deliciously absurd set-piece dinner party is the inciting incident. Nicky, the conspicuously countercultural twentysomething son of Roger’s old friend, is the “interesting” guest of honour at the meal. Nicky’s bohemian affectations and resistance to bourgeois politesse both disquiet and captivate Phyllis – much to her surprise. Phyllis “hadn’t known that the young had this power, to reduce the present of the middle-aged to rubble”. Nicky’s nonchalant dismissal of Phyllis’s settled existence releases this “something unhinged” within her: a latent propensity for risk, a longing for the untried. Without unequivocally lionising its protagonist as an intrepid pursuer of liberty or vilifying her for naive self-indulgence, the narrative coalesces around Phyllis and her relationship with Nicky. It homes in on this latter-day Emma Bovary’s pained evaluations and negotiations – “she saw how fatally Roger and the children […] held her fixed inside their shape, so that she couldn’t change her own life without bringing everyone else’s down around her”. Hadley also shrewdly problematises the misleading promises of the sexual revolution through her unstinting portrayal of the Ginsberg-adoring, pot-smoking rake Nicky. While the Fischers’ Arts and Crafts suburban villa exudes Roger’s desire for steadiness and civility, the faded block of flats in Ladbroke Grove where Nicky lives is perhaps revelatory of what lies beneath his shiny “idyll of playful ease”: The Everglade was a crumbling vast art nouveau palace, built at the turn of the century to contain sixty luxury serviced apartments […] Now it had fallen from grace, broken up into who knew how many run-down bedsits and sublets, taken over by ex-boxers, theatricals, members of occult sects, tarot-card readers […] The roof leaked in a thousand places […] once or twice an excess of stone ornamentation from the façade had crashed into the street below. Master storyteller and superior stylist that she is, Hadley wryly records the unexpected crashes and calamities of Nicky and Phyllis’s relationship as Phyllis wrangles with the “nothingness of her self”. The sustained intimacy of Hadley’s recent novels Late in the Day and The Past that have garnered her legions of admirers is in abundance here – and not just in relation to her central characters. Her acuity in making use of minor figures is a highlight, too. Congruences between Colette’s teenage rebellions (late-night drinking and inexpert flirtation in which she “imagines [herself] doing the audacious … and then follows through”) and Phyllis’s misadventures add a complicating, challenging, satirical thread. Equally, Barbara Jones, a Grenadian trainee nurse and neighbour of Nicky, is a welcome presence. Barbara introduces a salty, straight-talking realism that counters Phyllis’s often infuriatingly hazy idealism. Her muted but nevertheless affecting revelations about the inequities of life as a working-class Black woman in 1960s London importantly widen the scope of this novel’s feminist concerns. One criticism sometimes levelled at Hadley’s astutely observed narratives is that, for all their finesse, they lack propulsion and verve – her 2007 novel, The Master Bedroom, is a case in point. Some readers may consider the conclusion of Free Love in similar terms, feeling that the plot fizzles out, or that the resolution for the Fischers is partial or underwhelming. But on rereading, the final pages struck me as achingly moving and real. This novel does not close as a triumphant bildungsroman of middle life, replete with self-discovery. Instead, Hadley’s poignant drawing together of a situation that ultimately becomes “as fatally twisted as a Greek drama” shows a writer with boundless compassion. Yet again, she offers insightful and sensitive understanding of the quiet compromises people make to survive in a deeply compromised world. • Free Love by Tessa Hadley (Vintage, £16.99). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Here are the main stories on Wednesday, 12 January: Novak Djokovic releases a statement about his visa application, as the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, says he requires more time to decide whether to order the tennis star’s deportation; It was the second deadliest day of the pandemic with 21 deaths recorded in both NSW and Victoria and seven in SA (although there were reports some Victorian deaths were not recorded yesterday); NSW reports 34,759 Covid cases and 2,242 hospitalisations, Victoria 40,127 cases with 946 in hospital, Queensland 22,069 and 525, SA 3,715 and 190, Tasmania 1,583 and 22, ACT 1,078 and 23, NT 352 and 28, and four new cases in Western Australia, including a possible mystery case; There were $1,000 fines announced for not reporting positive rapid antigen tests in NSW and in South Australia; and A large bushfire in south-west Western Australia is being investigated as arson. Enjoy your evening, see you here back here tomorrow. We may have a mystery case in WA, AAP reports: Western Australia may have undetected community Covid-19 transmission after a woman contracted the virus from an unknown source. Authorities are investigating where the woman may have been exposed to the virus and genomic sequencing is underway to determine the variant. “The woman was infectious in the community but did not attend work and there are likely a limited number of potential exposure sites,” WA Health said on Wednesday. “Exposure sites will be released as soon as possible, once confirmed.” A second local case reported on Wednesday is connected to a cluster of cases involving an infected security guard at Perth’s Hyatt hotel. This person has been in quarantine throughout their infectious period. WA is the only state or territory yet to experience significant spread of the Omicron strain, although the McGowan government’s plan to reopen borders from 5 February means it is only a matter of time before such an outbreak occurs. Four new local cases were announced on Tuesday, including a person believed to have been infected with the Omicron variant while in the community. The person, identified as Case 1244, had close contact with a confirmed Omicron case who recently returned from Tasmania. They subsequently spent several days in the community in Perth, with genomic sequencing expected to confirm they have the Omicron strain. “There’s a strong possibility there’s been community spread of Omicron,” the health minister, Amber-Jade Sanderson, told reporters on Tuesday. “This is just part and parcel of managing a really aggressive strain of this virus.” Case 1244 travelled to the airport on 2 January to pick up a family member who had returned from Tasmania. They are believed to have worn a face mask at the airport and followed all other rules. Perth’s supermarket shelves were noticeably bare on Wednesday after Coles introduced national purchasing limits on some items. WA will shift the Northern Territory to “extreme risk” status from Thursday, meaning travel to WA from anywhere in Australia will be blocked except under extraordinary circumstances. For no reason other than it is all feeling a bit glum at the moment: AAP reports that a bushfire in south-west Western Australia is being investigated as a possible arson: A bushfire in Western Australia’s south-west that forced the evacuation of hundreds of residents and tourists is being treated as suspicious. Arson detectives are investigating the blaze, which started in the Meelup Regional Park near Curtis Bay beach on Monday night and has since burned through 225 hectares of bushland around the popular Dunsborough area. It’s believed no properties have been lost. An emergency warning has now been downgraded to “watch and act”, although people are being warned to remain on alert in case conditions change. Police are seeking information from anyone who saw suspicious activity in the Meelup park on Monday between 6pm and midnight. “Rewards of up to $25,000 are available for information that leads to the identification and conviction of an arsonist,” WA police said on Wednesday. Ninety firefighters are continuing to strengthen containment lines and protect properties. Hundreds of people were left stranded in the tourist hotspots of Eagle Bay and Bunker Bay before being evacuated on Tuesday afternoon. AAP has reported on the more than 50,000 positive RAT results registered within hours of the system going live in NSW: More than 50,000 NSW residents have registered positive at-home Covid-19 test results with the NSW government just hours after a new system went live. Residents aged 16 and older can now log any positive at-home tests they have taken this year via the ServiceNSW app or website, in a process the premier, Dominic Perrottet, said is “seamless”. Uploading the positive result within 24 hours is mandatory from Wednesday, with residents facing a $1,000 fine for failure to comply. Police enforcement will commence from 19 January, though Perrottet concedes it will be difficult. Some 53,909 had lodged their tests by about 3.30pm on Wednesday after the system went live at 9am, the customer service minister, Victor Dominello, told 2GB. Of those, about two-thirds had tested positive in the last week. “The fine demonstrates that it’s serious,” Dominello said. “If we didn’t have the fine there’s probably going to be more people taking it less seriously and less people registering.” People who test positive on RATs will have to isolate for seven days, unless they have no symptoms and no known exposure – in which case they must do another test within 24 hours. The premier on Wednesday said the shift was not just about counting cases but understanding who has underlying conditions and may need more care. Those who test positive will be asked for details about their medical background and sorted into high and low risk cases, with the former to receive extra contact from NSW Health. NSW Health has repeatedly warned the official case numbers were likely inaccurate, as so far it has only counted those who have returned a positive PCR test. The daily case numbers – which reached 34,759 on Wednesday – will include PCR and RAT statistics from later in the week. The opposition leader, Chris Minns, who has called on RATs to be free, on Wednesday said many people still can’t get their hands on RATs. The chief health officer, Kerry Chant, on Wednesday apologised for the “messy” transition to the testing approach, which she said had happened far quicker than authorities wanted. AAP has filed this report on efforts to boost (pun intended) the number of Victorian healthcare workers: Victoria will recruit 1,000 people to administer Covid-19 vaccines to bolster its booster rollout, as the health system continues to be plagued by virus-related staff absences. The state government is encouraging first-year health students and retired nurses to apply for one of the new positions, with applications opening next week. The acting health minister, James Merlino, said the recruitment drive was needed as the number of people eligible for their third dose is set to “dramatically” increase in coming weeks. The Covid-19 response deputy secretary, Naomi Bromley, said training was “absolutely key,” with vaccinators required to complete commonwealth and Victorian vaccination training. They must also complete a Covid-19 clinical skills and competencies assessment, and undertake a number of supervised vaccinations before carrying one out themselves. The new vaccinators will not be responsible for establishing patient consent and will only be authorised to vaccinate people over 18. Eighteen per cent of Victorians aged over 18 have received their booster. The state opposition says the booster rollout was running slower than planned, with fewer than half of the promised doses handed out in week one of a vaccination blitz. A quite bizarre story on the navy rescue of two New Zealanders stranded in Singapore during the pandemic. Here’s our story on the current situation regarding job vacancies and supply chains, issues which have been mentioned a few times today. The number of reported cases in the Northern Territory has dropped significantly, with the number of patients in hospital also falling, reports AAP: The daily number of Covid-19 infections reported in the Northern Territory has fallen significantly with 352 new cases recorded. Wednesday’s figure brings the total number of active cases to about 27,00, the equivalent of just over 1% of the 250,730-strong population. Twenty-eight of them are in hospital, 16 patients of whom are classified as acute cases with severe symptoms including one in intensive care. That is four less patients than Tuesday when 32 people were reported to be in hospital with the virus. The remote communities of Yuendumu and Yuelamu, about 295km north-west of Alice Springs, remain in lockout until Saturday with another six people testing positive overnight. It brings the total number of virus infections in low-vaccination Yuendumu to 24, which are all in quarantined close contacts. Meanwhile, another five people have been fined $5,024 each for breaching Covid-19 health directions at a protest over a business that was shut down for failing to comply with health directions. About 70 people gathered at the Darwin business on Monday while a territory-wide lockout of unvaccinated people was in place. The five people fined are also accused of returning to the business on Tuesday. It was ordered to close on Friday after investigators found the proprietors and staff had not complied with the vaccination mandate and workers were not wearing masks. NT Police did not specify what the activists’ breaches were but they are understood to include failure to wear a face mask. Five others who protested were fined on Tuesday. The NT detected 594 new cases on Tuesday, 403 on Monday, 481 on Sunday and 594 on Saturday. The NT government has been contacted for comment. Three Australian music festivals have been cancelled or postponed in the past 24 hours, amid increasingly desperate calls from organisers and musicians for a federal insurance scheme to protect live events, which has still yet to be introduced as the pandemic enters its third year. On Wednesday, touring metal and punk festival Full Tilt announced that it would be cancelling its Adelaide concert, which was due to be held on 29 January. Earlier in the week, organisers announced that its Brisbane concert would be postponed until the end of April. The news comes a day after the cancellation of NSW’s Grapevine Gathering festival, just four days before the event was due to start, with the Veronicas, Peking Duk, the Jungle Giants and San Cisco on the bill. Organisers estimate that $5.2m will be lost to the greater Hunter Valley region, with 1,400 jobs and 16,000 ticket holders affected. Read the rest of this story here: A bit of interesting context on the 21 Covid deaths reported in Victoria today, via the ABC: they were not all people who died yesterday. Anglicare Australia has also criticised the government for suggesting that welfare recipients could solve a worker shortage impacting supply chains. Acting executive director Maiy Azize said: The reason we have a worker shortage is because so many people are sick, and they can’t get at-home tests to slow the spread of the virus. If the government was serious about helping people find work, it would raise the rate of income payments and create new jobs. People out of work aren’t to blame for this crisis. They are the ones hardest hit. World Health Organization experts have warned that repeating booster doses of the original Covid vaccines is not a viable strategy against emerging variants and called for new jabs that better protect against transmission. “A vaccination strategy based on repeated booster doses of the original vaccine composition is unlikely to be appropriate or sustainable,” the WHO Technical Advisory Group on Covid-19 Vaccine Composition (TAG-Co-VAC) said in a statement published on Tuesday. The group of experts, who are working to assess the performance of Covid-19 vaccines, called for the development of new vaccines that not only protect people who contract Covid against falling seriously ill but also better prevent people from catching the virus in the first place, in order to deal with emerging Covid variants such as Omicron. There is more on that story here: That threat of a $1,000 fine no doubt spurred them all into action. Here’s the full story on Novak Djokovic’s statement, released earlier today, which he says responds to “misinformation”. Half the little penguin chicks from this year’s breeding season on Penguin Island in Western Australia have died, as the colony dwindles and researchers accuse the state government of failing to act. It is thought up to 20 chicks, which represented 10% of the colony, were lost after New Year’s Day when their parents were unable to feed them, resulting in the worst breeding season since 2011. Penguins in the colony, where numbers have dropped from around 2,000 birds 15 years ago to around 250, began the breeding season late after heavy rains brought by La Niña improved their food supply. You can read more on that story here: In unsurprising news that is nonetheless worth noting, Western Australia is closing the border to the Northern Territory. Speaking of South Australia, Full Tilt festival, due to be held on 29 January in Adelaide, has been cancelled due to the reintroduction of Covid restrictions. The music festival was set to feature artists including Northlane, In Hearts Wake and Luca Brasi, but will now offer fans a full refund. A statement from festival organisers said that: ... with the government backtracking on all its earlier promises on density and outdoor gathering limitations, presenting the event in just two weeks was simply unrealistic. Promoter Chris O’Brien said: We simply can’t run Full Tilt in a seated format, and a postponement into a time where we have zero confidence in the state government to remain true to their word has forced this decision. We are devastated for the artists, contractors, crew and event staff who will all miss out on the income, many of whom have barely worked since March 2020. We are also gutted for the thousands of fans that have purchased tickets and were looking forward to Full Tilt. All Full Tilt ticket-holders will be refunded in full. South Australia is also reportedly introducing $1,000 fines for those who do not report a positive RAT test, following the announcement made in NSW earlier today. Interesting news on a fascinating case, via AAP: Hobart grandmother Susan Neill-Fraser is appealing to Australia’s highest court for a second time in a bid to have her murder conviction overturned. The 67-year-old was sentenced to 23 years in jail for killing partner Bob Chappell aboard the couple’s yacht, the Four Winds, on Australia Day 2009. Her appeal before Tasmania’s court of criminal appeal was dismissed in November, with two of the three judges finding new evidence did not meet the required threshold of “fresh and compelling”. Lawyers representing Neill-Fraser have lodged an application with the high court seeking special leave to appeal the judgment. Neill-Fraser’s appeal was centred around the whereabouts of then-homeless teenager Meaghan Vass, whose DNA was found aboard the yacht. It was put by the prosecution at the 2010 trial that the DNA deposit was a “red herring” and arrived on the boat via secondary transfer. Vass has given conflicting accounts about whether she was on the boat the night Chappell was murdered. She signed an affidavit saying she was on the yacht but later recanted, telling an appeal hearing she was coerced into giving that evidence. Neill-Fraser’s legal team abandoned the evidence of Vass, which they had held up as the pillar of their case, during the appeal process. Justice Helen Wood determined evidence of forensic expert Maxwell Jones, which Neill-Fraser’s legal team claimed cast doubt on the secondary transfer scenario, did not prove there was a miscarriage of justice. She said Jones’ evidence conformed significantly with what the jury heard at the trial. In his dissenting view, Justice Stephen Estcourt determined there was a “significant possibility” the trial jury might have acquitted Neill-Fraser had Jones’ evidence been before it. The high court action challenges the judgment on three grounds, including that the court erred in holding that there had not been a substantial miscarriage of justice. Neill-Fraser is eligible for parole in August but her supporters have indicated she will not leave prison unless her conviction is overturned. The Antipoverty Centre is calling on the government to stop using welfare recipients as a possible solution to employee shortages caused by a wave of Omicron cases that have impacted on supply chains. The acting small business minister, Anne Ruston, said earlier today that she had been seeking solutions to a shortage of workers in the food and grocery sector. Ruston said the government was working towards “unshackling” employment opportunities for cohorts like temporary visa holders and those on unemployment benefits, AAP reported. Rushton said: Anybody who is currently on unemployment benefits who is able to work, we would be really keen for them to undertake some really active investigations about how they could help out with these workforce shortages. The Antipoverty Centre spokesperson Kristin O’Connell said: Once again we have a government using unemployed people as a tool of misdirection and obfuscation to cover up the distressing circumstances we all find ourselves in, unable to get the basic goods we need. Unemployed people are desperate for sustainable jobs and adequate support. And yet consistently employers knock people back because they don’t have the right experience. Let me be clear: people on social security payments are the ones hit hardest by these shortages. The cheapest goods, which we rely on to survive, are flying off the shelves and it is becoming impossible to manage our finely honed budgets. If you’ve not had the chance, you should definitely have a read of this lovely piece from Lisa Cox. Thanks for another wonderful shift of web logging Caitlin. With that, it’s over and out to Nino Bucci, who will keep you equally entertained and informed for the rest of the afternoon. The annual music and arts festival Mona Foma will go ahead in Tasmania this year, but it may look a little different to the past. More charts for you. This one tracks current hospitalisation numbers in New South Wales against the federal government’s clinical capacity thresholds. The territory’s case numbers are in. There have been 1,078 new Covid-19 cases reported. There are 23 people being treated in hospital including three in intensive care, which is actually a slight decrease on yesterday’s figure. There have been no new deaths today. I am looking forward to hearing whether L’Equipe was aware they were interviewing and photographing a Covid-positive person who was meant to be isolating. There is some confusion here. Novak Djokovic’s sworn court affidavit says he was both tested and diagnosed with Covid-19 on 16 December, with his positive result returned that evening. From his court documents: On 16 December 2021,1 was tested and diagnosed with SARS-CoV-2 (COVID). Annexed hereto and marked ND-2’ is a true copy of my COVID-PCR test result issued by the Institute of Public Health of Serbia showing a positive COVID result dated 16 December 2021. That’s after he attended the basketball game with the positive Covid players on 14 December. According to Djokovic, he took a rapid antigen that was negative, and a PCR test, both on 16 December. But his result wasn’t returned until the following afternoon, after he attended the event with the children (and before he attended an interview while Covid-positive). As he said: I was asymptomatic and felt good, and I had not received the notification of a positive PCR test result until after that event. That event occurred on 17 December. South Australia’s Covid numbers are in, and there have been 3,715 new cases detected, almost 1,000 more than yesterday’s figure. Sadly, there have been seven deaths since the last reporting period – six women aged between 60 and 100 and a man in his 90s. It brings today’s national death toll to 49. There are now 190 people being treated in hospital, including 27 in ICU and six requiring ventilation. Here is part two of Djokovic’s comments, where he addresses the travel declaration “error”, confirming he did, in fact, travel overseas in the two weeks prior to arriving in Australia. It appears these were the additional documents provided to the government which are delaying the immigration minister Alex Hawke’s decision: On the issue of my travel declaration, this was submitted by my support team on my behalf – as I told the immigration officials on my arrival – and my agent sincerely apologises for the administrative mistake in ticking the incorrect box about my previous travel before coming to Australia. This was a human error and certainly not deliberate. We are living in challenging times in a global pandemic and sometimes these mistakes can occur. Today, my team has provided additional information to the Australian government to clarify this matter. While I felt it was important to address and clarify misinformation I will not be making any further comment out of utmost respect for the Australian government and their authorities and the current process. It is always an honour and a privilege to play in the Australian Open. The Australian Open is much-loved by players, fans and the community, not just in Victoria and Australia, but around the globe, and I just want to have the opportunity to compete against the best players in the world and perform before one of the best crowds in the world. Here is part one of Djokovic’s comments in full: I want to address the continuing misinformation about my activities and attendance at events in December in the lead up to my positive PCR Covid test result. This is misinformation which needs to be corrected, particularly in the interest of alleviating broader concerns in the community about my presence in Australia, and to address matters which are very hurtful and concerning to my family. I want to emphasise that I have tried very hard to ensure the safety of everyone and my compliance with testing obligations. I attended a basketball game in Belgrade on 14 December after which it was reported that a number of people tested positive with Covid-19. Despite having no Covid symptoms, I took a rapid antigen test on 16 December which was negative and out of an abundance of caution, also took an official and approved PCR test on that same day. The next day I attended a tennis event in Belgrade to present awards to children and took a rapid antigen test before going to the event, and it was negative. I was asymptomatic and felt good, and I had not received the notification of a positive PCR test result until after that event. The next day, on 18 December I was at my tennis centre in Belgrade to fulfil a long-standing commitment for a L’Equipe interview and photoshoot. I cancelled all other events except for the L’Equipe interview. I felt obliged to go ahead and conduct the L’Equipe interview as I didn’t want to let the journalist down, but did ensure I socially distanced and wore a mask except when my photograph was being taken. While I went home after the interview to isolate for the required period, upon reflection, this was an error of judgement and I accept that I should have rescheduled this commitment. Further to Alex Hawke’s statement below, Novak Djokovic has taken to instagram to address claims of “misinformation” surrounding his testing and isolation requirements. Djokovic says he wasn’t aware he had tested positive when he attended a tennis event with children in Belgrade. He discovered he was positive after the event when he returned a positive PCR result, he says, adding he took a RAT before attending the event. When he discovered he was positive, he cancelled all events on 18 December except for a “longstanding” interview commitment with L’Equipe. On the issue of his travel declaration, Djokovic says it was submitted by his support team and his agent “sincerely apologises” for an “administrative mistake” in ticking the incorrect box about his previous travel before coming to Australia. Djokovic was required not to travel overseas two weeks prior to his arrival in Australia. The WTA, the peak international body for women’s tennis, has expressed its disappointment with the “unfortunate” way in which Renata Voracova’s aborted attempt to appear at the Australian Open was handled by authorities. The Czech doubles specialist, who has not taken a Covid-19 vaccine but contracted the virus in December, was initially allowed into Australia for a week – during which time she played a match – before her medical exemption visa was cancelled. But unlike Novak Djokovic, Voracova opted not to pursue legal avenues in an attempt to stay in the country and play in next week’s grand slam in Melbourne, and she left the country on Saturday after a brief stint in the same detention centre as the men’s world No 1. The WTA statement read: The WTA is supportive and appreciative of all the efforts put forth by Craig Tiley and Tennis Australia to host the Summer of Tennis under conditions that continue to be challenging for all. The WTA believes that all players should be vaccinated and is in full support of the immigration policies that have been put in place as the protection of the Australian communities in which we compete is critical. That being said, the complications experienced over the past few days where athletes have followed the approved and authorised process of receiving a medical exemption for entry into the country are unfortunate. Renata Voracova followed these rules and procedures, was cleared for entry upon her arrival, competed in an event and then suddenly had her visa cancelled when she had done nothing wrong. We will continue to work with all authorities on addressing this unfortunate situation in an appropriate manner. Fresh submissions from Novak Djokovic’s lawyers are the reason for a delay on the fate of the tennis player’s visa, and, by extension, his prospects to compete in the Australian Open. A spokesman for the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, said: As noted publicly, minister Hawke is considering whether to cancel Mr Djokovic’s visa under section 133C(3) of the Migration Act. Mr Djokovic’s lawyers have recently provided lengthy further submissions and supporting documentation said to be relevant to the possible cancellation of Mr Djokovic’s visa. Naturally, this will affect the timeframe for a decision. The Murdoch Children’s Research Institute paediatrician Fiona Russell appeared on ABC News 24 earlier, calling for the return to school to be prioritised by Australian governments. Russell was one of 35 child health experts and academics who signed an open letter to Australian governments calling for schools to be reopened despite surging Covid cases. Queensland has announced the return to school will be delayed by two weeks, but Victoria and NSW are so far determined to go ahead with the slated return date. Russell said: Our schools should be seen by now, two years into the pandemic, as an essential service. Up until now, children have really been protecting adults. And they’ve had their time, particularly in Victoria, for Victorian children, and last year, particularly for NSW children as well. So they have really suffered an enormous amount with not only the loss of learning, but the mental health impacts have been extraordinary. There’s child protection issues, there’s lack of exercise, there’s social development, social interaction, all of those things. And these are some of the known harms. But ... we don’t know what long-term effects this will have. It’s absolutely critical now that we prioritise children. We’ve got major events such as the tennis and the cricket, with hundreds of thousands of spectators watching, and to consider that, you know, in Omicron peak, we are delaying children returning to their schools, and we have no plan for them, is really very disheartening at this point in the pandemic. So we’re really calling for investment to have a national plan, to make sure both students and staff of the schools are as safe as possible, but to open them up and have a really good solid plan for children and staff. Back and forth like a tennis match, so to speak. While I’ve been off, the federal opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, has been showcasing his disaster prevention plan while wearing what appears to be a Rabbitohs mask. Read our preview of the announcement here: Oh will you look at that, here’s Caitlin Cassidy again. See you later this afternoon. Here’s an update on the movements of Cyclone Tiffany, via AAP: A tropical cyclone that slammed into Queensland before tracking west has made landfall in the Northern Territory. Cyclone Tiffany started crossing the coast as a category one system about 10am on Wednesday, the Bureau of Meteorology said. It is currently east of Ngukurr, 635km south-east of Darwin, and south of Groote Eylandt, and heading west at 27km/h. It was forecast to impact the NT’s gulf coast as a category two system but weakened overnight. The system is expected to continue tracking west across the Top End throughout the day and weaken below cyclone strength over land. A warning has been issued for communities from Alyangula to Port McArthur, including Port Roper and the remote communities of Ngukurr and Numbulwar, 780km south-east of Darwin. Wind gusts up to 100km/h are likely from Port Roper to the Nathan River area. A storm tide bringing damaging waves and flooding is likely between nearby Port McArthur and Alyangula, and on Groote Eylandt. Heavy rain across parts of the Arnhem Land and Daly district may cause flooding of low-lying areas as rivers rise. Tiffany was a category two cyclone packing winds of up to 130km/h when it crossed the east coast of the Cape York peninsula on Monday afternoon. It weakened to a tropical low overland, dumping 120mm of rain in some areas in the 24 hours to 9am on Monday. Three people were rescued after their vehicle got caught in flood waters triggered in far north Queensland, north-west of Cairns. The ACTU secretary, Sally McManus, says we’re “not even started” with the supply chain crisis that is gripping Australian industry due to people being off work because of the Omicron wave. She points out that construction workers are currently on holidays across the sector, which is Australia’s second biggest industry, and they’re due to come back to work next month, just as Omicron is predicted to peak. This will also roughly coincide with a post-school holidays return to work (and school) for many people at a time when there are concerns about children being unvaccinated. McManus says: Tied to the construction industry is a massive amount of jobs, so a lot of manufacturing to make, you know, everything you need, so everything from carpets all the way through. So all of those places have yet to be hit by the same issue. And that’s around the same time the peak of the infections are meant to be happening. You can read more about the crisis in our most recent piece here: Job vacancies soared across the country in the September-November period, jumping almost a fifth or 18.5% from the previous three months, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said today. At 396,100, the vacancies nationwide were 74% higher than at the start of the pandemic, Bjorn Jarvis, the head of ABS’s labour statistics unit, said. He added: These figures continue to show the high demand for workers from businesses emerging from lockdowns, together with ongoing labour shortages, particularly in lower-paying industries. In fact, all sectors of the economy reported higher vacancies, led by the private sector with job openings at 361,700, or up 19.4% from August. Public sector job vacancies were up 9.7%. Jarvis said: Job vacancies were also elevated in all states and territories, ranging between Western Australia, where job vacancies were 120% higher than before the pandemic, and 49% in the Australian Capital Territory. Arts and recreation, and accommodation and food services had the biggest increases in job openings, rising about 260% and 210%, compared with February 2020 before Covid got going. Those numbers, of course, are somewhat dated as the Omicron Covid strain has created fresh distortions to society in general, and of course the economy. Still, they point to a scramble to find workers before the new Covid wave, and hint at why many industries were already struggling to find appropriate staff before the latest turmoil landed. The Women’s Tennis Association (WTA) has released a statement about Renata Voracova having her visa cancelled ahead of the Australian Open. The Czech doubles specialist had received a vaccination exemption similar to that of Novak Djokovic before her visa was cancelled (she has said she plans to be vaccinated). The WTA says that while it appreciated the efforts of Tennis Australia in staging a tournament during the pandemic, it was “unfortunate” Voracova was deported after seemingly doing everything she had been required to do. Full statement: The press conference has wrapped up in Queensland, which today reported a record 22,069 new Covid cases, and an increase in patients in hospital and in ICU. Yvette D’Ath says she’s not sure what the federal government’s plan is to staff aged care centres once the Omicron waves hits its peak (Gerrard mentioned earlier this week this was expected in Queensland in late January or early February, with the peak of hospitalisations to occur a week later). She says she will raise this with the federal government later this week. Dr John Gerrard, the Queensland CHO, says he is concerned about vaccination rates in some First Nations communities. The state is actively pursuing measures to increase the rates, he says. No detail about what these measures are, or which specific communities are of concern. Thank you for the graft this morning Caitlin. I’m still bringing you bits and pieces from the Queensland Covid update. The health minister, Yvette D’Ath, is repeating her calls for the federal government to supply more RATs. She says: Is there ready supply out there, that anyone who wants one can get one? No. If the commonwealth can do anything more, to get more in the hands of Queenslanders, they have to do it, because businesses are suffering. With that, I will pass you briefly to the highly capable Nino Bucci. Queensland’s chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, is speaking now. He says triple-vaccinated people are nine times less likely to end up in hospital than the unvaccinated: We now have enough data from around 500 patients to see some real trends in who’s ending up in Queensland hospitals and the importance of boosted vaccination is very clear. If you are unvaccinated, you are nine times more likely to end up in hospital than if you have received a boosted vaccination – three doses of a vaccine. Some 5,558 five-to-11 year olds received a booster shot yesterday, D’Ath says. Thanks to all the mums and dads who are lining up with the kids. Some 748,053 boosters have been administered across the state. Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath is up. The state has recorded 22,069 new Covid cases, from 57,604 tests. There are 30 people being treated in ICU including eight who are ventilated, up from 27 yesterday, and 525 Covid positive patients in wards. That’s up from 502 yesterday. She says what is seen in hospitals and ICU reflects Queensland’s vaccination rates. Have a peruse of Labor’s plan for disaster readiness, released today, here. It lays out up to $200m per year on disaster prevention and resilience. If matched by state, territory or local governments, that would equate to $400m annually. It comes as opposition leader Anthony Albanese continues his seventh day of his tour-de-Queensland (he isn’t calling it that). He is currently in Mackay, and due to have lunch with the Country Women’s Association imminently. ACTU secretary Sally McManus has weighed in on tomorrow’s national cabinet meeting, which will discuss, among other things, new health advice relating to isolation requirements for Covid-affected workers. Unions are prioritising making rapid antigen tests free and accessible. A so-called tornado has swept through the NSW Northern Tablelands: The Australian Republic Movement has unveiled its plan for the country to find a new head of state, which would involve a national ballot, AAP’s Alex Mitchell reports. The group says federal, state and territory parliaments should nominate a shortlist of candidates for head of state, which would then be put to a national ballot of voters. The federal parliament would be able to nominate up to three people while states and territories would nominate one person each. The ballot winner would get a five-year term and would be responsible for appointing a prime minister with majority support in the House of Representatives, or calling an election if that support does not exist. But the head of state would have no authority in day-to-day governance or passing laws. The model was developed across a two-year period, with more than 10,000 Australians consulted through surveys, polls and meetings. ARM chair Peter FitzSimons said the “Australian Choice” model brought responsibility to citizens to elect their own leaders: This will give all Australian voters a merit-based choice about who speaks for them as head of state. The decision will be in their hands, unlike now, where it is luck of the draw who we get from the British Royal Family. We have more details on the 21 deaths reported in NSW today. It’s 2022, and we’re back to Hunger Games analogies – this time regarding rapid antigen tests in NSW. I really think there could be a better metaphor for the present situation, although I haven’t read the Hunger Games since my teen years. Feedback is welcome. Reporter: It is like the Hunger Games out there at the moment with people desperately trying to buy RATs. In December you said they would be given for free. When will the distribution start? Perrottet: Obviously it is very clear across the state that there is a shortage of rapid antigen tests and as I have said, my expectation would be nationally as the states and the federal government roll out their procurement program that we will see greater access to rapid antigen tests across the board. We have already started to see the commencement of arrivals of our rapid antigen test orders that we have put in ... and we will work through the provision of those tests in areas where we see appropriate ... to make sure our frontline workers here in New South Wales have access to those tests. But it may not just be simply frontline workers. We will provide those tests in circumstances that support service delivery across the board and once that has been determined, as the tests come in, we will make the announcements. Perrottet says he sees PCR testing being “complementary” and continuing alongside rapid antigen tests as supply scales up. RATs are costing around $25 a pop at the moment, if you can get your hands on them. The advice that we have received is very clear and that has come through the national cabinet. It is important as we move forward that the private supply chains remain in place. I certainly and from the government perspective are looking at ways in which we can help the broader community in terms of the cost of those rapid antigen tests as we move forward in a way that maintains those private supply chains. One of those options that we are certainly looking at is a voucher system that would be supportive alongside the provision of those tests through a pharmacist or a supermarket, but we are working on that now and looking at the feasibility of doing that. In the interim what we’re doing is making sure we procure rapid antigen tests to ensure the continuation of service delivery here in our state and they are in the key areas of schooling, transport and health services that we make sure that the workforce has access to those tests when they need them. Just a bit more on the supply chain meetings that were happening last night and continue today between government, industry groups and unions. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, is convening a meeting with the National Coordinating Mechanism that will consider the new health advice relating to isolation requirements for Covid-affected workers. The new guidelines were signed off by the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee earlier this week. Today’s meeting will consider the requirements for essential workers to keep working, including booster shots, social distancing measures and hygiene standards, and also discuss which business should be defined as essential services for the purposes of relaxed isolation requirements. This means that workers may continue to work even if registered as a close contact, provided they produce a negative RAT on day one after exposure and regular RAT testing after that (if they have access to the tests – assume this will be discussed at length today also). Some of the services under consideration to be deemed “essential”, (in addition to what’s already been announced) include teachers and childcare workers, transport workers, mental health and physiotherapy services, and civic services such as rubbish collection and water and energy services. Also today, the attorney general Michaelia Cash will hold meetings with the Australian Council of Trade Unions and employer groups, who are discussing the issues surrounding testing for safe workplaces, and business obligations to meet occupational health and safety laws. Tasmania’s Covid numbers are in. There have been 1,583 Covid cases reported overnight. There are 22 people being treated in hospital, an increase of four on yesterday, and no people currently in ICU. Schools in New South Wales will open from the first day of term one, premier Dominic Perrottet has vowed, however some activities like sports may be limited. Perrottet said: We are completely committed that schools will be open on day one term one. I accept that there is a lot of people right across NSW who are anxious at this time and people will make their own decisions, in relation to sport particularly. But when we announce our school plans there are areas within those plans that we focus on in terms of activities within schools that we may limit early on as we move through. But for every parent across the state our commitment as a government is to open schools on day one, term one in a way that is safe for teachers and for kids. Perrottet was then asked follow up questions about schools and risk, and took an even stronger tone: Kids being at school is one of the most things we can have happen in NSW…The impact of not having kids in the classroom will be substantial in terms of impact on the child’s educational outcomes in the future. He said that “I completely disagree with the doctors union” in relation to the Covid risk of schools returning. He went as far as saying that in his “list of things that we’re working on every single day”, that managing hospitalisations was his first priority, and that ensuring classrooms return from the first day of term one was his second highest priority. Back in NSW, and Chant has provided a breakdown of the 21 Covid deaths reported today. Seventeen men and four women lost their lives, including one person in their 30s, one in their 40s, two in their 50s, four in their 60s, six in their 70s, four in their 80s, two in their 90s and one person just over 100. She says seven of the deaths are historical: Four were reported since 23 December, one relates to a death in September and the second in October. And just to go through the reasons for that ... We work closely with the coroner, deaths reported to the coroner are unusual ... or a clinician is uncertain of the cause of death. As you know, the virus can be in people’s nose and throat for a long time, particularly when we use sensitive PCR testing, and the coroner has been routinely swapping all people admitted to their facilities and in those cases where there is a positive case the coroner will determine where it is clear cut. And ... where it is not clear cut we wait for the coroner to indicate whether it is linked at all to the Covid infection and hence we update our case numbers – and that will be a feature going forward. I want to thank the forensic pathologists in the coroner for their cooperation in updating those statistics. Victoria’s press conference has wrapped up, in a cool 30 minutes. No additional supports will be announced today for the hospitality sector or other industries hit by the Omicron wave, Merlino says. We need to be cognisant of what activities are risky right now ... Omicron is incredibly virulent and a dance floor is an easy place where you can catch this variant. New South Wales health authorities will use a new system to require residents to report positive rapid antigen test results to survey Covid cases about their health and deliver further care if required. People in New South Wales who test positive to Covid with a rapid antigen test – who are legally required to report their result via the Service NSW app – will be asked to fill out an initial survey. This initial survey will seek to understand if a Covid case has significant health problems, such as those related to the heart, lungs, kidney and immune system, as well as cancer status. Health authorities will make a “risk assessment” on that person’s ability to isolate at home. If needed, they will be sent advice to care for themselves at home. Dr Amith Shetty, clinical director of Covid-19 Care in the Community in NSW, believes the majority of Covid cases in NSW will fall into this category. However those deemed higher risk will receive follow up communications from NSW Health. At this point, NSW Health may determine someone requires a greater level of care – whether that be via general practice or hospital. NSW Health may also recommend Covid treatment options for patients at this stage. The plan is designed to provide care for those isolating at home, and to reduce the number of those whose Covid illness escalates to the point they need to go into hospital. As has been pointed out by readers, while you register through the Service NSW App, you technically click on a link in the app that takes you to an external webform. Victoria will “absolutely” be delivering the school year on time, Merlino says, though he cannot predict what will happen in six months’ time. Schools will “not be immune” from the impact of staff shortages, which may require additional teaching staff and casual relief teachers. Get your kids vaccinated and we can move beyond remote learning, beyond lockdowns ... We support the national framework for getting students back to school for the start of term one, day one, term one. The commitment is we get 51,000 air purifiers delivered to schools by the start of term and we will do that. We’re having [staff shortages] with transport companies, truck drivers, we will get this delivered because it’s an important part of our mitigation strategy ... even if I need to get in a truck and deliver them myself, we will get them delivered. More than 20,000 air purifiers have been delivered so far, Merlino says. Health and emergency staffing is going to be a “massive issue” in 2022, Merlino says. He also urged Victorians not to call triple zero unless it was an emergency as this system was also under strain. These pressures are having an impact across the board and we’re seeing that with 000. We’ve got a system under enormous stress and a massive surge in demand. One in five calls to 000 are not emergency calls. We’ve all got a role to play ... if it is not an emergency please do not call 000. In terms of what we’re doing for the service itself, there’s 43 additional full-time equivalent staff, additional funding, a significant review by the inspector general of emergency services as well as offering additional overtime for existing staff. New South Wales chief health officer Kerry Chant has provided a breakdown of the changing nature of Covid patients in intensive care in the state. In early December, Delta was the dominant strain in ICUs in the state, with 90% of Covid patients found to have that variant, while 10% had Omicron. However that has changed as Omicron spread rapidly throughout the state over the end of the year. By the week of 29 December to 4 January, Omicron had become the dominant strain in ICUs in NSW, with 67% of patients having the newer strain while 33% had Delta. Merlino says the 21 deaths reported in today’s Covid update are not all from today, but “over the last day or so”, and the health system is under increased pressure. There are a record number of people hospitalised with Covid in Victoria today. Merlino said more than 6,600 health workers were also unable to work. It is a health system under considerable strain ... it’s more than 6,600 health service workforce who are unavailable to work right now. This is a system under strain. As we came down from lockdown last year, it’s a race between people getting vaccinated ... whilst we try and support the health system during a period under which it’s under extreme strain. From tonight, high risk workers in Victoria will be required to have three vaccination doses – if they are eligible – in order to return to work. The sectors include healthcare, aged care, disability workers, emergency services, correctional facilities, hotel quarantine, food distribution and processing. If workers are eligible for a third dose today, they will have until 12 February to get their third shot. If they are not yet eligible, they will be required to receive their third vaccine at a date to be decided upon in March. Merlino says in response to “extreme demand” on the health system, Victoria is seeking to recruit some 1,000 Victorians with appropriate knowledge and experience to come on board with the vaccination rollout. He is calling on health students, retired nurses and people with experience in health settings to be trained and deployed across state run vaccination clinics. Applications open next week. They will be called “limit scope vaccinators”, with training “absolutely key” to be qualified to vaccinate. We have the capacity to deliver up to 300,000 doses per week alongside more than 600,000 doses through our primary care network. There are over one million Victorians currently eligible for their third dose and thousands of appointments available...however very soon, that number of eligible people is going to increase dramatically as they get to that four month mark. Victoria, to deal with that demand is recruiting a new pool of vaccinators to help with that effort. Some 53,000 children are booked to get a vaccine in the coming weeks, Merlino says. Victoria’s acting premier James Merlino is up. He says thoughts and prayers are with the families of the 21 people who died in the latest Covid reporting period. There are 209,715 active cases in the state. More than half of those who reported a positive rapid antigen test yesterday actually took the test yesterday. Positive RATs accounted for around half of today’s new cases. More on the RAT result mandates in NSW: Anyone in New South Wales who tests positive to Covid with a rapid antigen test will face a $1,000 fine if they do not register their Covid status with the state government. On Wednesday, premier Dominic Perrottet announced the function to register positive RAT results has been incorporated into the Service NSW smartphone application, which is already used for QR code check ins across the state. Perrottet also confirmed that registering positive status would be mandatory, after a public health order was signed off on this morning. Anyone who has received a positive result to a rapid antigen test since 1 January must register their result. If someone fails to register their positive RAT result, they will face a $1,000 fine. Enforcement of the fine will come into effect from 19 January. Perrottet acknowledges it is “a difficult time” for the state. There were 21 Covid-19 deaths reported today. I know that many people are anxious, we will get through this. We will get to the other side and we will come out stronger as a state. We have done that twice before with the Alpha outbreak and the Delta outbreak and we will do it once again. We are seeing Omicron spread not just around the country but around the world and our health system is strong - we have the best health workers anywhere in the country and we will get through this and come out the other side stronger than we came through. Some 20.2% of the eligible population in NSW have received a booster shot. Perrottet says of the people in ICU, more than 50% are unvaccinated: We have a 95% vaccination rate here in New South Wales yet over 50% of people in ICU are unvaccinated. So, please, if you have not done so, if you have not received the first dose, please go and do so. If you are eligible for a second dose please do as well. But there are many people across the state who are now eligible for a booster shot and you can have a booster shot administered either at 40 of our clinics across New South Wales but also through your pharmacy and your GP. Once again as I have said in the past, if you received a vaccination through a GP you can still come to one of our centres and receive that booster shot here in any of our 40 clinics across our state. Please make an appointment today. The NSW premier Dominic Perrottet is up. He says from 9am today, people across the state must register positive rapid antigen tests through the Service NSW App or they can be fined $1,000. He says “unlike other states” the reason for reporting RATs is to connect people with care. A reminder that RATs still aren’t included as part of daily case numbers in NSW. We made a decision as a government that the registration of that test is mandatory and you will need to register your positive rapid antigen test from 1 January. So if you received a positive test from the 1 January you can do that through the Service NSW App. This health order has been signed off this morning and in terms of enforcement if someone fails to register a positive rapid antigen test there will be a $1,000 fine and there will be a grace period. It will only take a couple of minutes. Simple questions in terms of registering details if you are registering a positive test for yourself or for somebody else, those details need to be provided. Importantly, also the provision of information in relation to whether you have any underlying health conditions, whether you are pregnant. That medical information we ask you for because, unlike other states, what we do here in New South Wales and the importance of this ... is connecting people with care. Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath and chief health officer Dr John Gerrard will hold a press conference at 11am local time. We’re back to the good old days when premiers announce Covid updates at the same time. A bushfire in Western Australia’s south-west that forced the evacuation of hundreds of residents and tourists has been downgraded after firefighters managed to contain the blaze, AAP’s Michael Ramsey reports. People were evacuated from the tourist hotspot of Eagle Bay in the city of Busselton on Tuesday afternoon. But hours later firefighters contained the fire raging around Eagle Bay, Naturaliste and Dunsborough. The emergency has now been downgraded to ‘watch and act’ although people are being warned to remain on alert in case conditions change today. The cause of the fire, which started near Curtis Bay Beach in Dunsborough, is being investigated. The blaze has burned through more than 220 hectares but it’s believed no homes have been lost. On Tuesday more than 150 firefighters were working to contain the blaze, which left the Eagle Bay and Bunker Bay communities isolated. Assisted evacuation convoys left the Eagle Bay community hall and Pullman Bunker Bay resort at 4pm. The blaze was first reported on Monday night with firefighters initially unable to access the scene. The federal government’s official Covid statistics have been overstating the number of Covid patients admitted to hospital by several thousand. On Monday prime minister Scott Morrison gave an update on hospitalisation figures, saying: “There are 5,097 patients in hospital who have Covid.” This figure of 5,097 was in part due to the inclusion of 2,170 people hospitalised in the Northern Territory, as listed on the federal Department of Health coronavirus statistics page. However, the Department of Health confirmed on Tuesday that the figure of 2,170 people hospitalised in the Northern Territory was incorrect, and that the correct number was 32, as per the NT government’s coronavirus page. This means the correct number of national hospitalisations was just over 3,000 as of Tuesday. A Guardian Australia analysis suggests that the federal statistics have been overstating the number of hospitalisations due to the error for at least several days, if not weeks. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese is up and about in Mackay, set to announce Labor’s plan for disaster readiness today. Amid floods, cyclones and pandemics, god knows we need one! The Border Force workers’ union is calling on an urgent industrial intervention after Australian Border Force marine officers have been forced to isolate onboard ABF vessels. The Community and Public Sector Union says the commonwealth failed to heed warnings from workers about “wholly inadequate” Covid-19 safety plans, and is seeking intervention from the federal regulator ComCare. As reported today, for over two years the Australian Border Force Marine Unit workers and their union the CPSU, have been calling on the Department of Home Affairs and the federal government to ensure safe working conditions and adequate testing for vessels. More than six officers on two Cape-class vessels and one large hull vessel have contracted Covid-19 onboard, or boarded vessels while positive and asymptomatic. The CPSU says officers affected have been made to isolate in the detainee transportation accommodation and, in some instances, kept at sea despite being in close quarters with other officers. The transportation quarters do not have appropriate air-conditioning, basic amenities, power points, electricity or reliable wifi to contact family or medical professionals, it says. Brooke Muscat, CPSU deputy national president, said: The Department of Home Affairs has failed to adequately prepare for Covid on Marine Unit vessels. At every turn they have rebuffed or ignored workers’ calls for common sense protections when it comes to vaccination leave, crew testing, screening, and onboard logistics. For two years the CPSU members in the Marine Unit have been raising these risks, but due to inaction we have been left with no alternative but to seek a resolution through the regulator, Comcare. Marine Unit officers do a dangerous and tough job, while being separated from their families for six months of the year. These officers need to be supported not left out to dry by a Departmental Secretary more concerned with his own ego than worker safety. From fires to floods – police are investigating a suspicious fire at an auto-wreckers in Maryborough, Queensland last night. Emergency services attended an abandoned Kent Street address at 7.15pm to find the business well alight. A 46-year-old woman located at the scene is currently assisting police with inquiries. Investigations into the cause of the fire is ongoing. A media conference will be held at 10.30am local time. At the same time in Redbank Plains, police will address the media in relation to police dog Quizz, who went missing yesterday during a high-speed chase. I’m not sure I can bring it to you live but I’ll hope to keep the updates rolling in. Meanwhile, health minister Greg Hunt is tweeting about the booster program. Turning to Covid test positivity rates, and 35.20% of tests in Victoria returned a positive result. Some 25.86% of tests in NSW came back positive. This is a confronting number, and so far we only have the figures for NSW and Victoria. Victoria’s numbers are also in and there have been 40,127 new Covid cases reported overnight. Roughly half are from RATs and half are from PCR tests. There are a record 946 people being treated in hospital, including 112 in ICU. While ICU numbers have dipped somewhat since yesterday, hospitalisations have jumped by 85 overnight. There were 21 lives lost – meaning at least 42 people have died in the past 24 hours. Condolences to their families. The NSW Covid cases are in, and they’ve jumped significantly since yesterday. These numbers are just from PCR tests, so including RATs the real figure is likely to be much higher. There were more than 134,000 tests – a big jump on yesterday’s figure. Sadly, there have been a record 21 deaths overnight. There are 2,242 people being treated in hospital, including 175 in ICU – an increase of five in ICU since yesterday. Hospitalisations have jumped by 56 overnight. A reminder that the peak isn’t expected until at least the end of the month. People are getting very angry at today’s Wordle on social media, which is timely as the Guardian has a lovely piece on the creator of the game today: The game has become an unexpected grassroots hit for Josh Wardle, who developed it for his puzzle-loving partner. The pair played it for fun on their sofa, and other users slowly began to join them ... He takes comfort in the knowledge that his game has brought joy to people at a difficult time. “I get emails from people who say things like ‘hey, we can’t see our parents due to Covid at the moment but we share our Wordle results each day’. During this weird situation it’s a way for people to connect in a low effort, low friction way.” I made today’s in six, but it was touch and go. Wordle 207 6/6 ⬜🟨⬜🟨⬜ 🟨🟩⬜⬜⬜ ⬜🟩🟨⬜⬜ ⬜⬜⬜⬜🟩 ⬜🟩⬜🟩🟩 🟩🟩🟩🟩🟩 Deputy ambassador of Israel to Australia Ron Gerstenfeld just appeared on RN Breakfast suggesting the Sydney festival approached the Israeli embassy about the sponsorship deal that has led to the boycott of more than 20 acts. Gerstenfeld lamented the “aggressive” social media campaign that he said came to the detriment of artists hit by two years of a pandemic. The latest statement from Sydney festival chair David Kirk said: The Board is also conscious of the calls for artists and audiences to boycott the Festival in relation to the Israeli Embassy’s financial support of a performance by the Sydney Dance Company of a work, Decadance, by world renowned Israeli choreographer Ohad Naharin. The Sydney Festival Board wishes collectively to affirm its respect for the right of all groups to protest and raise concerns. We spent time with a number of groups who have concerns about this funding and welcomed the opportunity to engage with them. All funding agreements for the current Festival – including for Decadance – will be honoured, and the performances will proceed. At the same time, the Board has also determined it will review its practices in relation to funding from foreign governments or related parties. He will be appearing on the program tomorrow. Australia’s former deputy chief medical officer has put his name on a letter to national cabinet calling for leaders to not delay the start of the school year, AAP reports. Dr Nick Coatsworth, along with other medical experts, told Nine this morning children going back to school will not have an impact on the trajectory of Covid-19 Omicron cases: Many kids have already had it so there is no cause to delay schools going back. It is not correct to delay it. I put my name on a letter to national cabinet indicating we do not feel as medical experts that is right. Federal, state and territory leaders will meet tomorrow to consider a nationally consistent approach to getting kids back to school safely. Meanwhile, urgent talks are continuing on which business sectors will have Covid-19 isolation rules relaxed for their workers, after a rapid rise in infections led to widespread supply chain issues. The talks between the government and industry took place overnight and will pick up again today to help address coronavirus-induced staff shortages. The discussions include acting small business minister Anne Ruston and industry groups. Still in NSW, premier Dominic Perrottet will be up for a Covid update at 10am. In New South Wales, four people have been rescued after a ute was swept into a flooded creek in the Hunter Valley last night. Emergency services were called to Wells Gully Road at McCulleys Gap late last night, after the ute was swept off the spillway into Sandy Creek. A 49-year-old man, a 16-year-old boy, and two girls aged 14 were forced to climb on to the roof of the car after it began to sink in strongly flowing flood waters. A multi-agency rescue operation was coordinated by officers and members from NSW Rural Fire Service and SES, with all four retrieved safely. There were no injuries. Dijana Djokovic is asked whether she supports her son’s views against receiving Covid vaccinations: He has his own philosophy if he thinks like that ... he’s the most healthiest guy, he takes care of his life ... he’s playing tennis and he wants to stay. And I know that he’s doing everything to stay healthy to take care of his body, so ... if he’s not, he doesn’t want to, that’s his choice. So, what’s the problem? You know, the vaccination – the vaccination, it’s not that I’m against it of course I’m not ... it’s not the point. If he’s healthy, his PCR is negative, why he cannot play? Asked about controversy’s over Djokovic’s visa application, she says: I cannot say the ... all issues I don’t know exactly I’m reading in the newspapers. I didn’t talk to Novak about that. So I really cannot say anything. What I can say, that Judge Kelly [has] decided that Novak is free. So for me, this is closed book. And as to whether the tennis star was out in the community a day after his positive test: He didn’t know. Probably he didn’t know it, because when he realised [about] isolation, then he go to isolate ... because he didn’t know anything about that, He ... I really cannot say but it’s maybe the best is to ask him. Back to Novak Djokovic: his mother Dijana Djokovic,= is speaking to Sunrise at the moment from Belgrade. She says her son isn’t a murderer or a politician, he’s just a tennis player: I have to say, for us, even in my worst dreams, because we never have thought that is going to happen. Something like this, this court case like when I was watching and I was sitting and watching that, I said, some movie or something, something like that, because I cannot even accept that they are judging my son. For a few days, we are not even sleeping ... this is not over yet, I’m very worried, so I realise he will stay and he will play. And we are all praying that ... don’t throw him out. He’s not politician, he’s a tennis player, he is not a criminal, he’s not murderer. He’s just a tennis player. The best in the world. Just let him play. Member for Hotham and shadow minister for aged care Clare O’Neil is not mincing her words on Radio National today: A little bit of frankness and honesty and acknowledging the problem is the first thing we should be asking of the prime minister. She suggests some aged care residents have been locked in their rooms for up to seven days waiting for the results of PCR tests. The consequences in aged care are people are sick and they are suffering. CEO with the Council of Small Business Organisations Alexi Boyd has been in talks with the government over worker shortages hitting businesses across the country. She appeared on ABC News Breakfast this morning, suggesting some small businesses are closing their doors altogether: We’re hearing 20 to 40% furloughing of workers. That’s for a variety of reasons. It might be because the worker is sick and has Covid or because they’re symptomatic or because there’s a little bit of confusion as whether or not that worker should come to work. Cosboa has been calling for a national standardised approach for most of these for about a year now but what we heard from lots of industry groups was that the problem was across the board and that lots of industries were being heavily hit. The notion of an essential business, now, small businesses have been down this road before. It’s been determined by government what is an essential business and our concern is that after obviously the critical industry, such as food security, etc, and logistics are worked out, that we’re going to see a prioritisation of businesses and what’s considered essential. Now, to, I think a lot of communities out there, every small business is essential right now being the largest employer collectively of Australians. We need to see all small businesses given, I guess, equality when it comes to different circumstances in which they operate and that will alleviate confusion as well. Labor leader Anthony Albanese was just up on Sunrise chatting Novak Djokovic. He wouldn’t say whether the tennis player’s visa should be re-cancelled, just that if visa requirements weren’t met, it shouldn’t have been granted in the first place: It is just a mess, isn’t it? Everyone can see that. The federal government is the body that issues visas to Australia and it is yet to explain how it is that a visa was granted if the conditions had not been met and what we see here is just another failure, a problem becoming a crisis before the government actually acts and when you look at the issues, the vaccines, testing, tracing, and when it comes to quarantine, that is a grand slam of failures that this Morrison government has presided over. It is a very embarrassing situation for Australia. Given this story has been the biggest story in sport for months. What I would have done was make sure that if the visa requirements weren’t met, the visa would not have been issued and that is what should have occurred here. Now we have a circumstance whereby we have an intervention which is one of the biggest stories in the world at the moment and it is all of the government’s own making. Matt Canavan says if Novak Djokovic did fill out his form incorrectly, he wouldn’t be “the first person to tick the wrong box”: I read through the transcript of the interview with Novak. While I’ve never been a massive Novak fan, I thought he was honest and open through the interview process which started at 1am and went through to 6, 6.30am or so. And so I think he just has to be treated like anyone else. Now, yes, he may have lied or made a mistake on the form. I just hope – we’ve just got to apply the same rules as we would to anyone else because I am sure he is not the first person to tick the wrong box. I don’t want to live in a world of strict bureaucracy when if we make a mistake on a form we are hauled off to jail. If there’s been an error or a lie, he needs to be questioned again and see how or why that happened. English is not his first language so that could come into play. We have to have sensible rules, that’s the main lesson out of this. Catch up on the latest here: Nationals senator Matt Canavan appeared on the Today show this morning agreeing the situation with Djokovic is “a mess” and we should simply stop talking about it, as he continues to talk about it: I think it’s long enough talking about a tennis player. We have more serious issues in the country. Look, I’ve been a long time on this program saying I thought we should have just let Novak in. He’s got Covid, he has natural immunity and is a low health risk but the decision was made and the court overturned it: I think we have to move on now and de-escalate it as much as possible. If he has said something wrong on his form, OK, the law needs to apply there. I don’t know enough about that ... this shows why it’s important to base our decisions on what the science says. You know, I know there’s a lot of concern here and maybe we should keep all unvaccinated people out of work but if you’ve had Covid, you’ve got immunity, you have better protection against getting or spreading Covid than someone with just a vaccine. So that’s what all the science says. We should have relied it on that. That’s what the medical board said last week and now we are where we are. Hopefully the tennis starts next Monday and we enjoy that. United Nations special rapporteur on the human rights of migrants Felipe González Morales appeared on Radio National this morning, discussing the worldwide attention the Novak Djokovic case has brought to Australia’s immigration system. He said the case brought visibility to the fact that most people who apply for asylum or migrate to other countries don’t have the money or contacts to call attention to their plight. Good morning, It’s hump day, Novak Djokovic is still in the country and Omicron has now reached KFC. Caitlin Cassidy here to take you through this morning’s news, starting with Scott Morrison meeting senior ministers and chief medical officer Paul Kelly today to discuss the potential relaxation of isolation requirements for a range of industries. Health guidelines allow workers in essential industries including critical food and grocery production, logistics and distribution to return to work despite being a close contact if they are asymptomatic. Some of the services being considered include vets and childcare, education, rail and air. Immigration minister Alex Hawke is yet to confirm whether he will recancel Djokovic’s visa less than a week out from the Australian Open. The world No 1 hit the courts yesterday afternoon as the saga continues. Australian Border Force is now investigating whether Djokovic incorrectly declared he had not travelled and would not do so for two weeks before his flight to Australia, as images emerge of the tennis player that seemingly showing him in in Belgrade on Christmas Day. Further north, Tropical Cyclone Tiffany has reintensified today along the Gulf of Carpentaria after being downgraded to a tropical low as it crossed Cape York in far north Queensland on Monday evening. The cyclone is expected to reach the mainland near Port Roper in the NT about midday. And meat has been the latest victim of supply shortages amid the Omicron wave. Staff shortages have significantly cut sales at major chicken supplier Ingham’s and made some products unavailable at one of its big customers, KFC.An Extinction Rebellion activist whose home was raided by Western Australia’s counter-terror police over a chalk message has had the case against her thrown out by a Perth magistrate. Rosa Hicks was one of six arrested after a group of activists used washable chalk paint to write messages on a pedestrian bridge in Perth within view of Woodside’s headquarters to protest the company’s development of the $16bn Scarborough gas project. Hicks was not involved in applying the paint, arrived after the protest had started and took photos on someone else’s phone. She said she did not take any active part and was very conscious of avoiding any violation of the conditions of her visa. Two weeks after the protest, on 19 August 2021, officers with the state security investigation group – a division of the Western Australian police force referred to as the state’s “counter-terrorism police” – raided the homes of the six activists in the early hours of the morning. Four people who actually applied the paint have since pleaded guilty to damaging property by graffiti and received fines and a fifth activist is awaiting a trial to begin in April. However, police prosecutors maintained that Hicks’ photographing the incident amounted to aiding and abetting, despite her not being involved in applying the messages. At a trial in the Perth magistrates court on Monday, prosecutors played half an hour of CCTV footage tracking Hicks’ movements that confirmed her account of events and a recording of the interview she gave police during the raid on her home. Magistrate Matthew Holgate, however, threw out the case on the grounds it had no legal basis. WA police were ordered to cover Hicks’ legal costs of $3,300. Hicks, who is from the UK, described the decision as an “anti-climactic relief” as police prosecutors had been steadfast in keeping the prosecution going. “It’s just a huge waste of time. A huge waste of money. A huge waste of state security resources,” Hicks said. “Not only have they wasted all those resources but they’ve treated me like a dangerous criminal by not allowing me to see my friends with non-association bail conditions and taking my phone, making me feel like I was really dangerous. “I’ve had to go through all this stress, I’ve had to have my house raided, I’ve had to live in fear of being deported, when in actual fact there was no case.” Hicks’ lawyer, Anthony Eyers, a barrister with Equus Chambers in Perth said any prosecution would have set a bad precedent by criminalising the act of being near protest actions. “It’s the thin end of the wedge,” Eyers said. “If these prosecutions are allowed to stand, they will invariably generate precedents affecting fundamental freedom of expression and freedom of movement, and association. “It’s an unfortunately trivial example of how easy people’s fundamental rights could be eroded against the background of [governments] promoting the interests of big businesses to the detriment of the environment.” The decision comes as other environmental protesters have had strict non-association bail conditions and harsh financial penalties imposed – contributing to what some human rights groups and NGOs say is an alarming trend of repression around the country. In November, three activists with the Scarborough Gas Action Alliance blockaded the only road into the Burrup Peninsula in WA’s far north for 16 hours. The area is home to a significant amount of gas industry infrastructure. Caleb Houseman, who took part in the protest, received a $1,100 fine after pleading guilty in late December to failing to comply with a move on notice, obstruction of a carriageway and obstruction of police. The magistrate rejected an attempt to impose an additional $55,000 in restitution to WA police after finding prosecutors failed to cite proper legal authority to justify the charge and did not give his lawyers adequate time to respond. Sophie McNeill, the Australia researcher with Human Rights Watch, said the decision in Hicks’ case was a sensible outcome to an “overzealous” prosecution. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “There has been a concerning trend in Australia recently with police targeting peaceful climate activists with overly harsh tactics and charges,” McNeill said. “The magistrate rightly threw out these charges and I think it shows how excessive and overzealous the WA authorities were in pursuing this case.”The government of Israel was asked to financially contribute to the 2022 Sydney festival by someone from the festival’s management, a representative from the Israeli embassy in Canberra has claimed. The deputy Israeli ambassador to Australia, Ron Gerstenfeld, told ABC radio on Wednesday that “someone from management” approached the embassy for sponsorship of the Sydney Dance Company production of Decadance, a work devised by Tel Aviv choreographer Ohad Naharin. “They told us about it … and we were happy and honoured to support it,” Gerstenfeld said. “We didn’t think about it twice … and there were no strings attached. We didn’t ask any promises from [the festival] or the dance company to do something, we didn’t intervene in anything, so it’s a bit of hypocrisy to say we are doing some sort of art-wash in order to hide some kind of Israeli activities in any other sphere.” Division continues over the Sydney festival decision to accept the $20,000 sponsorship with politicians and the militant Palestinian organisation Hamas joining the debate over the past five days. More than 30 productions and individual performers have either pulled out of the festival, or removed themselves from the festival’s banner, to protest the Israeli government’s involvement. In correspondence seen by Guardian Australia dated 20 December, the festival board chairperson, David Kirk, told a coalition of groups lobbying the festival to terminate the Israeli sponsorship that the $20,000 would also pay for a Q&amp;A session hosted by the Israeli embassy, at an invitation-only festival event at the Sydney Opera House. A spokesperson from the embassy told the Guardian the Q&amp;A event was “planned as a private arts and culture event” and confirmed a Sydney festival statement that the event had been cancelled due to Covid-19 concerns. Despite continued requests for comment, festival management and its board – which met on Tuesday night to discuss the crisis – have refused to address the issue publicly since releasing a statement on 4 January, standing by the Israeli embassy deal but pledging to review how future sponsorships would be handled. On Wednesday, Gerstenfeld described the boycott organisers as “agents of chaos” and accused them of anti-Semitism and of politicising the festival. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Writer Michael Mohammed Ahmad, one of the boycott organisers who last month announced he would no longer be joining the festival board as planned, said it was the festival, not the boycotters, who were engaging in a political act. “It is completely paradoxical and a contradictory argument for the festival to defend the most politically contentious nation on earth, and claim that this is non-political,” he told the Guardian. “The non-political position would have been to withdraw and to tell the Israeli embassy that [the festival] is not a political organisation so it has to end this partnership. “You have to ask, why is the Sydney festival putting Israel ahead of the festival itself, and the hundreds of artists caught up in this?” Last Friday, Hamas issued a statement via the Palestinian Information Center supporting the boycott. Another boycott spokesperson, Fahad Ali, said it would be wrong for people to assume guilt by association with any group. “This campaign is big, it’s gone global,” he said. “Of course, Hamas or various other groups are going to react in some kind of way. But it would be nonsensical to assume as some people have suggested that just because one group supports what we’re doing that we immediately endorse that group, or that we are guilty by association.” The comedian Judith Lucy and singer-songwriter Saint Claire are among the latest acts to pull out of the festival. Lucy placed blame for the division within the arts community squarely at the feet of the festival board. “As has been pointed out by other [billed] artists, we’ll be condemned no matter what we do,” she posted on Facebook, saying she was reluctant to add her voice to an already polarised situation. “But after sitting with this for days, I’ve decided not to perform. I can’t support the actions of the board; particularly their sponsorship deal with the Israeli embassy but also leaving their artists in the shit.” Melbourne band Tropical Fuck Storm accused the festival board of handing billed artists a “shit sandwich”. The group posted on Instagram that by choosing to accept such a divisive sponsorship it “would inevitably mean that hundreds of unwitting artists (who are having a rough enough time with the pandemic as it is) would become the targets of online harassment, bullying, smear campaigns, ridiculous accusations, misrepresentations and abuse from total strangers who have no idea what’s actually going on behind the scenes, what any artist’s position is or even what they’re talking about”. Late last week, the Guardian put a series of questions to Kirk concerning how the decision to accept the Israeli embassy sponsorship was made, and what, if any, risk assessments were undertaken. On Monday, the festival’s executive director, Christopher Tooher, speaking on behalf of Kirk, said the board would not discuss internal deliberations. Posting on Facebook on Saturday, the singer Katie Noonan said she had experienced “vigorous and quite aggressive” social media pressure to join the boycott. “I could not ask my fellow indie artists to turn down paid work after the hardest 2 years of their lives. Simple,” she posted. This article was amended on 13 January 2022. An earlier version incorrectly listed the Hayes theatre production Lizzie the Musical as among the shows boycotting.Seasonal workers in the UK on a post-Brexit pilot scheme to harvest fruit and vegetables were subjected to “unacceptable” welfare conditions, according to a government review. Issues cited by workers included a lack of health and safety equipment, racism, and accommodation without any bathrooms, running water or kitchens. The UK launched the seasonal workers pilot scheme in 2019 after concerns about a shortage of labour for harvesting jobs on farms on leaving the EU. Most of the 2,481 workers who came to the UK under the scheme were employed picking soft fruits, almost entirely on farms in England and Scotland. A UK government survey of workers found that workers had not been given employment contracts in their native language; had not been provided health and safety equipment, as they had been promised and were legally required to do; and that they had been subjected to unfair treatment by farm managers, including racism, discrimination and mistreatment, allegedly on the grounds of workers’ nationality. Recruitment presentations to potential applicants for the pilot scheme were sometimes found not to have accurately reflected the accommodation, which was mostly on the farms. In the survey, 15% of respondents said their accommodation was neither safe, comfortable, hygienic nor warm, and 10% said their accommodation had no bathroom, no running water and no kitchen. The findings have raised concerns that conditions for foreign workers in the UK’s agricultural sector have not improved in recent years, despite commitments to crackdown on exploitative conditions. A Scottish government-funded review last year also found seasonal workers reporting degrading and unsafe living conditions, as well as poor health and safety practices. The Morecambe Bay tragedy in 2004, in which 23 Chinese cockle-pickers drowned while harvesting the shellfish, prompted the creation of the Gangmasters Licensing Authority, which became the Gangmasters and Labour Abuse Authority (GLAA) in 2017, to combat labour abuses. The GLAA’s remit includes ensuring workers receive a minimum wage, adequate accommodation, safe transport, proper contracts and decent working conditions. The recruitment operators Concordia and Pro-Force were selected to manage the pilot phase of the scheme, which required the firms to “maintain high standards of immigration control and migrant welfare”. The scheme has recently been extended to 2024, with two additional firms licensed to bring workers to the UK for employment in the horticulture sector. Up to 30,000 visas are available for this year – with a further 10,000 if demand allows. The joint review by the Home Office and Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, published on 24 December, said that the pilot had protected workers from modern slavery and other labour abuses but that other “alleged welfare issues identified are unacceptable”. It said the Home Office had reviewed the requirements placed on the scheme operators and updated the seasonal worker sponsor guidance to tighten the compliance requirements. Pro-Force said it did not want to comment at this stage. Concordia said the report had identified that most workers found the scheme met their expectations and either wanted to return or would recommend it to a friend or relative. “Over the last three years, we have worked with various government departments in an iterative and collaborative way to continually improve and expand the scheme,” it said. “As a charity, we take the utmost care to try to ensure that workers recruited on this scheme have a beneficial experience in the UK; as a labour provider we strive to ensure that our member farms get the labour they need in order to feed the nation.”“Hope you can share other such longest gaps in appearances for the same club without leaving,” tweets Chittaranjan following Phil Jones’s return to Manchester United action after a 712-day absence. Here you go … 745 days: Joe Perry flags up that QPR’s Luke Young was sidelined and struggled with a hip injury from 24 March 2012 until his return on 8 April 2014. 910 days: Rangers’ Ian Durrant was infamously injured by Neil Simpson against Aberdeen on 8 October 1988 and only made it back to the first team on 6 April 1991 (hat tip to David Ferguson). A rivalry between the clubs has sustained itself ever since. 1,120 days: “John Kennedy of Celtic had more than three years between successive appearances for the club,” writes Rhuaraidh Fleming. “He played in the Old Firm derby on 28 March before suffering a horror tackle on his international debut for Scotland on 31 March 2004. He wouldn’t return to action until 22 April 2007.” 1,221 days: Due to an injury crisis, the Wycombe manager, Gareth Ainsworth, brought himself out of retirement to play in their Checkatrade Trophy game against Northampton on 30 August 2016, having hung up his boots at Adams Park on 27 April 2013. “[The appetite to play] never disappears and you always think you can do it,” said Ainsworth. “I probably have to say thanks to my Sunday league team as well because they have kept me pretty fit and I have not let the game go.” Thanks again to Joe for that one. 1,455 days: “At the beginning of the 1984-85 season, the professional players in Spain called for a strike, so the second round was played with amateur and youth players,” recalls Jordi Gómez. “Most of them had their only first-team experience that day, but a few proved their skill and got a chance to play in the seasons that followed. And then there was Luis Milla, who played for Barcelona that day (9 September 1984) at only 18 years old, and had to wait almost four years (3 September 1988) for his next match. If you think that proves great patience and faithfulness to the club, it should be noted that after a year and a half he couldn’t agree contract terms and he left for Real Madrid, no less.” 2,925 days: Lewis Baker made his second Chelsea first-team performance in their FA Cup win over Chesterfield on Saturday. He had previously been given a brief debut appearance in the Blues’ FA Cup victory at Derby on 5 January 2014, before being sent out on eight long-term loan, rather than permanent, deals. High-scoring aggregate draws in one season “What is the largest goal tally for two teams combined drawing in both their home and away fixtures in a season? I presume there are examples of say 3-3 and 4-4 but are there any really big tallies where they just got two points?” asks John McDougall. John Curry gets the ball rolling: “In the old Division One, 1958-59, Spurs drew 1-1 away to Portsmouth in October and 4-4 at home in the following February.” A good start but Clive Denny can go higher. “Charlton may be contenders,” he offers. “Charlton v Middlesbrough finished 6-6 on 22 October 1960 at the Valley, with the return fixture 2-2. More remarkable, but not draws, were the Christmas fixtures between Charlton and Plymouth in 1960. Charlton won 6-4 at the Valley on Boxing Day, then lost 6-4 at Plymouth the very next day. Still just two points apiece.” Calendar woes (2) Last week’s column led on footballers appearing on club calendars in years they never even played for the team. But there’s more and it’s very good … Step forward Donald Vass, who picked up the baton and ran with it for this spectacular thread on the infamous Portsmouth 2013 calendar. “Some context,” he begins. “Pompey were enduring a truly bleak 2012-13 season. We were in administration, on a grim 23-game winless run, and were set to suffer our third relegation in four seasons, eventually finishing 24th to complete our collapse from Premier League to League Two. Crucially, the financial trouble facing the club at the time meant we were desperately short of players. We had a threadbare squad cobbled together with pretty much anyone who was available at the time. “Academy youngsters, loanees, journeymen on one-month contracts and even 40-year-old coach Ashley Westwood was called out of retirement to make an appearance for a particularly memorable EFL Cup tie at Plymouth. Fifty-five different players made appearances for the club that season. So the calendar was always likely to be a disaster. The club were operating week-to-week, while the product was sent to the printers months in advance. It was already wildly out of date by the time it was unwrapped by fans on Christmas Day … and would only get worse from there.” Here it is in all its glory … Knowledge archive “Have they ever used an actual hat for the FA Cup draw?” asked Andy Morrison in 2006. “If so, when was it last used, and what kind of hat was it?” Early draws really did involve headwear; a top hat covered by a handkerchief, to be precise. It was filled with pieces of paper bearing the names of the clubs, with a member of the FA committee delicately lifting a corner of the handkerchief to draw the ties. Bryon Butler’s history of the competition is the only source of information on this arcane ritual, as until the first radio coverage of the draw, in December 1935, it was “barred and bolted against all unofficial comers” – including the press. By then, the bag and ball arrangement was in place. Indeed, the then FA secretary, Sir Stanley Rous, was asked by the BBC to rattle the balls in the bag for dramatic effect. David Barber, the FA’s historian, suggested that the top hat and handkerchief met their demise in a drive for modernisation around 1914. Nevertheless, phrases such as “in the hat for the next round” will always have their roots in the actual routine of the draw. Can you help? “I saw recently that Andrea Barzagli has opened a vineyard, and it got me thinking: alongside Andrea Pirlo (wine), Richard Eckersley (oat milk) and Carlo Ancelotti (parmesan), is it possible to put together a team or squad who have a stake in food production?” asks Joe Morris. “Has any player had to leave a game after colliding with a referee?” wonders Gerard Parker. • Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.That the Women’s Super League leaders, Arsenal, were toppled by a previously winless Birmingham on Sunday was a shock. But perhaps the bigger surprise was the manner of the Gunners’ limp defence of their status as the only team not to have lost. Birmingham’s 2-0 victory was no smash and grab but reward for an intelligent and driven performance that put their opponents to shame. Arsenal’s decline, starting with the 3-0 FA Cup final defeat by Chelsea on 5 December, has been rapid. In the 18 previous games, from Champions League qualifying until December, Arsenal suffered a bruising 4-1 defeat in Barcelona and dropped two WSL points in a 1-1 draw with Tottenham. The team averaged 3.39 goals per game and conceded 0.55. In the five matches since, starting with the final, they have averaged one goal a game and conceded 2.6 (13 in five games as opposed to 10 in 18 before). Europe’s best, Barcelona and Chelsea, have emphatically exposed Jonas Eidevall’s new-look Arsenal but equally sides such as Hoffenheim, who finished third in the Bundesliga last season, and Birmingham have shown that it is not hard to nullify the previously potent Gunners. Pinpointing exactly what has caused things to unravel so dramatically is not easy. The loss of the influential centre-back Leah Williamson after November’s draw with Tottenham was a huge blow. Jen Beattie, Lotte Wubben-Moy, Steph Catley, Viki Schnaderbeck and Frida Maanum have been tried in search of a centre-half pairing that can cope with the absence of the ball-playing and pacy Williamson, but none have filled the void and a mixture of poor positioning, lack of speed and woeful individual errors have eroded any air of infallibility. The loss of one player, though, should not destabilise the team to such an extent. Arsenal’s problems are not limited to the back. Across the pitch the fluidity and cohesion so potent at the start of the season have gone. A heavy schedule meant a number of players went straight from the Olympics into pre-season training, Champions League qualifiers and the season proper, which included the quarter-finals, semi-finals and final of last season’s FA Cup. That has undoubtedly taken a toll and it has not just affected Arsenal. Chelsea’s dominant display in the FA Cup final was the last win of the year for Emma Hayes’s side as the Blues, who limped into 2022 having been knocked out of the Champions League thanks to a 0-0 draw at home to Juventus and 4-0 defeat at Wolfsburg and lost to Reading in the league in between. There was perhaps hope that the winter break would rejuvenate Arsenal legs and minds but the Birmingham defeat suggests the problems are deeper and Eidevall’s seemingly straightforward entry into English football now looks anything but. January signings, with Arsenal linked to the Swedish forward Stina Blackstenius and believed to be hunting for a centre-back, could prompt a revival of fortunes and are necessary. With Arsenal’s three Australian players – Catley, the forward Caitlin Foord and goalkeeper Lydia Williams – competing in the Asian Cup in India, which runs until 6 February, and the defender Anna Patten loaned to Aston Villa, Eidevall is short of players. There are also question marks hanging over the futures of a number of squad members. Although Williamson signed a new deal on Wednesday, players including the prolific striker Vivianne Miedema and midfielder Jordan Nobbs have contracts that are due to expire at the end of the season. This kind of uncertainty cannot be healthy for the morale of the squad. The closer the summer gets the more these issues loom large and compound other problems the team face. The games are coming thick and fast and there is little time to work on structural issues on the training pitch but there is an urgent need to grind out positive results to rebuild seemingly shattered confidence. That will not be easy. Reading, unbeaten since the start of October, are up next. Then Manchester United await in the League Cup before Arsenal travel to a resurgent Manchester City. Their WSL fate is in their own hands, the team four points ahead of Chelsea, who have a game in hand and host Arsenal in February. Eidevall’s side are also in the Champions League last eight, facing Wolfsburg. But channelling the early-season form and confidence will be critical to any fast-diminishing hopes of reclaiming the WSL title after back-to-back Chelsea triumphs.So here is Scream. Actually, it should be called Scream 5, and they must surely have thought about 5CREAM. But this one has gone for the solemn franchise-tic of jettisoning the title number as if longevity entitles the latest iteration to automatic classic status. In fact, Scream pre-emptively satirises precisely this affectation, with fans mocking the makers of the film-within-a-film “Stab” franchise who are pompously calling their latest episode “Stab”, instead of Stab 8. There is some watchable gonzo humour to this fivequel (though I hid under my seat for the violent bits.) The Scream films, about a serial killer called Ghostface who slaughtered his victims according to the scary-movie rules tabulated by nerd-cool connoisseurs and who can only be survived or defeated by sticking to those rules, were born in the irony boom of the 90s. (My fellow film critic Matthew Turner points out that Scream movies also had an unintended irony, on which they are very silent: the Weinstein brothers were involved in production and distribution and the franchise featured the assault and abuse of female actors.) Horror maestro Wes Craven, who died in 2015, directed the first four and this fifth film is directed by Matt Bettinelli-Olpin and Tyler Gillett. Original Scream writer Kevin Williamson has an executive producer credit. We are back in Woodsboro, the small town where the trouble started. Jenna Ortega plays Tara (pronounced “terror”), a home-alone teen who is texting her friend and intensely annoyed by ringing from something called a “landline”. A horribly familiar voice asks her what scary movies she likes – and the ghastly old boomer psychopath is enraged when Tara pertly nominates The Babadook, this “exalted horror” being apparently superior to the cheesy slasher canon. Further infuriated when this Gen Z wokester starts talking about It Follows and The Witch, Ghostface shows up in person with his cloak and mask and the cold-steel mayhem ensues. Tara’s long-estranged sister Sam (Melissa Barrera) arrives with her boyfriend Richie (Jack Quaid) and reveals a grim secret about their connection to the original killings. And after some consultation with Tara’s friend group, Sam asks for help from veteran cop and Ghostface-nemesis Dewey Riley (David Arquette), whose involvement brings in Sidney Prescott (Neve Campbell) and Gale Riley (Courteney Cox). The horrible truth dawns. Ghostface is now involving them in a “requel” – a reboot-slash-sequel – whose purpose is to appease the toxic fandom by introducing a younger cast but respectfully leaving “legacy characters” like Riley, Sidney and Gale intact. And Ghostface is the most toxic fan of all. Perhaps there is less zap in Scream nowadays and archly invoking the newer generation of indie horror – Jordan Peele is mentioned, with absolute respect – only serves in the long run to remind you how elderly Scream is. But it’s still capable of delivering some piercing high-pitched decibels. • Scream is released on 13 January in Australia, and on 14 January in the US and UK.At last, we are waking up to the astonishingly oppressive measures in the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill, intended to criminalise effective protest. At last, there has been some coverage in the media, though still far too little. The Labour party is finally feeling some heat, and may find itself obliged to stop appeasing the Daily Mail and vote against the government’s brutal amendments in the House of Lords next week. But as we focus on this threat, we’re in danger of forgetting something else buried in this monstrous bill. It’s the provision that turns trespass from a civil into a criminal offence, allowing the police to arrest people who are Gypsies, Roma and Travellers (GRT) and confiscate their homes, if they stop in places that have not been designated for them. Under the proposed law, any adult member of the group can be imprisoned for up to three months. Given that authorised sites and stopping places cannot accommodate the GRT people who need them, this is a deliberate attack on a vulnerable minority. Put these elements together – the curtailment of protest and the persecution of a minority, alongside blatant corruption and barefaced lies, the bypassing of parliament and the new power in the nationality and borders bill enabling the government arbitrarily to remove people’s citizenship – and you see the makings of an authoritarian state. These measures look horribly familiar to anyone cognisant of 20th-century European history. But they also have deep roots in Britain’s peculiar brutalities. The persecution of mobile people goes back to the 1349 Ordinance of Labourers, which ruled that those deemed to be “vagrants” could be whipped or branded with hot irons. Laws passed in the 16th century decreed that “rogues”, “vagabonds” and other “masterless men” could have their ears sliced in two or bored with a hot poker. If they still failed to return to their own parish (regardless of whether they had one), they could be hanged. A 1554 statute enabled anyone calling themselves “Aegyptians” (Gypsies) to be summarily killed. Some of the brutal, pre-democratic legislation remains in force in England and Wales today. The 1824 Vagrancy Act is used by the police to arrest rough sleepers, still defined as “rogues and vagabonds”. In 2020, 573 people were prosecuted under this act. Some members of parliament sought to use the police bill to repeal this archaic law, but in November the government rejected their amendments. Now homeless people find themselves in an even worse position. Certain councils, seeking to interpret confusing government rules, have decided that they will offer housing support only to verified rough sleepers. They have advised homeless people to start sleeping on the streets, so they can be picked up by outreach teams, who will then try to find accommodation for them. Of course, they might first be picked up by the police, whereupon they can be prosecuted under the Vagrancy Act. If they try to house themselves, by occupying empty buildings, they can be prosecuted for that as well, because David Cameron’s government turned squatting from a civil into a criminal offence. Similarly, people who are Gypsies, Roma and Travellers have been deprived of places where they can lawfully stop, and then punished for the absence of provision. According to a study by the Community Architecture Group, between 1986 and 1993 roughly two-thirds of traditional Travellers’ sites, some of which had been used for thousands of years, were blocked and closed. Then, in 1994, John Major’s Criminal Justice Act granted the police new powers against GRT people stopping without authorisation. With a cruel and perverse twist, the same act repealed the duty of local government to provide authorised sites, and removed the grant aid funding these sites. Partly as a result, a recent study by the group Friends, Families and Travellers found that, of the 68 local authorities they surveyed, only eight had met their own identified need for Gypsy and Traveller pitches. Though there is a long waiting list of GRT households seeking authorised sites and stopping places, official pitches have declined by 8% in the past 10 years. Now the new bill would enable the police to confiscate people’s vehicles (in other words their homes) on the mere suspicion of trespass. When their homes have been seized and their parents arrested, GRT children are likely to be taken into care. The police bill would deprive this minority of everything: homes, livelihoods, identity, culture, even their families. And, like the homeless people trapped between the Vagrancy Act and the housing qualification, it would put people who are Gypsies, Roma and Travellers in an impossible position. To apply for an official pitch, you must demonstrate “proof of travelling”. But if you don’t have access to official pitches, travelling will put you outside the new law. In other words, it is not a particular behaviour that is being criminalised. It is the minority itself. The new authoritarianism meshes with a very old one, that harks back to an imagined world in which the peasants could be neatly divided into villeins (good) and vagrants (bad), where everyone knew their place, geographically and socially. Of course, the demonisation of mobile people, whether Roma or asylum seekers, does not extend to the government ministers and newspaper editors who might shift between their pads in London and their second homes in Cornwall or Tuscany. It’s about the rich controlling the poor, as if democracy had never happened. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnistThe boss of the UK’s largest energy supplier has said rocketing energy prices, which are adding to the soaring cost of living for British households, could last for as long as two years. Chris O’Shea, the chief executive of British Gas owner Centrica, said the energy market “suggests that high gas prices will be here for the next 18 months to two years”. O’Shea told the BBC there was no reason to think that gas prices would start to fall again “any time soon”. The rising global demand for gas is partly being driven by the energy transition, according to O’Shea, as countries move away from reliance on coal and oil. “As we move towards net zero, gas is a big transition fuel, so as you turn off coal-fired power stations in other countries, maybe there is more demand for gas,” O’Shea said. “There isn’t an abundance of gas that you can just turn on quickly, so I can’t say that this will be done in six months, or nine months, or a year.” However, O’Shea said he did not believe that increasing the domestic supply of gas from the North Sea would help to solve the energy crisis. “I’m not sure an increase in UK supply would have brought the price down from £3 a therm, as it was in December, from 50p as it was a year ago,” he said. “We bring gas in from the United States, from Norway, from Europe, from Qatar, from other places. So we’re not in a position to simply have the UK as an isolated energy market. We are part of a global market.” Consumers are bracing for a jump in what they pay for household energy in April, after the regulator reviews its energy price cap. Many expect Ofgem’s decision will lead to average bills soaring by as much as £700, taking the annual cost of electricity and gas for households on a supplier’s default tariff to £2,000. O’Shea, who has headed Centrica for almost two years, recently called on the government to help out struggling consumers by cutting VAT on energy bills, or stripping environmental levies from bills. According to O’Shea’s calculations, the VAT cut would shave £100 off the average annual bill. However, this move has been dismissed by the prime minister, Boris Johnson. O’Shea also suggested that the government should fund environmental and social levies through general taxation instead of household bills, which he estimated would cut the average annual total by £170. Last year 26 UK energy firms collapsed, and O’Shea has previously said that energy companies would have to pass on higher wholesale costs in order to survive, although he has insisted that Centrica would not want to receive a government bailout to help it keep bills down. O’Shea’s comments came as the chief executive of rival supplier, Ovo Energy, apologised for what he described as a “ridiculous” email sent to customers, advising them to cuddle their pets, eat “hearty bowls of porridge”, or do “a few star jumps” to lower their heating bills. Stephen Fitzpatrick, Ovo Energy’s founder and chief executive, blamed an employee for sending out the email, which he called “embarrassing”, adding that it “should never have been written”. “Somebody had a bad day and they sent out an email and the truth is, we should have caught it,” Fitzpatrick told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Wednesday. “I think it was probably meant with good intentions, but this is the kind of message that causes many customers a lot of upset.” Fitzpatrick said he was not expecting wholesale energy prices to fall until 2023 and called on the government to announce measures to ease the energy crisis. The UK’s third-largest energy supplier sent the email on Monday to customers of its SSE Energy Services, which Ovo acquired in 2020. The company was widely criticised for the tips on how to stay warm during the winter – described as “insulting” and “offensive” by MPs – which came at a time when millions of households are worrying about how they will cope with a significant increase in their energy bills.Sainsbury’s is to make £60m more in annual profits than predicted after enjoying better than expected food and drink sales over Christmas as shoppers bought more champagne than ever before. The UK’s second biggest supermarket said grocery sales rose 0.8% in the six weeks to 8 January, excluding Boxing Day, when it chose to close this year, as more people dined at home as the Omicron wave of Covid-19 put a dampener on trips to restaurants and pubs. Total sales slipped 2.4% over that period as the company said problems with the supply of electronic goods, TVs, gaming kit and toys hit trading at the group’s Argos chain . Simon Roberts, the chief executive of Sainsbury’s, said supply chain issues, driven by hold-ups with international shipping and production at factories in east Asia, were likely to continue for some weeks or months. Roberts said Sainsbury’s had taken on 22,000 temporary workers at Christmas, 10,000 more than a year before and 12,000 more than in 2019, as it tried to fend off staff shortages and keep shelves stocked in the face of the Omicron wave while handling additional home deliveries. About 15,000 of those temporary staff have stayed with the business into January as Roberts said Sainsbury’s was dealing with high absence rates resulting from Omicron. He said London stores were particularly affected by staff shortages but UK-wide absences were about half their peak at the start of the pandemic. Despite the fall in sales, Sainsbury’s said profit margins on non-food had improved as it had cut down on discounting. Online grocery sales were down 15% year on year but still almost double pre-pandemic levels. Sainsbury’s now expects to make underlying profits of £720m for the year to 8 January, up from £660m, with profit expectations boosted by the better than hoped for grocery sales, improved profit margins on non-food and lower than feared bad debts at its banking arm. Cost savings from closing delicatessens and other fresh food counters in stores, closing high street Argos outlets and shifting them into supermarkets, and merging distribution for Sainsbury’s and Argos also paid off. Roberts said: “I am really pleased with how we delivered for customers this Christmas. More people ate at home and our significant investment in value, innovation and service led to market share growth.” He said Sainsbury’s had gained share from rivals as it had cut prices on average despite inflation in the market. Sainsbury’s matched the discounter Aldi’s prices on key Christmas foods, such as turkey, sprouts, potatoes and gammon joints, pushing up sales volumes of those items by 23%. Sainsbury’s said it had seen its biggest ever sales of champagne, contributing to its best ever new year trade, while there was a surge in demand for last-minute online orders from Argos. The late surge came at the end of a tricky quarter in which sales at established stores were down 4.5%. Sales at Argos were down 16% in the three months to 8 January and clothing down almost 3% but Sainsbury’s said this was partly the result of a reduction in unprofitable discounting. It said full-price clothing sales rose 38%. Sophie Lund-Yates at Hargreaves Lansdown said Sainsbury’s had been able to strike the right balance in taking on the discounters on price but offering the right products. But she added: “As we embark on the new year there are some lingering challenges. General merchandise sales remain subdued, and while current events including supply chain disruption are partly to blame, there are structural declines in some markets. Sainsbury’s is especially exposed to this market thanks to the acquisition of Argos.”Team that will be most missed in the postseason The Los Angeles Chargers. Extra chances to see Justin Herbert doing Justin Herbert things should be treasured. Brandon Staley’s side was flawed – their run defense would likely have doomed them in any playoff matchup – but Herbert’s excellence would have balanced the scales, giving the Chargers a shot at causing an upset. OC It would have been more fun to see Justin Hebert’s Chargers making the playoffs rather than the Pittsburgh Steelers (it’s a shame their head coach flunked the Prisoner’s Dilemma) but in all honesty, the current NFL postseason format is forgiving enough that any team that doesn’t qualify doesn’t deserve to. HF The Chargers and it’s not even a close second. It’s a shame Los Angeles couldn’t eke out the, uh, tie against Las Vegas because the NFL world deserves to see Justin Herbert and all his gifts in the postseason. Between Herbert, Austin Ekeler, Keenan Allen and Mike Williams, the Chargers have as explosive an offense as anyone, and their defense was starting to get healthy – though not healthy enough to stop Las Vegas on third-and-5 in overtime. Welp. MJ The Baltimore Ravens. They’re always a tough out, and their rivalry with the Titans has been something of a standing appointment these last few years. But their loss to the Steelers in the season finale means another year of Lamar Jackson having to hear that he can’t make a deep playoff run. If only he had been healthy … AL High-seeded team at risk of going out early The Dallas Cowboys are loaded on both sides of the ball. But the Niners are just the kind of team that can give them trouble. Kyle Shanahan’s offense is still running the ball at will. On defense, they have one of the highest pressures rates in the league when rushing just four and playing coverage behind. Dak Prescott is a founder member of the Do Not Blitz club. The only chance to slow the Dallas offense: create pressure with four pass-rushers. The Niners can do that, and they can churn out yards on the ground, backing up Dallas’ ferocious pass rush. OC The Tennessee Titans are only the top seed in the AFC because somebody had to be, not because they were heads and shoulders above the rest of the conference. If star running back Derrick Henry ends up returning and playing like peak Derrick Henry, they should be a significant problem to everybody. If not, a one-and-done wouldn’t be shocking. HF The Kansas City Chiefs. The two-time defending AFC champions can make multiple mistakes during wild-card weekend and still top the Steelers. Beyond that, if Patrick Mahomes and co remotely resemble their first-half-of-the-season selves, a team that was turnover prone and shot itself in the foot with dumb penalties, they could see a divisional round exit. The defense has been astounding the second half, but did surrender over 800 yards in the past two games. MJ The Tampa Bay Buccaneers. Word is they’re a little thin at wide receiver … AL Dark horse to win When you start putting together the perfect playoff cocktail, you start with three things: A defense that can pressure with four; a quarterback that can create magic on third downs; an offense that can hit three or four splash plays a game. The Cincinnati Bengals tick all the boxes. There are issues on the edges – their linebackers aren’t good enough; the running game isn’t consistent – but those are playoff wants, dependent on matchups. The Bengals have all of the championship needs. OC Do the Buffalo Bills count as a dark horse? Maybe not at the start of the season, but it feels like Buffalo’s stock has dropped after nearly letting the New England Patriots sneak in to win the division. However, the Bills ended the season on a relative upswing. An iffy AFC field and a Josh Allen hot streak could result in an unlikely Super Bowl appearance. HF Yes, the San Francisco 49ers barely squeaked into the playoffs but if they play like they did in the second half against the Rams, they can beat anyone. The stars will have to align. Jimmy Garoppolo will have to play mistake-free football. Kyle Shanahan will have to get creative with Deebo Samuel’s usage from the get-go. And the secondary will have to play the ball of their life against Dallas and any future opponents. MJ Have you heard? Derrick Henry, the league’s most talent rusher, is returning to a Titans team that locked up the No 1 seed in his absence. Be afraid, Chiefs fans. Be very, very afraid. AL The most important player will be … Joe Burrow. The Bengals have a chance to string together upsets if Burrow is able to continue his recent hot streak. The Cincy offensive line isn’t good enough to consistently block playoff-caliber pass-rushes, but Burrow has a way of slipping and sliding out of pressure, of extending plays, and punishing defenses when he does so. OC Is it boring to say Green Bay Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers, who at the very least is the most interesting player in the postseason? Rodgers has been the best player in football on the field and a lightning rod off it. You know your reputation has taken a hit when experts start spreading (apparently baseless) rumors that you will sit out the freaking Super Bowl. HF Aaron Rodgers. Rodgers hasn’t won a Super Bowl in a decade. He’s lost back-to-back NFC championship games. Nothing to scoff at for a pedestrian quarterback, but Rodgers is in a different league. With the No 1 seed and a ferocious defense, Rodgers has never been as well positioned to win a title. Whether he does could go a long way to determining his future, which could have a major domino effect on the league. MJ QAron (aka Aaron Rodgers). The Chiefs at least know they can count on Chad Henne to win a game for them. But if the presumptive league MVP goes down? The Packers’ title hopes will fall to Jordan Love – and we all got a glimpse of how that project is going when the Pack fell to the Chiefs in Week 9. AL AFC championship game Chiefs over Bengals OC Chiefs over Bills HF Titans over Bills MJ Titans over Chiefs AL NFC championship game Packers over Buccaneers OC Buccaneers over Packers HF Packers over Buccaneers MJ Packers over Cardinals AL Super Bowl LVI Packers over Chiefs. When trying to figure out contenders, you have to look at the certainties. Two things are certain about the Packers: In Aaron Rodgers and Davante Adams, they have the surest connection of any quarterback and playmaker in the league; Rodgers does not turn the ball over. Those are sound building blocks. On top of that, you can add a fearsome pass rush, versatility at linebacker – which allows them to toggle to different looks depending on the matchup – and, if healthy and available, a true shutdown corner, the likes of which it’s tough to find elsewhere in the playoffs. There are concerns. Green Bay’s special teams unit is a disaster of doomsday-ish import; the team’s offensive line has struggled in protection for much of the year. But neither of those flaws has been enough to offset Rodgers’ precision and lack of turnovers. Green Bay steal possessions. And when they have the ball, they have the surest quarterback-receiver tandem in the league. Of all the contenders, they have the fewest warts. OC Chiefs over Buccaneers. How about a Super Bowl rematch with a different outcome? This season’s Chiefs have a better defense than the previous edition while the high-scoring offense is mostly the same. Meanwhile, the division-winning Buccaneers won’t have to survive the playoffs as a wild-card team. Look for the Chiefs will to dish out revenge in a changing-of-the-guard game: an erratic Tom Brady will show his age for the first time and Patrick Mahomes will clinch a Super Bowl MVP trophy before the fourth quarter has even ended. HF Packers over Titans. Tennessee will make a valiant run aided by AJ Brown, who has been phenomenal since returning, and Derrick Henry, the most impactful rusher in football. Unfortunately for the Titans, they will face off against the most impactful player in the game, who is way overdue for a second Super Bowl ring. The Pack were already well-positioned seeding and talent wise, and they have a strong track record of winning close games this season (5-1 in games decided by three points or less). Add in the possible returns from injury of left tackle David Bakhtiarti, cornerbacck Jaire Alexander and linebackers Za’Darius Smith, three of their best players, and the Packers are sitting pretty. MJ Packers over Titans. Again, if nothing happens to Rodgers, Green Bay should have no problem neutralizing Tennessee’s play-action attack on the way to claiming a fifth Lombardi trophy for Titletown. They’ve been the class of the league all season, and their record might actually show it if Rodgers hadn’t missed that Week 9 Chiefs game with … you know. A second ring, and presumably another Super Bowl MVP nod with it, might not change the conversation about the league’s best all-around passer relative to the GOAT Tom Brady or baby-GOAT Pat Mahomes. But it would promote Rodgers into that all-time great echelon just beneath it – where Peyton Manning, Ben Roethlisberger and co reside. It’s just a shame it all has to end here, as Rodgers seems bent on moving on from the Packers after this season. ALIt couldn’t happen again … could it? Reflections on last year’s 6 January Capitol riot in the US – amid a trenchantly divided political landscape between Democrats and Republicans – have led many observers to wonder whether the country could seriously be on the path to another civil war. Washington bureau chief David Smith asks the experts, while columnist Jonathan Freedland ponders the sinister influence of Donald Trump and a make-or-break year for democracy in the US. Tennis’s Novak Djokovic found himself in the wrong sort of court this week as a row over vaccine requirements for his Australian visa rumbled on. Tumaini Carayol reports from Melbourne on a tough week for the world No 1, whose stance has earned him a dubious new fanbase of anti-vaxxers and far-right figures. Startling unrest in Kazakhstan last week led to hundreds of people being killed and several thousand detained by authorities. An information blackout in the authoritarian central Asian nation meant that much remained unclear about the circumstances. But, as Shaun Walker and Peter Leonard write, it was probably born from frustrations felt by millions living in voiceless poverty while elites continue to siphon away profits from the country’s natural wealth. The Deepwater Horizon oil rig explosion in 2010 resulted in one of the worst environmental disasters. Much of the focus since then has been on those responsible and the damage caused, but what of those workers who survived? Eyal Press follows one man’s quest for justice. Olly Alexander was already a successful pop star before the award-winning TV drama It’s a Sin made his name as an actor. Rebecca Nicholson hears how he survived a difficult lockdown, and why his next career move will be a return to music. Get the magazine delivered to your home address.“Smiling doesn’t win you gold medals,” the gymnast Simone Biles famously retorted when a judge told her to smile more. While that may be true, few would deny that life without smiles would be diminished in ways we can scarcely imagine. What do they mean to us? Does the physical act of smiling create joy, or the other way around? What happens if you can’t smile, even though you want to? These are questions that the distinguished American playwright Sarah Ruhl explores, with a winning combination of wisdom and erudition. Ruhl lost her smile for more than 10 years due to Bell’s palsy, which caused the left side of her face to be almost completely paralysed. The morning after she gave birth to twins, a lactation consultant remarked that her eye looked droopy. When she looked in the mirror, she was astonished to see that half her face had fallen. She couldn’t move the left side at all. That moment marked a profound shift in her life. “Before I looked in the mirror, I was the same person. After looking in the mirror, entirely different.” Bell’s palsy can be brought on by childbirth, although the link is not well understood. While most sufferers recover in weeks or months, Ruhl was one of the unlucky few in whom it endures. At the time, Ruhl was on a professional high; one of her plays had just transferred to Broadway, and was nominated for a Tony award. She had been anxious about the impact of twins on her career (she already had an older daughter, aged three). Soon after they were born, Vanity Fair asked her to do a Tony awards photoshoot. Photographers yelled at her on the red carpet: “What’s wrong with you – you can’t smile for your Tony?” When she saw the photo, she couldn’t bear her expression of existential pain, and resolved not to be photographed again. “I felt inside a paradox: I thought I could not truly re-enter the world again until I could smile; and yet, how could I be happy enough to smile, when I couldn’t re-enter the world?” The personal implications were more torturous still. What does it do to her babies, she wonders, to look into an unsmiling face every day? Will they know that their mother loves and delights in them? She reads that mothers teach children empathy by mirroring their facial expressions. Will her inability to do so mess her children up? And on it goes, Ruhl’s ability to feel joy maddeningly limited by her inability to express it. She observes that joy is a profoundly embodied experience, and quotes Thich Nhat Hanh: “Sometimes your joy is the source of your smile, but sometimes your smile can be the source of your joy.” Ruhl makes many interesting observations on the wider significance of smiles, from strangers in the street demanding that women should smile, to the frozen statue of Hermione in The Winter’s Tale. But she wears her academic hat lightly, skipping easily from Shakespeare back to the chaos of her family life, in which theatre rewrites are cut short because all three children are vomiting. This is a book about far more than smiles: some of the most touching sections look back at Ruhl’s childhood, and the experiences that propelled her into theatre. The tale of a health condition is, more interestingly, the tale of the person it afflicts. The book takes gentle aim at the limitations of conventional medicine, with its stark division between the mind and the body. Like many people who live with chronic health conditions, Ruhl is forced to become part detective, part medical researcher, as she tracks down the people and therapies that work for her. But Smile is not just a medical memoir; it’s the story of a passionate and committed woman trying to forge a life that nourishes her creativity, her children, her health and joy. That’s a journey many of us can relate to – and this book serves as a welcome invitation to worry about it all a little less, and smile a little more. • Smile by Sarah Ruhl (Vintage, £16.99). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Boris Johnson faces a make-or-break session of prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, with furious Conservative MPs awaiting his explanation of the “bring your own booze” garden party in May 2020. Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, said: “He has an opportunity now to come clean to the British public, who are devastated by these allegations. “What’s astonishing is the prime minister has had a couple of days now where he could have quite simply answered that question yes or no – was you there at this party? – and he’s refused to do that.” More than 10 Conservative MPs have publicly criticised the Downing Street gathering, details of which emerged in a leaked email from Johnson’s principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds. The Amber Valley MP Nigel Mills said Johnson’s position would be “untenable” if he attended the party. “If the prime minister knowingly attended a party, I can’t see how he can survive having accepted resignations for far less,” he told BBC News. “He accepted the resignation of his spokesperson [Allegra Stratton] for not attending a party but joking about it at a time of much lighter restrictions. I just think that’s untenable.” Many more Tory MPs are expressing anger in private, though some are prepared to await the findings of an inquiry by the civil servant Sue Gray into a string of parties in Downing Street. One former minister said Conservatives would be watching prime minister’s questions closely. “Off the back of that, you will get a very clear sense from colleagues about whether they think that is a sustainable position.” Several witnesses have said Johnson and his wife, Carrie, attended the gathering. The Liberal Democrat leader, Ed Davey, called for him to resign. “Millions of people obeyed the lockdown rules, often at huge personal cost. They missed funerals, cancelled weddings and said goodbye to dying loved ones on video calls – some on the very day that No 10 illegally hosted a garden party,” he said. “Boris Johnson has become a threat to health of our nation, and for the sake of the country still gripped by this awful pandemic he must resign.” The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, will emerge from Covid self-isolation to pose questions to Johnson in the House of Commons, after receiving a second negative lateral flow test. He is expected to accuse the prime minister of misleading parliament about his role in lockdown social events. The 20 May party – as well as a gathering on 15 May revealed by the Guardian – took place at a time when the public were allowed to meet outdoors only one person from outside their household. The government did not put forward a minister to answer questions in broadcast interviews on Wednesday morning. On Tuesday, the junior minister Michael Ellis was sent out to take MPs’ questions about the party, insisting most of these must wait for the Gray inquiry. Rayner said: “Of course Sue Gray has an important role in terms of the wider investigation, but we don’t need to wait for that.” She added that the Metropolitan police “could and should” investigate the event. The Met have said they are in discussions with the Cabinet Office about the claims.Dusan Vlahovic is becoming almost as permanent a part of the Mill’s machinery as Erling Haaland and the latest breathless whispering has Arsenal persisting with their pursuit of the Fiorentina forward by running a player-plus-cash deal up the flagpole to see if the Serie A side are inclined to salute it. According to the Mirror, Arsenal have already waved £70m in I Viola’s faces to no avail – yet – but may instead offer them the midfielder Lucas Torreira plus £44m. Torreira is already at Fiorentina on loan so they wouldn’t need to waste time showing him the sights, but reports are that they would want Arsenal to bump up their cash offer by at least £7m. The Arsenal exit door is unlikely to go unpushed by strikers this month either, with Crystal Palace in talks to sign Eddie Nketiah, whose contract at the Emirates Stadium runs out this summer, and Folarin Balogun headed for Middlesbrough on loan until the end of the season to help out Chris Wilder’s promotion push. Antonio Conte is evidently up for replacing people who leave the pitch slowly with those who zip along it at great speed, with Wolves’ Adama Traoré understood to be on Tottenham’s radar. The Spanish wide man is valued at £20m by Wolves, a deal that could be helped along by some departures. Roma appear to be at the front of the queue to snap up Tanguy Ndombele, with José Mourinho reported to have contacted the midfielder directly, while Matt Doherty and 2017’s Dele Alli could also be heading out on loan. Over in northern Italy, Milan’s desire for central defensive reinforcements could prompt a bid for Manchester United’s Eric Bailly while Paris Saint-Germain’s Senegal international Abdou Diallo is also a possible loan option for Stefano Pioli. You’ll be expecting some more Newcastle content I shouldn’t wonder, but today we must make do with the titbit that the Saudi-owned project have been linked with a bid to bring Georginio Wijnaldum back to Tyneside – but the PSG midfielder isn’t having any of it. A more realistic target for them is the teenage Reims striker Hugo Ekitike, whom they are favourites to land in a £30m deal, though Brentford and Brighton have entered the bidding with offers of around £20m for the 19-year-old. Everton and West Ham are sniffing around the Bournemouth defender Lloyd Kelly. The 23-year-old has been a mainstay for Scott Parker’s promotion-chasing side this season and the Cherries are keen to ward off suitors by demanding what an insider described as “silly money” for his services. And Memphis Depay is allegedly in talks with Atlético Madrid about a summer move to the Wanda Metropolitano from plucky, hard-up minnows Barcelona. Such are the harsh realities of the modern game that it’s harder for the smaller clubs to keep hold of their players. Barça are looking for €30m for the Dutch forward.In the winter of 1996, I almost lost my job because of the acclaimed management sim Civilization II. I was supposed to be reviewing it for the video game magazine Edge, where I was a fledgling staff writer. But I got so hooked, playing it was all I did for three weeks. During that period I ate, slept and drank Civilization II. At the end, I handed in my extremely thorough two-page review: the only thing I had submitted for the entire issue. I was supposed to be writing 25 pages a month. My editor was … displeased. On Saturday evening, video game publisher Techland proudly tweeted that if players hoped to fully complete its forthcoming apocalyptic adventure Dying Light 2, they would need around 500 hours – “almost as long as it would take you to walk from Warsaw to Madrid”. The message immediately provoked a storm of controversy. Many respondents were critical, complaining that there wasn’t a chance they’d be able to find enough time for such a challenge. Writer Andy Kelly summed up it up by tweeting: “How not to market a game to anyone over 30 years old.” For players with demanding jobs, families and other interests, the prospect of having to put aside 500 hours to finish a game about slaughtering zombies seemed too exhausting to contemplate. Other commentators saw it as a symbol of unhealthy games industry practices, in which developers burn themselves out through years of crunch to deliver gigantic games, setting impossibly high targets – only for the game to fall short, requiring months of bug-chasing. “Easily the most toxic and damaging way to market and set expectations for video games,” tweeted Luke Plunkett of games site Kotaku. “Well done to everyone involved.” Techland immediately clarified its original post. “Note: It’s about 100% completion rate,” the company explained, giving an estimate of 80-100 hours for most players to finish the main story and all the side-quests. But by then the 500-hour figure had stuck. The thing is, as my Civilization experience taught me, there are many players who do value spending many hundreds of hours with a game, immersing themselves in the world and its community for months or even years. In your teens and 20s, when you have few responsibilities, absolutely burying yourself in a sprawling adventure is a genuine treat, like getting lost in a vast fantasy novel. Nowadays, games such as Minecraft and Fortnite completely lack definitive endings and are more like social platforms than games; a huge percentage of fans will be spending thousands of hours in those virtual getaways. Ask players what games (or series) they’ve spent the most time on, and the answers range from endless multiplayer sci-fi shooter Destiny to the 16-year-old multiplayer RPG World of Warcraft to Fifa. Other players are just fundamentally not willing or capable of playing a single game for such a long time. “Ever since I was a kid I’ve always played games until I’ve either finished the story or gotten bored, and then moved on,” says the Guardian’s games editor Keza MacDonald. “I almost never replay a game, either – I know a lot of people who’ve gone through a huge RPG like Skyrim three or four times, but I’ve never been able to see the point. Even if I didn’t have small children, I’d be a 10 to 20-hour kind of player, and I find the continual expansion of playtimes in modern games to be pretty exhausting. An Assassin’s Creed game used to take you 30 hours; now it’s more like 100 and I always bail before the end. “There are a few exceptions, though. If you added up all the hours I’ve spent over the course of my life playing various versions of Guitar Hero, Tetris, Animal Crossing or Monster Hunter, you’d definitely end up in the hundreds.” The most important thing, when it comes to investing so much time into a game, is what you get out of it. “The most wholesome I’ve felt about having played a game for a long time would be The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild,” says game designer Sam Barlow. “My save file for that game is in the hundreds of hours. Unlike games that pad out their game time with filler content and arduous checklists, Breath of the Wild is a game I’ve spent so much time in because of the simple joy of walking in its world, exploring without the pressures of busywork. It’s a game that my kids and I like to return to just to hang out in and enjoy on a sensory level. If from time to time we come across one of the many [collectible] Korok seeds we’ve yet to stumble across, fine, but that’s not why we’re there.” Whether it’s time with friends or constant new discoveries, if a game (or indeed anything) is going to ask for hundreds of your precious hours on this Earth, it’s got to be giving you something you really enjoy. Have you ever spent that long with a video game? And more importantly, did it feel like time well spent?It was towards the end of his interview for a place at the prestigious Britannia Royal Naval College that Craig Jones was asked if he had ever had contact with homosexuals. No, he said, he had never knowingly met a homosexual in his life. Then, for good measure, “I said something like: ‘If I saw anybody who was gay, I’d walk in the opposite direction.’” He looks ashamed. “I was only young,” he says. Back in 1987, there was a ban on gay, bisexual and trans people joining Britain’s armed forces. Jones, then 20, was telling the naval officers what they wanted to hear. But he was also telling the truth. He had no sexual experience, had never been in a relationship and was an unworldly, small-town Yorkshire lad. About to finish a degree in economics at Portsmouth polytechnic, he had only one ambition: to join the navy as an officer. Jones impressed the interview board and won a place on an elite fast-tracking course, which he deferred for a year. Then, a few weeks after the interview, he passed a newsagent and a magazine caught his eye. He went in and bought the Radio Times, which featured the singer Michael Ball on its cover. He took the magazine home, looked hard at the picture and panicked. “I thought: ‘Fuck, I bought that because I fancy him, and therefore I’m gay.’ That was a massive complication when I was about to join the navy. I walked through the gates of Britannia Royal Naval College at 15.45pm on 12 September 1989 and left part of me behind. The bit of me that was acceptable to them carried on up the hill.” Jones, who is speaking via Zoom from his home in Brighton, recalls times and dates with military precision. Despite rising to the rank of lieutenant commander, he was forced to live a secret life. He went on to have a successful career in the Royal Navy – but not as successful as it could have been. Over the past 21 years, since the ban on gay personnel was repealed, he has campaigned vociferously for gay rights in the armed forces - damaging his own advancement in the process. Last week, the home secretary, Priti Patel, announced that all convictions for consensual homosexual activity will be wiped from the records. A further announcement is expected in the next few days about people criminalised or forced out of the military because of their sexuality. Some were stripped of pensions and medals, some ended up homeless and impoverished, and some were imprisoned for a variety of offences, including breaching the Sexual Offences Act. As Jones is quick to point out, he could have easily gone the same way. “In the 80s and 90s, admirals and generals would repeatedly say: ‘We don’t want to serve with these people. These people have standards that are different to those we have in the armed forces. They would damage operational effectiveness, they would cause discord at the frontline, they would make us less competent as a nation at war fighting.’” He pauses. “A bit crazy, but that was what the thought was.” Jones, a youthful 53-year-old, has the bearing of an ex-naval officer – a polished smartness, and hair swept immaculately to the side. He was born in Bingley, five miles from Bradford, to a dinner-lady mother and a father who was a storeman at Bradford University. His uncle had served in the navy as a radio operator in Ceylon, now Sri Lanka, and was revered in the family. Jones wanted to follow suit from a young age. At 21, he joined the navy as a sub-lieutenant and was subsequently promoted to lieutenant and lieutenant commander. He was involved in interdiction operations to disrupt the cocaine trade from South America to North America, and retrained as a helicopter fast-rope incursions officer (which involved surprising targets by landing on them with an armed team). He was deployed to the northern Gulf in 1993, after the Gulf war, to check vessels for bombs, guns and contraband. For Jones, it was an exhilarating and purposeful life. In 1994, back in Britain, he found himself working as a patrol officer in South Down, Northern Ireland, performing armed boarding operations on vessels suspected of smuggling fertiliser bombs to mainland Britain. One day, he had an epiphany. On patrol with a police sergeant, they spotted what appeared to be an unmanned fishing boat in the middle of the sea. “We got on board and it was silent. I said to the sergeant: ‘This isn’t right, I’m not comfortable.’ So we drew our pistols and he very bravely said: ‘You look down the hatch, boss, and I’ll cover you.’ So I looked down the hatch and saw two older teenage lads lying on a mattress in each other’s arms. At the time, the age of consent in Northern Ireland was 21, so it was an illegal act.” Jones discreetly gave the young men time to dress, beckoned them to come to the top of the hatch, and told the sergeant there was nothing suspicious below deck. “It was the first time I had any notion that I was part of anything bigger – a gay community – and it was instinctive to protect them.” A few weeks later, he returned to England. “That night, I walked into my first gay bar and sat next to the man who would become my husband and partner of the past 27 years.” He laughs. “I think I bring remarkable military efficiency to dating!” Jones was 26; Adam was 19 and working as a coffee shop assistant at Tesco. This brought another set of problems. Now he didn’t just have to hide his sexuality, he had to hide his partner and their lifestyle. “When we met in 1995, if we’d been caught, I’d have been arrested and sent to prison for six months for the criminal offence of homosexuality.” The year before, Jones had been appointed navigator on HMS Sheffield – a dream job for him. But, 48 hours before he was due to sail from Plymouth, Adam’s father died suddenly. Jones knew he had to be with Adam, but he was unable to leave the ship. He ended up having a breakdown on board that resulted in 10 weeks’ leave. He couldn’t tell his seniors what had happened, so he said he had suffered a crisis of confidence in navigating. Not surprisingly, this proved to be a professional setback. Throughout his career, Jones expected a tap on the shoulder. Every time he came ashore, he feared the military police would be waiting to arrest him. “You didn’t know if somebody had seen you with your boyfriend or just made a false accusation. It was a toxic environment and people were actively encouraged to report those who might be gay.” On one occasion, when a colleague visited, he had to “de-gay” their home. “I had a signed Shirley Bassey poster in the hall, and I thought: ‘Jesus, get that down.’ I had a picture of a warship somewhere so I shoved that up on the wall instead.” He created aliases for friends in his address book. “On one page is George and Joan. Well, George and Joan are actually George and John. My whole address book was adjusted like that, in case anyone found anything.” Some people confessed to being gay under duress, he says. “They had been interrogated for days [by Royal Military Police]. Some had been spat at and pushed around, and then somebody said: ‘You can go on leave for a week if you sign this form,’ and they signed confessions.” Today, Jones is in touch with three of 17 former lifeguards who were sacked for being gay in a single day, in the 1970s. “One of them is gay, two are straight. What a sad waste of brilliant careers.” By 1999, he’d had enough. He applied for a job as principal warfare officer on HMS Fearless, a role that involved working with special intelligence. The job required high-level security clearance: he knew he would be vigorously vetted and his relationship with Adam would be detected – they shared bank accounts, had a joint mortgage and were on the electoral register at the same address. Astonishingly, he got the job. “The lieutenant colonel interviewing me leaned forward and said: ‘Just before you go, I haven’t spoken to you about homosexuality but, based on the answers you’ve given me, I don’t believe it’s something I need to worry about, is it?’ And I thought: ‘You don’t need to worry about it. I’m quite a happy homosexual,’ so I said: ‘No sir, I don’t think so,’ and he shook my hand and I left.” A year later, a signals telegram came in with a security classification. It stated that the gay ban was to be lifted because it had been found to be unlawful by the European court of human rights. After the captain had announced to the ship’s company that the ban would be revoked, Jones went to his office and said his bit. “I told the captain that this was a day when, finally, our values would match those which we defend. He said very little.” In some ways, Jones says, it was comic. There was disquiet when he said Adam would be his plus one at the navy’s Burns Night party a few days later. “I think they thought he might come in a feather boa.” Did anyone else come out at the same time? “No. Did they hell. The fact that the ops officer – me – had come out didn’t just go around my ship quickly, it went around the whole damned fleet. For the first four years after the ban was lifted, very few people came out – and if they did, it was done quietly.” From then on, Jones fought ceaselessly for gay rights. He wrote a paper in 2000 suggesting the Royal Navy joined Stonewall’s Diversity Champions scheme (the employers’ programme for ensuring all LGBTQ+ staff are free to be themselves in the workplace), that they marched and recruited at Pride, and that education programmes were introduced to ameliorate the impact of the former ban. “It went to the Royal Navy’s head of personnel and I got a reply saying: ‘Homosexuality is a private matter for the individual and not something for the service to be involved with.’” Jones kept writing to admirals and ministers saying it was not enough to revoke the ban; LGBTQ+ people had to be welcomed in the military. “I got letters back from admirals saying: ‘Please stop doing this.’” On one occasion, he gatecrashed a senior conference on inclusion to announce to all present, including the second sea lord (the head of personnel in the navy), that the failure to embrace LGBTQ+ personnel was “a catastrophic breach of the armed forces covenant”. He smiles at the memory. “The second sea lord had a face like thunder.” Did he ever feel he should have spoken up earlier, when the ban was still in place? “So many things were fundamentally wrong, but I couldn’t do anything about it except wreck my career. I’m pleased I didn’t leave because, if I had, I wouldn’t have had the opportunity to enable changes that have made our armed forces the best in the world at LGBTQ+ inclusion, which is amazing.” In 2005, the Royal Navy became the first armed service to sign up to the Diversity Champions programme and, a year later, became the first armed service to march at Pride. Was life better for Jones, professionally, once he came out? Anything but, he says. “I felt there was a spotlight on everything I did. There was nobody else who was trying to be out and proud. So it was really tough. Whenever I went into an officer’s mess that wasn’t mine, eyes would follow me round the table. I’d stop conversations at lunch – people would put their knives and forks down as I walked past. There weren’t many friends who would stand next to me at the bar. If you were a career person, I wasn’t someone to stand next to.” In 2006, he won an OBE for services to equality and human rights in the armed forces, and two years later, he quit the navy. Why did he leave? “My career had been damaged by the campaign to achieve change. I was a lone wolf, a very vocal protagonist of change, and it had an enduring impact on my career. And my work was done. Sometimes, the person who kicks the door down isn’t the person who sits at the table and I’m fine with that. I’d achieved what I was passionate about.” Jones went on to become head of equality and diversity for Barclays, then set up an organisation with Adam (now a psychologist) dedicated to moving people with severe mental health problems from low secure units back into the community. But he felt that victims of the ban still hadn’t seen justice and, last year (20 years after the ban was lifted), he founded the charity Fighting With Pride to campaign for those who had been hounded out of the military and criminalised for being LGBTQ+ (or for others thinking they were). “There are thousands of people who are financially impoverished, with health and wellbeing issues, broken careers and criminal records,” he says. Jones is now confident that the armed forces are ready to acknowledge the harm that was done, and to compensate victims fittingly. What has delighted him is that, after many years, the veterans community has now offered its support. “The people who I speak to every week are really struggling. I speak to people who are not living the lives our veterans should live. And this is an unremedied disgrace.” How important has the fight for justice been to him? “It’s in my DNA,” he says. “I’ll be here till it’s done.”We found out last February that Tom Brady can win a shiny Vince Lombardi Trophy without any help from Bill Belichick. Now comes Part II: Can Belichick win one without Brady? The bookies don’t think so, at least not this year. Oddsmakers have set the New England Patriots’ price on winning the Super Bowl at 18-1, joint-eighth with Cincinnati among the 14 playoff teams. (Green Bay are favorites at 7-2. The Steelers are the longest shots at 80-1.) New England are four-point underdogs against their wild-card weekend opponents, the Buffalo Bills. But the Patriots are back in the playoffs after a year away, and Belichick, their longtime coach, sounds as if he is up for the challenge – by clamming up, of course. Belichick needed an efficient 208 words over four minutes to answer seven questions Monday about the Bills, the AFC East rivals whom his Patriots will face Saturday night on the road. He was not grouchy, but succinct. Just got it done. “We have a lot to get ready for,” Belichick said Monday of the Bills. As always, he could have been talking about any opponent. So much has happened since Belichick and his quarterback, Brady, made the 2019 playoffs only to lose at home to Tennessee in the first round. Brady won his seventh Super Bowl in his first season with the Tampa Bay Bucs, and has had a second impressive season. The Patriots went 7-9 in 2020 with quarterback Cam Newton, whom Belichick decided to scuttle in favor of Mac Jones, the rookie from Alabama who has been a pleasant surprise this season, throwing for 3,801 yards, with 22 touchdowns versus 13 interceptions. A month ago, the Patriots were on a roll. They’d won seven in a row to improve their record to 9-5, including a 14-10 victory at Buffalo that was a Belichick masterstroke. It was blustery, so the Patriots threw the ball just three times, gaining just 19 yards, but ran it 46 times, gaining 222 yards and keeping the ball from the dangerous Buffalo quarterback Josh Allen. After a bye week, however, the Patriots finished the regular season with three losses in four games, including a 33-24 loss Sunday to the Miami Dolphins (9-8). A day later, the Dolphins fired coach Brian Flores, who’d been an assistant to Belichick for 11 years. It was a discouraging loss for the Patriots, who could have won the AFC East with a victory over the Dolphins (9-8) and a loss by Buffalo (11-5) to the Jets (4-13). The slide is similar to what happened two years ago, when New England were 10-1 but lost four of their last six. New England’s current slide includes a 33-21 loss at home to Buffalo just three weeks after the Patriots’ victory over the Bills. Jones did not play so well, completing only 14 of 32 passes with two interceptions. Naturally, people wondered if Jones had hit a “rookie wall”. Belichick is 69 years old and has done it all as a football coach – including, as his many detractors in New York will point out, suspiciously resigning as “the HC of the NYJ” and spying on, um, the Jets. Don’t forget Brady, as a Patriot, was busted for deflating footballs. Nevertheless, both are still relevant, nearly two full decades after they led the Patriots to their first Super Bowl victory. (Here is how long ago that was: That was the first Super Bowl to be played in February, because the 2001 schedule had been pushed back because of 9/11). Belichick and Brady have even gotten the Head-to-Head Matchup out of the way. That came in October, when Brady traveled back to Foxboro and beat the Patriots, 19-17, on a field goal with less than two minutes to play. But Jones kept pace with Brady all afternoon. The week leading up to that game included the two chief combatants saying all sorts of nice things about each other. At one point, Belichick said of Brady’s longevity: “Nothing Tom does surprises me. He’s a great player. Works hard and takes care of himself. I mean, he’s talking about playing until 50. If anybody can do it, he probably can.” Belichick would never, ever, say that he wants to see what he can accomplish without Brady – he might not even be thinking such a thing – but there is no denying that the two men will forever be linked. Plus, the Patriots missed Brady more than he missed them in 2020. New England and Tampa Bay would not meet in the playoffs until the Super Bowl, anyway. The two teams will chart parallel routes for a month, and, besides that, neither team is expected to even make it so far. The Patriots might not get out of the first weekend. Jones labeled the way he played against the Dolphins as “super embarrassing”, even though he completed all nine of his fourth-quarter passes for 121 yards. The Patriots had a chance to win the game until their final play went haywire, resulting in a Miami touchdown. “Obviously played poorly, coached poorly, didn’t do anything very well,” Belichick said while wearing a mask with the state flag of Maryland, where he grew up. “So just too many – too many mistakes, way too many. So we’ll go look at the film, turn the page here and make some corrections and move on to next week. So that’s really about it.” A day later, he was reluctant to talk about a third game against Buffalo, saying that the coaching staff was still reviewing the loss to the Dolphins. The Bills have won four games in a row after a 33-21 loss on 12 December to, yes, Brady and the Bucs. Asked what he’d tell his players who’d be playing in their first playoff game, Belichick responded: “Try to play and coach well. It’s a one-game season. It’s no big mystery.” The key part is that it is no big mystery to Belichick. This will be his 44th playoff game as an NFL head coach. His teams lost only 11 of the first 43. Belichick said Monday, “I don’t think we lack confidence.” That must be why Ty Law, the Patriots’ Hall of Fame cornerback, told Boston.com: “I’m going with Bill Belichick for one game.” And if Belichick wins one playoff game, his team can certainly win three – or even four. There is no dominant team in the playoffs, not even that team with his old quarterback. Bet against the coach in the hoodie, if you dare.The US postmaster general, Louis DeJoy, has drawn criticism over changes made to the US Postal Service since Donald Trump appointed him in May 2020, which have included delays in services, cuts and consolidation efforts, along with financial conflicts of interest. These changes have continued into the Biden administration amid calls from unions, some elected officials, and progressive groups to oust DeJoy from his position, especially as in the pandemic, postal votes have become increasingly common and a core part of America’s democratic systems. In March 2021, the USPS unveiled a 10-year austerity plan to improve the financial sustainability of the postal service, which includes implementing longer delivery windows, cuts to branch hours, consolidation and shutdowns of branches and facilities, and postage rate increases. As well as fears over the efficacy of postal voting, the move has raised concerns over impacts on low-income Americans, rural communities and small businesses that rely on these services. “The 10-year plan is a plan for privatization. It just doesn’t use the ‘p’ word,” said Porter McConnell, co-founder of the Save the Post Office Coalition. “It’s already happening. I think what they’ve discovered is that you can privatize without talking about it.” The 1970 Postal Reorganization Act reorganized the USPS into a businesslike organization designed to rely on self-funding through revenue. A 2006 law mandated the USPS pre-fund health benefits for all retirees 75 years into the future, which has contributed significantly to financial troubles for the agency, which receives no government appropriations, unlike other government agencies. “I think the reorganization of the postal service into something that both has a universal service obligation and has to break even was setting them up to fail,” added McConnell. “I don’t think we should be apologetic about a government service being provided where as a democracy it’s not in our best interest to have people in rural Alaska, for example, not be able to get mail service.” As part of the 10-year plan, 18 mail processing facilities around the US were listed for closure in 2021, with plans to consolidate them into other regional cities. In Cape Girardeau, Missouri, postal workers have held informational pickets to raise public awareness in opposition to the closures and consolidations, citing the impacts on workers and degradation in services as a result. The mail processing facility in Cape Girardeau is expected to shut down and be moved to St Louis next month. Greg Davidson, president of American Postal Workers Union (APWU) Local 4088, explained the union had fought plans to consolidate all mail sorting operations to St Louis since 2011. “All of these consolidations, they weren’t anywhere near as successful as what they would say. I would say they were actually disastrous,” said Davidson. “The mail has slowed down. They reduced the service standards.” An audit by the USPS inspector general in 2018 found that slowing mail delivery in 2016 and 2017 resulted in just 5% of the savings the delays were projected to result in, and Davidson argued the decline in services resulted in lost revenue due to customers having to rely on different services because of the delays and consolidations resulting in mis-sorted mail. Davidson said workers had already erroneously received truckloads of mail sent from the St Louis processing center to Cape Girardeau, resulting in delayed deliveries. He anticipates the issues worsening as 31 jobs are set to be eliminated with the mail processing consolidation. Yet as service declines, prices have risen. In August 2021, the USPS implemented rate hikes of 6.8% for regular, first-class mail, 8.8% for package services, and a three-cent increase for a standard stamp. Starting on 9 January 2022, additional price hikes were implemented for priority mail services as part of the USPS 10-year plan. The price increases have been criticized by union leaders as part of the postal service’s shift toward operating as a business rather than a public service, to the detriment of the public. Kimberly Karol, president of the APWU in Iowa, says the increased reliance on private companies to handle mail parcels has led to delays in deliveries, with mail tracking disappearing for periods of time. “This is the closest that we’ve ever come to actually being privatized,” said Karol. “We do everything we possibly can to make sure people get the mail in the way that they are expecting. The plans and the rules that are being put in place are making that nearly impossible for us to do any more and it’s heartbreaking. I’ve been with the postal service for 30 years. That’s a hard thing for us to come to terms with.” In November, the Biden administration nominated two members to join the Postal Service’s board of governors, which has the authority to remove DeJoy from his position as postmaster general. Biden previously appointed three members to the board, while the remaining four were appointed by Trump. Organizers successfully fought to prevent the Biden administration from reappointing Ron Bloom, a key ally of DeJoy, to the board. Jamie Partridge, a retired letter carrier and organizer with Communities and Postal Workers United in Portland, Oregon, emphasized actions had been taken to push current members of the board to oppose DeJoy and the 10-year plan. Advocates for DeJoy’s removal are adamant removing him is necessary to steer the USPS toward reforms required to strengthen the public agency. “Currently I feel like we have some momentum, with the possibility of gaining the majority that is against DeJoy and the 10-year plan, but there’s no guarantee of that,” Partridge said.Last fall, Krista Greene missed a week of work after her sons were exposed to Covid and could not return to school. Greene, who manages a tutoring center and yoga studio in Charleston, West Virginia, does not receive any paid time off. Normally, she would have been worried about this loss of income. But the Greene family’s budget had recently become a little more flexible, thanks to the monthly child tax credit payments that began in July 2021. “The first thing I said to my husband was, ‘The Biden bucks are coming next week, so I won’t miss any bills,’” Greene said. It was nice while it lasted. Families probably received their final monthly payments in December after Congress failed to pass the Build Back Better Act. The legislation, the cornerstone of the Biden administration’s domestic policy, would have made the payments permanent. But one Democrat stood in the way – Greene’s senator, Joe Manchin. A week before Christmas, Manchin appeared on Fox &amp; Friends and announced he would not vote for the Build Back Better Act, effectively poleaxing Biden’s plans in a Senate evenly divided between Democrats and Republicans. “I have always said, ‘If I can’t go back home and explain it, I can’t vote for it,’” Manchin said in a press release after the television appearance. “Despite my best efforts, I cannot explain the sweeping Build Back Better Act in West Virginia and I cannot vote to move forward on this mammoth piece of legislation.” The announcement came after months of negotiations between Manchin and the White House, some of which involved Biden’s expanded child tax credit. Manchin wanted to limit the credit to families making $60,000 or less annually. He has also said he will not support a permanent credit unless it includes a work requirement. The child tax credit was one of a number of Biden proposals that were surprisingly popular in the deeply Republican state of West Virginia – not least because Manchin’s constituents have benefited from it more than most. Ninety-three per cent of West Virginia children – about 346,000 in all – qualified for the credit payments. That extra $250 to $300 per child a month lifted about 50,000 of those children above the poverty line, according to the West Virginia Center for Budget and Policy (WVCBP). Now that the credits have vanished, so will those advancements. The timing could not be worse. Like the rest of the country, West Virginia is suffering a surge in inflation unseen in decades, a surge that disproportionately affects the poor. “The checks aren’t coming on,” said the WVCBP executive director, Kelly Allen. “Fifty thousand kids in West Virginia are at risk are dropping into deep poverty.” Queentia Ellis is a single mother with three daughters, ages seven, three and two. For a while, she supported her family with a minimum wage job but found she was always coming up short. “It’s impossible to take care of three kids on a minimum wage job,” Ellis said. She decided to get a college education. The monthly child tax credit payments, along with child support and Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), allowed her to stay home with her kids while taking classes full-time. “It helped me pay my bills and buy things for my kids that they needed,” said Ellis, who hopes to someday start her own business. With the monthly payments ended, Ellis said she will probably have to return to a minimum-wage job, which means it will take longer to complete her college degree. She will also have to find childcare for her daughters, which will cost up to $100 a month for each child, even with help from a state childcare assistance program. “That takes a toll on the income, especially if you’re working an hourly minimum wage job,” Ellis said. “I have to figure out what and how I’m going to go about making things possible. But where there’s a will there’s a way.” After announcing he would not support the Build Back Better Act, reports surfaced that Manchin was concerned parents were using the child tax credit to buy drugs. But the evidence shows that in West Virginia and across the country the money was spent on necessities – 91% of low-income families used the money for basic needs like rent, groceries, school supplies and medicine, according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities’ analysis of US census data. “Families know what they need. In some cases, that’s putting food on the tables. In some cases, that’s paying rent. In some cases, it’s allowing mom to stay home for a few months, or paying for childcare because mom needs to go to work,” Allen of the West Virginia Center for Budget and Policy said. Hunter Starks is a single parent with a four-year-old daughter. Theypreviously worked as a social worker, while also working part-time as a political organizer, often logging more than 50 hours in a week. But things changed in 2021. “I’ve worked since I was 15, usually multiple jobs. And I’ve never had a hard time finding work like I did this year,” they said. Starks had difficulty finding employment because they could only take jobs with hours that aligned with their child’s daycare hours. “Service jobs and fast food don’t need folks during those hours,” they said. Starks said the $300 child tax credit payments were “the difference between getting by or not”. “And I still had to ask multiple folks for help,” Starks said. Starks said January’s budget will be tight without the tax credit payment, “but it’s been tight”. They will soon start a new full-time job as a paralegal, in addition to their part-time organizing work. While that will help their bank account, Starks said it will mean less time with their daughter. “I kind of hate the fact that I’m going to go back to working multiple jobs and spending less time with my daughter,” they said. “Even though I’ve struggled financially, I’ve appreciated having that time with her.” While Manchin has balked at the child tax credit’s price tag – about $100bn a year – the credits pumped $470m into West Virginia between July and December 2021 alone. Allen said that money was probably immediately reinvested in the state’s economy, since low- and middle-income families typically spend tax refunds as soon as they receive them. Yoga studio manager Krista Greene said that’s why it was so important the payments arrived monthly instead of once a year, at tax time. “It became part of your monthly income,” she said. “If a hospital bill comes around, I can’t say, ‘Can you wait four or five months until I get my income tax?’” Allen also said the money would have long-term positive effects on the state’s economy as well. Living in poverty has a deleterious impact on children’s health, education and future earnings. “If kids are lifted out of poverty and have access to more economic security, it pays for itself in the long term,” Allen said. Manchin’s office declined the Guardian’s request for comment.While many expect to see rows of bright flowers and pillowy blossoms at the Chelsea flower show, this year star gardens will also feature such biodiverse elements as fungi and a beaver habitat. Garden designers at the annual Royal Horticulture Society (RHS) show have been asked to consider the environment when making their entries. Though many of the traditional aspects of the show, including the prize flowers in the Great Pavilion, remain, many gardens focus on nature rather than conventional manicured beauty. For the first time, the gardening power of beavers will be displayed at the show. The Rewilding Britain Landscape garden, by the designers Lulu Urquhart and Adam Hunt, will demonstrate how the rodents tend the landscape and let biodiversity thrive. Beavers became extinct in the UK 400 years ago, and only in recent years have they been reintroduced to parts of the country. Their garden will show naturally rewilded landscape in the south-west of England, with the designers saying they will be “showing the role of beavers as incredible bioengineers within a natural ecosystem.” It will feature a beaver dam, and a pool with a lodge behind, and show off a “riparian meadow” of the sort beavers create when they partially flood a riverbank and attract pollinators and other wildlife. The pair said: “The inspiration for the garden comes from seeing the incredible abundance, diversity and beauty that comes from the presence of beavers, a mammal once lost to the British landscape and now reintroduced.” Favourite trees of beavers, including hazel and field maples, have been chosen for the garden, as well as native wildflowers and plants that encourage and support trees such as hawthorn and alder, which provide winter food for many birds and support dozens of insect species. Rather than flowers, the designer Joe Perkins has decided to show off a range of fungi to highlight the “inseparable connection between plants and fungi within woodland ecosystems”. In between buying new roses and water features for their gardens, attenders will learn about the complex mycelium networks that connect and support woodland life, in the exhibit that will make use of trees including sweet chestnut and Douglas fir. The garden will also include species that are used to warmer climates, to highlight how our planting may have to change as a result of a warming planet. While most at the show, to be held in May in the grounds of the Royal hospital, Chelsea, usually focus on what grows in the soil, the dirt itself is the star of the new Blue Peter garden. The designer, Juliet Sergeant, is hoping to “open the eyes of children and adults to the role of soil in supporting life and its potential to help in our fight against climate change”. The garden will feature a subterranean chamber, which will show a soil animation, and soil-themed art by the children of Salford. It also features a roof-top meadow and barley field with common spotted and southern marsh orchids and a two-tonne tree on the planted roof, showing the wide variety of plants that good healthy soil can sustain. Also at the show is a foraging garden by Howard Miller, for the Alder Hey children’s hospital. The garden features a movable foraging kitchen and is designed to help children engage in nature through foraging, sharing healthy food, play, relaxing together and being in the moment. The garden will heavily feature heather and bilberries. Miller said: “One of my favourite childhood memories is going to pick bilberries with my grandparents, My grandpa Harold had a habit of counting 1,000 bilberries into a bag before he would allow himself to talk to us. My grandma Mary and I would sit and eat the bilberries while he wasn’t looking. “The smell of sitting in among heather and bilberries just transports me to that moment. So the takeaway I would like people to have is to give foraging a try, it’s free, it’s good for the soul and it’s a great excuse to connect with nature and each other.”As the pandemic’s second, gruelling year drew to a close and Covid rates in Rio de Janeiro plunged to levels unseen since it began, the Brazilian city’s health secretary, Daniel Soranz, celebrated a desperately needed respite. “We’ve been through such painful, difficult months … this is now a moment of hope,” the 42-year-old doctor said last November as carioca life regained some semblance of normality, hospitals emptied and the city’s effervescent cultural scene was reborn. But the new year, and the arrival of the highly contagious Omicron variant, has brought Soranz and many others crashing back down to Earth as coronavirus cases surge across Latin America with consequences that remain unclear. “It’s really tiring,” Soranz admitted this week as infections in his beachside city soared to their highest ever levels and plans for Rio’s rumbustious annual carnival were cast into doubt. “This pandemic has been going on for almost two years. It’s exhausting. But there’s nothing to be done,” Soranz said, noting how 20% of Rio’s health workers – about 5,000 people – had been infected since December. Similar angst is being voiced around South America, which, having witnessed some of the pandemic’s bleakest moments – with bodies dumped in mass graves and patients starved of oxygen in overwhelmed hospitals – had been enjoying a long-awaited moment of optimism after becoming one of the world vaccination champions. Nearly 65% of South Americans have been fully vaccinated, according to the University of Oxford’s Our World in Data project, compared with about 62% in Europe and the US, and less than 10% in Africa. So far Argentina seems to be the South American country worst hit by Omicron. Over the last week it registered over 50% of South America’s daily cases, with just 11% of its population, and had the world’s seventh-highest number of daily cases. Although cases are rising in a straight line from a daily average of about 2,400 a month ago to more than 130,000 now, authorities say they are not unduly worried. Their assumption is that Covid has become an endemic disease and vaccination is the only necessary safeguard. The government is relaxing restrictions even more than last September when restaurants, football matches and entertainment venues reopened after a sharp dip in cases, and the outdoor mask mandate was lifted. “In the evolution of the disease you can see that it is really like chickenpox, the flu or that type of disease. The transition to the endemic will no longer require testing all cases and the role of isolation will change,” the health minister, Carla Vizzotti, told journalists on Tuesday. Health official Sandra Tirado predicted cases could begin to fall in the next two weeks and pointed to Córdoba province where Omicron infections were already coming down. Arnaldo Dubin, an ICU doctor at a private Buenos Aires hospital, said he had deep misgivings about Argentina’s Covid policy and believed mask mandates had to return. “It’s horrifying. You have a very serious Covid situation that is paradoxically simultaneous with a total relaxation of safeguards.” Peru, which has one of the world’s worst per-capita death tolls, is also suffering, with more confirmed infections in the first week of January than during its ferocious second wave in early 2021. Other South American countries including Bolivia, Guyana and Uruguay have also seen infections jump while further north, Omicron appears to be rattling Mexico. On Saturday, a record 30,671 coronavirus cases were registered. On Monday, Mexico’s president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, announced he had tested positive for the second time in a year and was isolating. “I think it’s the flu,” López Obrador, whose dismissive handling of the pandemic has been criticised, had told a press conference earlier in the day. He appeared without a mask despite admitting feeling hoarse. Brazil, which was already facing a major influenza outbreak, is also under pressure although a statistics blackout apparently caused by a hacking attack on the health ministry is hampering efforts to track the surge. Isaac Schrarstzhaupt, a data scientist who monitors Covid statistics, said Brazil was clearly careening into a new wave, with states such as Rio Grande do Sul and São Paulo seeing a “vertiginous increase” in infections similar to that in Europe. “But [because of the blackout] we don’t know the scale of it and I fear we’ll only understand when hospitals start raising their hands to say: ‘Hey, we’re in trouble over here.’” Schrarstzhaupt warned: “Even if there’s a 95% reduction in severe cases, if we hit one million cases a day like the US, the remaining 5% will still be a very big number.” Rio’s health secretary said there was no doubt Omicron was driving a major Covid outbreak there. It had taken Omicron just 17 days to become Rio’s dominant variant, responsible for more than 98% of cases. Previous variants took more than 45 days to do the same. Soranz voiced apprehension about the coming days and could not confirm February’s carnival would go ahead. However, high vaccination levels seemed to be helping prevent a more dramatic crisis – as appears also to be the case in neighbours such as Peru and Argentina, and European countries such as Portugal. Ninety-six per cent of Rio’s adults have been double jabbed and 32% boosted. Soranz said 13 Covid patients were admitted on Sunday: 11 unvaccinated and two with only one shot. “There’s no way to predict what’s going to happen – but we can see it’s spreading much faster and that this is not being accompanied by severe cases or fatalities,” Soranz said, before adding a word of caution: “This could change.”Mikel Arteta is adamant the best players in the world are keen to join Arsenal as they continue their pursuit of the Fiorentina striker Dusan Vlahovic. Arsenal are keen to add the Serbian, who has 18 months left on his contract with the Serie A club and has indicated he will not sign a new deal, to their ranks in this transfer window but a deal will prove complicated. Fiorentina may be keen on maximising the player’s worth, with the asking price likely to exceed £60m, and there are question marks over his desire to join Arsenal when Champions League football is not guaranteed and they are by no means his only potential suitor. Arteta, though, was bullish when asked about his club’s capacity to pull off an eye-catching signing in their current position, and said their pulling power was undiminished. He said: “Historically this club has always been targeting the best players in the world and the best players in the world are always interested to come here and I can say that situation hasn’t changed. “Any time I have spoken to any player, they were so willing to come. I haven’t faced any other situation and that’s one of our biggest powers, our capacity to get the attention of people to come and join our club; it’s something that is a big advantage for us.” Other possible movements include left-back Sead Kolasinac, who is a target for Marseille and negotiations are under way for Udinese to take centre-back Pablo Marí on loan for the rest of the season. Forward Folarin Balogun has joined Middlesbrough on loan. Arsenal visit Liverpool in their Carabao Cup semi-final first leg on Thursday night. It was meant to be the second half of the tie, but last week’s first leg at the Emirates was postponed to 20 January after an apparent rash of Covid-19 cases in the Liverpool camp. Jürgen Klopp later said “a lot of false positives” had led to the switch and Arteta did not want to publicly question the decision. “It’s something that is not in our control,” he said. “The EFL is responsible to check every single player’s status and then make the decision whether the game is played or not. The decision was to postpone the match and I’m sure if that was the case, then they had the right arguments to do so.” Arteta’s side, who lost at Nottingham Forest in the FA Cup third round on Sunday, have Covid issues of their own and hope to discover today whether Granit Xhaka can return after a bout of the virus. Emile Smith Rowe and Takehiro Tomiyasu missed that game with injuries and four players are away at the Africa Cup of Nations in Cameroon. “It is extremely volatile and uncertain,” Arteta said of his players’ availability. “I don’t know what the situation is that we will have today or if it is different to yesterday. Obviously I cannot get into any detail with that. In the last week or so we lost so many players for many different reasons and we are trying to adapt to that. I will use the players that we have and make the most out of it.”A masterpiece by the Belgian surrealist René Magritte, described as one of the most desirable works in private hands, is expected to sell for a record-breaking £45m when it goes to auction for the first time this year. Helena Newman, the chair of Sotheby’s Europe, said the “show-stopping” painting, L’empire des lumières, depicting a street at night underneath a bright blue sky, would be the star of an auction on London on 2 March. The 114.5cm by 146cm work was painted in 1961 for Anne-Marie Gillion Crowet, a muse and close friend who had been introduced to the artist through her father, the Belgian surrealist collector Pierre Crowet. The family loaned it to the Magritte Museum in Brussels from 2009 to 2020. Should the painting’s $60m (£45m) estimate be met, it would be the highest price paid for a work by Magritte, whose most famous paintings include La trahison des images (The treachery of images) of a pipe that is not a pipe. It is already one of the highest estimates for a work of art in Europe. Crowet’s likeness is found in a number of Magritte works, and even some of those he painted before the two met. The artist told her after their first meeting when she was 16: “Tu vois, je te peignais déjà avant de te connaître” (You see, I was already painting you before I knew you). Magritte, who died in 1967, played chess with Pierre Crowet at his favourite bistro and spent evenings with him and his wife, Georgette, watching Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton movies. He had first started on L’empire des lumières in 1948, returning and enriching his vision of it over time, to leave behind 17 works, the only real attempt to create a “series” within Magritte’s oeuvre. The first version of the painting was bought by Nelson Rockefeller with others now held in the Peggy Guggenheim Collection in Venice, the Museum of Modern Art in New York, the Menil Collection in Houston and the Royal Museums of Fine Arts of Belgium, Brussels. The painting on sale is the largest horizontal version that Magritte did and depicts a suburban setting thought to be a street near the Parc Josaphat in Brussels, where the artist moved in 1954. The image is said to have provided inspiration for a scene in the 1973 film The Exorcist. Before it is auctioned, the painting will be publicly exhibited in Sotheby’s galleries in Los Angeles, Hong Kong, New York and London. Newman said: “A masterpiece of 20th-century art, L’empire des lumières brings together the two most fundamental elements of daily life – those of day and night – on to one paradoxical canvas. With its impressive scale, the cinematic painting draws the viewer into Magritte’s timeless world. “Its immediacy and power encapsulate the ‘star quality’ that places Magritte firmly among the pantheon of the market’s most sought-after artists.” Crowet, who was a Belgian tennis champion in 1955, went on to marry Baron Roland Gillion, a Belgian businessman. They have donated much of their art collection to the Royal Museums of Fine Art in Belgium. Until now, the most expensive painting by Magritte is The Pleasure Principle, sold at Sotheby’s in November 2018 for $26.8m.Most of the time, on the southern or eastern coast of Tasmania, you can feel how close you are to Antarctica. You feel it on the wind. Ten days by icebreaker across boilerplate seas, this is the last point of land between you and it. The gulf snaps back like elastic. Down the island’s flank, it flicks green fringes into the salt. Even when allegations of summer lie over its land, the water mutters of ice and cold. An edge to the weather. Tasmania, hunched with its head turned inward like a sleeping bird, in a futile attempt to deflect the white continent’s attention. The capital city of Hobart sits on that southern coast, the wind in its face, rushing up the mouth of the River Derwent. The artist Jon Kudelka dreamed of that channel, then painted it, so full of whales that you could walk from shore to shore on their backs. It may even once have been true. This week Tasmania will host an Ashes Test match for the first time. “It’s big,” says the typically understated Ric Finlay. ABC Radio’s premier cricket statistician has lived on the island all his life. “Everyone knows that because I don’t think we’ve ever had days booked out before. People down here scratch their heads a bit. There’s a feeling that it’s about time.” In national terms Tasmania often feels like an afterthought. There is a whole genre of maps and art and logos that have used the shape of the mainland continent without its final piece of punctuation, and a genre of Tasmanians who delight in pillorying the omission. Within a box of Vegemite Shapes – biscuits in the outline of Australia – there are accompanying pieces of an outsized Tasmania, just in case. The feeling is justified. By far the smallest state, with a population of just over half a million, Tassie is left behind in employment numbers, health access, infrastructure, investment and just about any other measure. This is part of the reason the logging industry, which creates so few jobs in relative terms, has still been fiercely protected while destroying irreplaceable forest. It is squarely at odds with an increasing reliance on tourism, but successive state governments have done nothing. The biggest economic shift in the state has been driven by the Museum of Old and New Art, built privately by the local man David Walsh and opened in 2011, which now drives around a quarter of Tasmania’s tourism traffic. It is no surprise that Tasmania has also been left on the margins by Cricket Australia, despite being one of the six state association members that now constitute the national body. Cricket within Australia began before the nation existed, and before the colonies were states, with Victoria playing New South Wales in 1857. The Sheffield Shield between those colonies and South Australia began in 1892. Tasmania were not brought into the Shield until the 1977-78 season. Finlay saw that latter era of change. “There was a period in the mid-1980s when we went 40 matches without a win,” he says. “In 1986 there was a coup d’etat in the middle of winter, we had eight elections, one for each of the old guard against someone new.” The leader was Denis Rogers, taking over what was then the Tasmanian Cricket Association, and reform followed quickly. “When we first got a Test match in 1989, that was a huge excitement. I grew up accepting what the situation was. Given how the Tasmanian Sheffield Shield team performed, it didn’t seem realistic that we would be hosting Test matches on even a semi-regular basis. When it did happen, it made sense to me because we had changed, thanks to people like Denis Rogers. It makes sense to me given that we’re now an equal partner, we’re doing what the other states are doing.” Still, some states are more equal than others. Tasmanians routinely went two to four years between matches. National administrators cited low crowds, while scheduling matches at the start of the international season in November when the southern weather remains frigid. They allocated the lowest-drawing teams: only New Zealand, Sri Lanka and Pakistan visited until 2005, at which point the post-fall West Indies made the roster. South Africa became the fifth team in 2016, handing out a loss that resulted in half the Australian team being sacked. Whether related or not, Hobart has not hosted a match since. Australia’s administrators have done this unapologetically, making five matches the routine in home seasons. Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth, Melbourne, Sydney, the holy quintet. The last six-Test season was 2018-19, when India played four, Sri Lanka two, and the sixth was a debut for Canberra. Neither Canberra nor Hobart had a hope after that. Then 2019-20 was two for Pakistan, three for New Zealand. 2020-21 was one for Afghanistan, four for India. Only the postponement of the Afghan match saw it added ahead of the Ashes in 2021-22, bringing Hobart back into the frame, but the match was cancelled after the Taliban intervened. A year from now the plan is for two against West Indies, three against South Africa. Hobart’s Ashes entrée is purely an accident thanks to Western Australia’s iron border. The wholehearted response in ticket sales to a January match, when the weather can be much more kind, could be one thing to change some administrative minds. Bellerive Oval has a capacity of 20,000, so there is no reason why it should not outsell some days of Test cricket at other venues if the offer is compelling enough. But it is a Tasmanian ground, built right on the water at the Derwent’s edge, so sensible scheduling is a must. Day-night Test matches, not so much. Bellerive is part of the change that Rogers brought about. The existing first-class ground was over the western side of the Derwent, the side of central Hobart. The long, long Tasman Bridge made the eastern shore a more workable part of the city in 1965. Rogers was an easterner, and saw potential. “The TCA ground was too small, it never had the potential to be a stadium,” says Finlay. “So the decision was taken to move the headquarters of Tasmanian cricket to Bellerive. It was an ordinary club ground, they built it up from nothing. They retained the hill, it doesn’t aim to be an MCG-type arena, but it suits the city that we’re in. The culmination of all that development is what we’re about to see this week. It will be the highlight of the ground’s existence for sure. And it should make the argument that this shouldn’t be the last time.” This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, just visit this page and follow the instructions.The songwriting catalogue of Marilyn Bergman, who has died aged 93, and her husband, Alan, evokes a golden age of Hollywood and popular song, and their compositions were performed by the greatest artists of their era. Their close professional relationship with Barbra Streisand is enshrined in her performance of The Way We Were. The painfully poignant ballad of remembrance and regret was a collaboration between the Bergmans and Marvin Hamlisch and won the Academy award for best original song in 1974, while their composition You Don’t Bring Me Flowers was a US chart-topping duet for Streisand and Neil Diamond in 1978. The Bergmans had already won an Oscar for The Windmills of Your Mind, a song they wrote with the composer Michel Legrand for the 1968 film The Thomas Crown Affair, and they won a third for their score of Streisand’s film Yentl (1983), another collaboration with Legrand. At the 55th Academy Awards in 1983, the Bergmans had written three of the five nominations for best original song: It Might Be You from Tootsie, If We Were In Love from Yes, Giorgio, and How Do You Keep the Music Playing? from Best Friends (though the winner was Up Where We Belong from An Officer and a Gentleman). Streisand described the Bergmans as “like family, as well as brilliant lyricists … We met over 60 years ago backstage at a little nightclub, and never stopped loving each other and working together.” An early milestone in Hollywood was the Bergmans’ work on the 1967 film In the Heat of the Night, where they collaborated with the composer Quincy Jones. Ray Charles sang the title song, notable for its eerie and menacing lyrics: “I’m a-feelin’ motherless somehow / Stars with evil eyes stare from the sky”. When In the Heat of the Night evolved into a TV series in the late 1980s, the Bergmans and Jones resumed their collaboration on the soundtrack. Outside the movies, the Bergmans wrote a swarm of durable popular standards, including Fred Astaire’s That Face (1957), Dean Martin’s Sleep Warm (1958) and the laidback title track of Frank Sinatra’s album Nice ’n’ Easy (1960), all of these in collaboration with the composer Lew Spence. They also enjoyed a string of successes in television, writing themes for shows including Good Times, Alice and Maude. They won Emmy awards for the score of the TV movie Sybil (1976), the song Ordinary Miracles (from a Streisand concert special in 1995), and the song Ticket to Dream, composed for the American Film Institute’s 1998 TV special 100 Years ... 100 Movies. Marilyn was born in New York, in the same Brooklyn hospital where Alan had been born three years earlier. She was the daughter of Albert Katz, a Jewish garment manufacturer, and his wife, Edith (nee Arkin). She studied the piano at the High School of Music and Art in Manhattan, then attended New York University where she earned a bachelor’s degree in psychology and English. While studying music, she had often played the piano for the lyricist Bob Russell (writer of Don’t Get Around Much Any More), who urged her to become a songwriter, but she had decided she wanted to become a psychologist. However, her plans were derailed when she fell down a flight of stairs and broke both shoulders. She travelled to Los Angeles to recuperate at her parents’ home, and, unable to write or play, began writing lyrics by reading them into a tape recorder. “The first song I wrote was published and I got an advance and I thought ‘this is easy’,” she recalled. “And then it was a long time before I got another one cut.” She began writing lyrics with Spence, and it was he who introduced her to his other lyric-writing collaborator, Alan Bergman. They married in 1958, and where other songwriting duos would often suffer fractious and argumentative relationships, the Bergmans enjoyed an enviable harmoniousness. Marilyn said: “Respect, trust, all of that is necessary in a writing partnership or a business partnership or in a marriage.” She also stressed that a professional songwriter has to maintain a critical detachment from their work, considering it vital “not to have fallen so in love with what you have written that you can’t find a better way”. They also appreciated the value of hard work and research when they tackled a new project. When the director Norman Jewison recruited them to write what would become The Windmills of Your Mind for The Thomas Crown Affair, starring Steve McQueen and Faye Dunaway, he stressed that he wanted them to evoke the anxiety McQueen’s character was experiencing as he prepared to carry out a major robbery. While Legrand composed eight very different melodies, Marilyn drew on childhood memories and her psychological training to create the lyric, with its repeating images of loops and circles. She recalled having her tonsils removed when she was seven, “and as they gave me the ether anaesthetic I remember this circular descent into a sleep state … that’s how we got the idea to write for Michel’s circular melody”. When they composed the soundtrack for Yentl, the Bergmans realised that, although they were both Jewish, they were not familiar with the traditions and practices of Orthodox Judaism. They duly sought out some rabbis and spent a year learning about Orthodox culture. Having been one of very few women in the songwriting business early in her career, Bergman was a founding member of the Hollywood women’s political committee, alongside Jane Fonda, Streisand and others. The committee raised money for Democratic political candidates, and in 1993 the Bergmans wrote material for Bill Clinton’s first presidential inauguration. In 1985 Marilyn was the first woman elected to the board of directors of ASCAP, the performance rights organisation, and she served as its president from 1994 until 2009. She is survived by Alan and their daughter, Julie, and granddaughter, Emily. • Marilyn Ruth Bergman, songwriter, born 10 November 1928; died 8 January 2022Despite apprehension about high Covid-19 rates, my family Christmas in Yorkshire was wonderful. Unfortunately, the week after was marred by headache, fever and malaise. And a PCR test confirmed the worst – I had Covid-19 for the second time. My second encounter has been dominated by severe fatigue and reduced concentration, which though improving, have not yet resolved more than two weeks later. Worryingly, what I know about long Covid suggests that this could persist for several months – or longer. The World Health Organization defines long Covid as ongoing symptoms “three months from the onset of Covid-19”. In December, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) estimated that more than 1.3 million people in the UK had symptoms for four weeks or more after Covid-19, of whom 892,000 people (70%) had symptoms that persisted for at least 12 weeks, and 506,000 (40%) for at least one year. Dr Melissa Heightman, who leads the University College London hospital specialist long Covid clinic says that breathlessness, fatigue, cough, myalgia, chest pain, headache, “brain fog” and palpitations are most commonly reported. But many other symptoms may be present. Despite this evidence, long Covid has been absent from government Covid-19 briefings over the course of the pandemic. This is a major failure, and shows the difficulty both medics and policymakers often have in identifying and dealing with chronic conditions. Throughout the pandemic, our reports, media, funding and research have concentrated on acute effects such as infections, hospitalisations and deaths, not chronic ones, such as cases and referrals for long Covid. Because of this we may not even know the scale of the problem. The ONS estimates for long Covid are based on an ongoing survey and may not be representative of the whole population. Although major research studies have been funded by the National Institute for Health Research, national and international long Covid surveillance is lacking. In each successive wave, we have sought short-term fixes for Covid-19 and long Covid. Reasons for this include short news and political cycles, chronic underfunding and under-prioritisation of prevention – all longstanding issues in UK health policy. Prevailing ways of thinking in science, healthcare and policy haven’t necessarily helped, either. For example, an outdated classification distinguishes diseases as “organic” or “functional”. Organic conditions, such as heart attacks, rheumatoid arthritis and bowel cancer are those that cause changes detectable by investigations such as blood tests or scans. Functional conditions, such as irritable bowel syndrome and chronic fatigue syndrome, do not necessarily cause changes detectable by tests, or the right test may not yet be available. Stigma and misconceptions arising from this classification may lead to functional conditions being overlooked, which is surely familiar to many with long Covid. Monitoring and prevention of mortality – death – has always been prioritised above morbidity – the general suffering caused by disease. But there have been attempts to change this. A measurement called “disability-adjusted life years” (DALYs), conceived in 1990, attempts to capture the impact of diseases on people’s lives, and led to the Global Burden of Disease Study, comparing morbidity and mortality across diseases and countries. The methods that have created daily, accessible, cross-country comparisons of Covid-19 mortality need to be applied to long Covid as well. The ways we train health professionals – which are similar to when I was in medical school – still tend to focus on false binaries that silo our thinking and prevent us from seeing the whole picture. Seeing disease as “acute (immediate) v chronic” or “communicable v non-communicable” means we neglect conditions like long Covid, a chronic condition arising from an acute communicable infection. We must bring together patients, health professionals and researchers with chronic disease experience as part of pandemic preparedness and monitoring. In the UK, 90 dedicated long Covid clinics have been established, but research and data are needed to inform patient services in real time. I am leading the team conducting the Stimulate-ICP (Symptoms, trajectory, inequalities and management: understanding long Covid to address and transform existing integrated care pathways) study, which involves a trial to evaluate a community-based, comprehensive MRI scan to rule out multi-organ impairment caused by Covid-19 and digitally enhanced rehabilitation, including tailored information and recovery plans, and connection to relevant specialists through an app, which will inform future care. Another trial will repurpose existing drugs, including antihistamines (loratadine and famotidine), anticoagulants (rivaroxaban) and anti-inflammatories (colchicine) to measure effects of three months’ treatment on long Covid symptoms, mental health, return to work and other important outcomes. This is a start, but we must do more. Long Covid, like all diseases, would benefit from public health and prevention perspectives, and “integrated care” across specialties and disciplines. Siloing our thinking about disease and focusing on the short term has held us back, and patients have been left on their own for too long. Lere Fisher, a patient advocate I know through the study, told me he had “to nurse himself back to health”. Another, Lyth Hishmeh, says that patients and health professionals “continue to face difficulties knowing what to do for long Covid”. Patients originally named and recognised this new disease. It is time for our health systems to count it. Amitava Banerjee is professor of clinical data science and honorary consultant cardiologist at University College London and is leading the Stimulate-ICP study to investigate long CovidWe would like to hear about your experiencesof the NHS over the past few months as the service has struggled to cope under the strain of covid and staff absences. Do you feel like you received the care you needed despite the pressure facing the system? Did you come across any staff who went above and beyond to help you and make your experience more comfortable? Have you, or a relative, faced a long wait in A&amp;E, or delays in treatment? Have you had to wait a long time for an ambulance, or been stuck in an ambulance outside A&amp;E waiting for a handover? Have you had an operation cancelled which has led to further health problems? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Christopher Hall parks his old Toyota on a dirt road that dead-ends in a forest in Oregon’s Illinois Valley. He points out a cluster of greenhouses surrounded by piles of trash, and the hillside above, which has been terraced and entirely stripped of vegetation. Guard dogs run through a small clearing, barking at us. Two men pull up almost instantly in a Honda with busted headlights; the driver asks Hall what he’s doing there. For a bespectacled middle-aged conservationist, Hall is surprisingly reckless. Even though he can see the men are armed, he yells back at them: “Where are you from? We know what you’re doing here is illegal! How many plants are you growing?” One man says they’re from Serbia and claims they have a license to grow as another truck pulls up. I tell Hall I think we should move on, and he reluctantly shifts into drive but is unable to resist a few parting shots: “Do you think you can just keep trashing our streams? Have some respect for the land!” This part of south-western Oregon – which encompasses Josephine, Jackson and Douglas counties and was settled by goldminers in the 1850s – has always kept a touch of the wild west anti-authority streak, contributing to its status as a stronghold of illegal cannabis farms since the 1960s. Pot was legalized for recreational use in Oregon in 2015, making it legal for any person to grow up to four plants. But in the past year, longtime locals have been alarmed by the rapid proliferation of unlicensed pot farms, unprecedented in terms of size and allegedly controlled by crime syndicates from eastern Europe, China and Mexico. Hall, community liaison for the Illinois Valley Soil and Water Conservation District, has been flying over the region in a single-engine plane to map illegal pot farms and has pinpointed 1,030 clusters of greenhouses on just 20 miles of the valley, 80% of which he estimates are illegal. Local authorities agree with that estimate. These large grows have flooded the market – a pound of cannabis that was worth $3,000 in 2009 here might now fetch $400, all but killing the industry for small-time legal growers. County officials say they have been inundated by hundreds of complaints from locals who accuse “crime syndicates” of stealing their farm equipment and their water. Hall documents the impact of the illegal farms depleting aquifers by pumping from protected rivers and digging huge pits to tap into the groundwater. “It takes an act of God to get a water right in Oregon, so they just don’t bother. They just dig holes,” he says. “One of the biggest complaints this year is that people’s wells are underperforming or just drying right out,” he says. “The threat to the environmental health of the region cannot be overstated. The community is upside down.” Jackson and Douglas counties declared a state of emergency in October and asked Governor Kate Brown for state funding for more enforcement personnel because local authorities are overwhelmed. This request is not unprecedented. The national guard have participated in pot raids since 1989, when Operation Green Sweep descended on the nearby Emerald Triangle, California’s most prolific weed region, the tip of which touches southern Oregon. Those raiders saw 1,300 cannabis plants destroyed, and locals protested against that deployment of federal troops to small farms. In 2019, government raids destroyed 953,459 plants in California. It’s the same story in Oregon, where busts on large grows now yield tens of thousands of plants. “When I say cartels, I’m not talking just Hispanic,” says the Josephine county sheriff, Dave Daniel, who welcomes the idea of state and federal help. “I’m talking Bulgarian, Ukrainian, Chinese, east coast drug trafficking organizations.” Daniel, who has been sheriff since 2015, is a big man with close-cropped silver hair. “The 2021 grow season was the most brazen, in your face, wide open that I’ve seen yet,” he says. He describes farms where crews of migrant workers live under armed guard, without refrigeration or sanitation. “They rule by fear of injury and death. They human-traffic. We know that,” he says of the cartels. With a team of just three detectives, Daniel doesn’t have the manpower to properly tackle the problem. “Have you ever seen the movie Animal House?” he asks. “Kevin Bacon is in his little police or military uniform and he’s got his hands in the air and he says ‘Remain calm, all is well’ and then completely gets mowed over by the crowd? That’s me. That’s Josephine county law enforcement right there.” A big part of the problem is rooted in the legalization of industrial hemp, which looks and smells like marijuana but won’t get you high. Since 2010, it’s been legal to grow hemp in unlimited quantities. After the hemp market crashed in 2018, some farmers began hiding psychoactive cannabis plants in their hemp fields and many more leased their properties to out-of-state operators who claimed they planned on growing hemp. This ruse allows criminal organizations to grow on a vast scale. Douglas county law enforcement recently raided two supposed hemp farms they believe are operated by the same cartel and seized a total of 122,000 cannabis plants – nearly 50 times the quantity of plants that can typically be grown under a recreational cannabis license. In another Douglas county raid this November, police seized 500,000 pounds of weed, which they estimate is worth $500m. Although Governor Brown declined to send in the national guard this harvest season, which ended mid-November, Daniel hopes he will have the state’s support next year. “We’re in close contact with the governor and our federal partners are starting to open their eyes. I’ve talked to the FBI, and the DEA. And everyone is going, ‘Something’s not right in southern Oregon.’” Communities here used to be close-knit. Unlicensed pot farms abounded, but the growers were largely local people and thus had some sense of accountability to one another and the environment. Nicole Rensenbrink, a social worker who is married to the local veterinarian, has lived in Josephine county since 1983 and laments how much it has changed in recent years, describing “the endless ugliness that the huge influx of cannabis farms has brought to our valley”. She says their once-picturesque drive to work is “riddled with ugly plastic hoop houses, fencing and industrial-looking buildings,” – all the makings for large-scale pot grows. She has to keep her dogs away from the creek that runs through her property because it’s full of “nasty looking slime”; she blames fertilizer run-off from the unregulated farms. Tim Freeman, a Douglas county commissioner, says for some locals the issue goes beyond dismay over a changing landscape. “When residents call in, they are scared,” Freeman says. “They are scared about where they live, afraid of what’s going on around them and, in many cases, they are afraid to leave their homes.” Terra and Jerry Palmer live in a shingled one-room cabin that Jerry built 30 years ago. The couple were saving up to build a bigger house on their land, but are considering moving because of an illegal grow that moved in nearby last year. Terra describes constant traffic on their country road, a steady stream of “pickup trucks full of young men”, cars without license plates, and trucks full of cannabis. Hundreds of trees Jerry planted over the years have started to die off due to a lack of water. “I’m really discouraged because this year the creek went dry two months earlier than it’s ever gone dry during the all years that I’ve been here,” Jerry says. The couple have not confronted their neighbors. They fear reprisals and asked that their names be changed. Terra and Jerry may look like typical older hippies, but they come off as conventional when discussing the consequences for breaking the law on such a large scale. “Confiscate the property and jail landowners who knowingly lease land to illegal growers. Deport illegal migrant workers,” Terra wrote in a letter beseeching authorities to take action. A migrant, mostly undocumented, workforce is required to farm on the scale southern Oregon is dealing with now. Sheriff Daniel is less aggressive on the subject of those workers. “We don’t look into immigration status. State law doesn’t allow us to,” he says. “Which is fine. I treat these workers like they’re victims, to be honest with you. Which I think in large part they are.” Kathy Keesee-Morales is the program coordinator for the Unete Center for Farm Worker Advocacy, an organization that lobbies for worker rights and provides support to the migrant community. Bosses withholding pay and substandard living conditions are the most prominent issues her organization has to address in relation to cannabis farms. “There were some pretty extreme cases. There’s farms where there were young children living in what someone referred to as squalor. They were sleeping under black plastic tarps inside the hoop houses,” she says. About half of the 200 complaints of wage withholding they received in 2021 are from workers who have been abused, like the man who said when he tried to leave the farm his boss put a gun to his head and threatened his family. Large pot farms with armed bosses aren’t where most of the migrant workers planned to end up. But last year, wildfires swept through the region, immolating the nearby towns of Phoenix and Talent. This year was so dry the governor had declared a state of drought emergency by June. “So these farm workers that were depending on harvesting the orchards and the grapes to be able to survive – literally survive over the summer and save up money for the winter – they didn’t have anywhere to go except to work for these [cannabis] farms,” Morales says. The threat of violence isn’t limited to workers. “I’ve had a homeowner who leased out his property, but then he realized it wasn’t actually just a hemp grow,” says Sheriff Daniel. “He started questioning one of the soldiers – managers, soldiers, whatever you want to call it – and they threatened to burn his house down. They said, ‘We can take care of this real quick. One match. So mind your own business.’” The abuse of workers, environmental degradation and threats of violence towards locals have pushed some residents who have historically been skeptical of federal drug enforcement to ask for exactly that. Cedar Grey and his wife, Madrone, own Siskiyou Sungrown, a seven-year-old permitted cannabis farm with 5,000 plants, which is large for a legal operation. But he has been growing cannabis in this area since 1998, the year Oregon legalized marijuana for medical use. “Our local government seems to spend more time enforcing compliance on legal cannabis farms than even visiting illegal cannabis farms,” Cedar says. “That’s incredibly frustrating to legal cannabis farms. The amount of money we spend and the hoops that we jump through to be compliant with regulations – it’s mountainous, it’s unbelievable,” Cedar says. To ensure licensed cannabis farms aren’t selling on the illicit market, Oregon law requires that farmers document every scrap of plant material they grow – from seed to sale. Growers are responsible for tagging and tracking every single plant. And all work must be done on camera – even the farm’s compost piles are under surveillance. If they snip a leaf from a branch, they have to weigh the clipping and report it to the Oregon Liquor and Cannabis Commission, the organization that strictly monitors all legal pot farms. Grey estimates he has spent $150,000 for cameras, video, alarms and tracking systems in the last seven years. “I mean it’s really, really strange for me to be calling for a huge law enforcement or military crackdown on growing marijuana because for so long I just wanted it to be free for people to grow,” Cedar says. “But what’s happening here has to stop. It’s too bad, it’s too wrong, and it’s too damaging. I fully support federal resources being brought, Oregon national guard and federal law enforcement coming in. Hit every one of these farms.”At the close of 2021 Manchester United’s Ella Toone had ticked off a few things on the to-do list: top scorer for her club in the 2020-21 season and leading the way at the mid-point of the latest campaign, a senior England debut, an England hat-trick, a first senior international tournament with Team GB at the Olympics and December’s Barclays player of the month in the Women’s Super League. She has a big grin when she says it was the “perfect end to an amazing year for me personally”. It all feels pretty surreal to the versatile 22-year-old, with a list of achievements she would have “bitten your arm off” for at the start of 2021. “I’ve achieved dreams that I set when I was a little girl,” she says. “It’s been amazing, and overwhelming. I’m really proud and I want to keep trying to achieve as many dreams as I can, keep working hard, keep learning and trying to be the best version of myself.” United ended last season with Casey Stoney quitting as manager and the US duo Christen Press and Tobin Heath joining Lauren James in departing. This campaign was therefore never going to be straightforward. New faces came in and so did the former Birmingham manager Marc Skinner from Orlando Pride and United struggled to find the rhythm that had them unbeaten and top at Christmas last season. Going into last month’s winter break United sat fourth, two points behind third-placed Tottenham, having drawn three times and lost twice. They remain there before Saturday’s game at home to second-bottom Birmingham. The topsy-turvy start, though, has taught the team a lot, says Toone. “As much as you hate losing, we’ve learned so much from those games,” she says. “Even the games we’ve drawn, which we probably shouldn’t have drawn” United have recorded three back-to-back wins – at Brighton and at home to Aston Villa in the league, either side of victory at Everton in the League Cup – for the first time this season and there are signs the team are starting to get to grips with the way Skinner wants to play. “The main thing for us was believing in each other and believing in ourselves,” Toone says. “We finished the year really strong. We clicked towards the end of the year and put on some really great performances and now it’s about carrying on from that. “It’s always going to take time when a new manager comes in with different ideas. It was about all of us being open-minded and believing in what he wanted from us.” Toone, born in Tyldesley, Greater Manchester, has enjoyed working with Skinner. “He’s got a lot of great ideas and he’s really positive on the pitch and I’ve learned a lot under him. “He just wants the best out of each individual player. I’ve had a lot of one-to-one time with him. He’s been a big part of why I’ve been playing well and scoring and assisting.” Toone, who is used in midfield and further forward, sets herself plenty of targets but at the start of the season Skinner’s instructions were simple: “To play with freedom, consistency and get goals and assists,” she says. “I’ve managed to do that and I just want to keep my foot on the gas and keep helping the team.” Having made her England debut in February, coming on as a substitute and scoring a penalty in a 6-0 defeat of Northern Ireland, Toone has six goals from eight caps, including a hat-trick in October’s 10-0 away win against Latvia. Her club form meant she was named as one of the four reserves for the Olympics who were upgraded to take part in the tournament when squad sizes were increased because of the pandemic. “It was a weird experience due to Covid,” she says. “But just being a part of it was amazing and it made me so much more hungry to be back at a major tournament representing England or GB.” It also made a place in the England squad for the home Euros this year feel that bit more achievable. “It was always an aim because you have to set targets and you have to push towards something,” she says. “I’ve tried to go there and believe in myself and learn as much as I can and show what I’m about. It is a dream and it would be stupid to say it isn’t, because it’s the home Euros and it’ll be a massive occasion for the country and for women’s football.” There is an added incentive with the opening England game at Old Trafford on 6 July. Toone is a huge United fan, thanks to growing up playing with her United-supporting cousin, and would be taken to Old Trafford by her Bolton-supporting dad as a kid. She joined United’s regional talent club before moving to Blackburn and then Manchester City because United did not have a senior side. She was brought back by Stoney in 2018. “As soon as United said there was a women’s team I just wanted to come home and I’ve loved every minute since,” she says. “It’s the proudest thing ever to wear this shirt and wear this badge. Growing up supporting the club, it’s massive. “I come to training every day and I’m at the club that I support. You just want to work as hard as you can for the badge and for the girls around you. “I’m also really happy for the girls in the academy that have the opportunity now to work hard and dream big. All I ever wanted to do was play professional football for Manchester United.” Ella Toone is the Barclays WSL player of the month for December. Read our interview with November’s player of the month, Jessie Fleming, here.With a sense of smell up to 100,000 times more sensitive than humans’, dogs have been employed in the service of sniffing out everything from contraband to crop molds to cancer. Yet while researchers first began exploring whether canines could be effective agents in the fight against Covid-19 early in the pandemic, only in recent months have conclusive, peer-reviewed studies begun verifying the hypothesis that dogs know Covid when they smell it. In late 2021, scientists at Florida International University published a double-blind study of canine Covid detection in which the four participating pups demonstrated a 97.5% accuracy rate in identifying biomarkers associated with Covid-19. “It’s one of the highest percentages I’ve ever seen, and I’ve been doing this work for over 25 years with all kinds of detector dogs,” says FIU’s Dr Ken Furton, a leading scholar in forensic chemistry specializing in scent detection. “It’s really remarkable.” Another study from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine found dogs could identify Covid 82%-94% of the time, whereas recent German research put their success rate at 95%. Dogs are capable of generalizing odors, meaning they can detect all currently known Covid-19 variants, similar to how they can recognize all manner of explosives when trained, explains Furton. Yet Omicron has affected search protocols used by the Ohio-based Bio-Detection K9, a company that trained dogs to identify crop diseases prior to the pandemic, and that began providing Covid detection services in October 2020 to clients including Nascar and the rock bands Metallica and Tool. “Omicron more than any other variant has changed the biology of the infection,” explains the company’s president, Jerry Johnson. Prior to Omicron, Johnson’s team of 14 dogs were trained to approach a line of people and sniff their hands or feet – where humans have many sweat glands – before sitting in front of those they considered infected. Because Omicron is expressed less through the lungs, which transfer the virus throughout the body and into our sweat, and more through the bronchial tube, people must now offer the dogs their worn mask for a sniff. Johnson’s dogs are able to screen between 200 and 300 people an hour, and require breaks every 20 minutes to maintain their enthusiasm for the job. When they work with musicians, the dogs are not screening audience members at live shows; rather, they hang out backstage, focusing on a much smaller group of talent, engineers and entourage. “This is not a tool that you’re going to use to get 70,000 fans into the Rose Bowl,” says Johnson. “But we can be very effective if you’re trying to maintain a protective bubble.” That efficacy comes at a price; the daily rate for one of Bio-Detection K9’s teams – comprising one dog and its trainer – is $5,000. Based on his experience with detector dogs, Johnson has a theory that canines are particularly adept at finding viruses because of a biological predisposition towards identifying and avoiding disease among their ranks. The logic is that a wolf in the wild couldn’t care less about cocaine and explosives, or other things we train dogs to find, but would be naturally interested in the health of their pack. Some institutions are training their own dogs to detect Covid, such as the Freetown-Lakeville regional school district in Massachusetts, which worked with FIU to turn Labradors Huntah and Duke into school safety inspectors last summer. Dogs are not yet an FDA-approved diagnostic tool, so if they flag someone as infected, that person still must take a Covid-19 test to confirm it. However, some research indicates that dogs may be more sensitive to the virus than PCR tests, identifying infected individuals even before they have amassed sufficient viral load to register on a test.The Conservative party has removed the whip from Anne Marie Morris, a Devon MP, after she rebelled to back a Labour move in parliament to cut VAT on energy bills. Morris said she was disappointed by the decision, but insisted she would not apologise for supporting efforts to address the rising cost of living. She voted on Tuesday in a favour of a Labour motion aimed at piling extra pressure on the government over the rising cost of living by challenging MPs to back up past promises on cutting VAT. The motion would have led to the government losing control of the Commons timetable to allow legislation to cut VAT to go through but was defeated by 319 votes to 229. The government had a majority of 90, with Morris being the only Tory MP to rebel. The move comes against the backdrop of rocketing energy prices, which the boss of the UK’s largest energy supplier this week said could last for as long as two years. “It is deeply disappointing to have had the whip removed by the government, especially on a matter of simply standing up for what I believed to be the best interests of my constituents,” said Morris, who has been the MP for Newton Abbot since 2010. “I believe removing VAT is the right thing to do and I won’t apologise for supporting measures that would help my hard-working constituents at a time when the cost of living is rising.” She acknowledged the government’s concern about the opposition taking control of Commons business, but said: “I believe that any disagreement over parliamentary procedure will always come second to standing up for the best interests of my constituents.” People were struggling with their energy bills and action was needed now, added Morris. A Treasury minister told parliament on Tuesday that the government “recognises the pressure” that the public was facing on their household finances and energy bills and would “continue to look closely at all the options that exist”. Simon Clarke, the chief secretary to the Treasury, said : “No one in this government is under any illusion about the challenges families are facing with their household finances and we will of course continue to look closely at all the options that exist.” Chris O’Shea, the chief executive of British Gas owner Centrica, said on Wednesday that the energy market “suggests that high gas prices will be here for the next 18 months to two years”. It is the second time Morris has been suspended from the Conservative party. In 2017, Theresa May ordered the party’s chief whip to suspend the MP after she used the N-word at an event during a discussion about Brexit.Boris Johnson is facing increasing pressure from Conservative MPs to publicly admit if he attended a rule-breaking garden party in Downing Street. About 100 staff were invited by the PM’s principal private secretary to bring a bottle and “make the most of the lovely weather”. But Johnson has declined to say whether he attended the event. These are just some of the responses from MPs to the furore. Johnny Mercer, MP for Plymouth Moor View: It’s humiliating, and does not reflect the majority of my colleagues who at least try and lead by example. Dr Neil Hudson, MP for Penrith and the Border: I am appalled and shocked at the reports of further gatherings in May last year that are now coming to light this week … It is vital, if we are to maintain public trust, that government employees, politicians and officials follow the same rules as the rest of the country. Christian Wakeford, MP for Bury South: How do you defend the indefensible? You can’t! It’s embarrassing and what’s worse is it further erodes trust in politics when it’s already low. We need openness, trust and honesty in our politics now more than ever and that starts from the top. Caroline Nokes, MP for Romsey and Southampton North and chair of the women and equalities select committee: I have no words that can adequately express how angry I am at the ‘don’t do as I do, do as I say’ attitude that appears to have prevailed in Downing Street. Mark Harper, MP for Forest of Dean and chair of the Covid Recovery Group: These are serious allegations. The prime minister will be in the House of Commons [on Wednesday] … and I await his explanation with interest. Douglas Ross, the leader of the Conservatives in Scotland: I’m in no doubt that any member – whether the PM or otherwise – who deliberately misleads parliament cannot continue. They would have to resign. Philip Davies, the MP for Shipley: It is clearly unacceptable for anyone in government to be flouting the laws that they had imposed on everyone else. For some of the people who imposed those damaging laws to have been ignoring them will be a bitter pill to swallow for those who faithfully followed them even at huge personal cost, and is impossible to justify and defend.” (Bradford Telegraph and Argus) Robbie Moore, MP for Keighley and Ilkley: I am deeply angered by the thought of any illegal gatherings, parties or social events which took place at Downing Street whilst the rest of the country was in lockdown and following the rules … If any event took place that was in breach of the rules, the strongest disciplinary action must be taken, and I will continue to follow any revelations on this closely.” Laura Farris, MP for Newbury, told BBC Politics live she “would have declined” any such invitation to a party: The rules were clear and unequivocal at that point in time. I don’t think anybody thought you were meant to be having parties.” Derek Thomas, MP for St Ives: If the inquiry or the Metropolitan police find that the alleged activities were illegal and that the PM knew this, or was involved, then I think he should consider his position.” Christopher Chope, MP for Christchurch: Why can’t all the dirty linen be washed at once? Why are we getting this drip, drip feed of parties?” Nigel Mills, MP for Amber Valley: I can’t see how anybody who organised a party or willingly chose to attend one can stay in any position where they’re setting Covid policy.” Bob Blackman, MP for Harrow East: Many of my constituents have sacrificed so much – not being able to visit sick or grieving relatives or attend funerals. I am clear that those who set the rules must abide by them or face the consequences.” Andrew Bridgen, MP for North West Leicestershire: If the PM has misled parliament, it’s an extremely serious matter and that, coupled with other investigations that have arisen, places the PM in an untenable situation.My wife, Heidi, took her own life after a 13-month battle with long Covid that started as a mostly asymptomatic coronavirus infection. Long Covid took her from one of the healthiest, most vibrant people I’ve ever known to a person so debilitated that she could not bear another day on this planet. I came home one day last May to find that she’d decided to end her pain. As our 13-year-old son waited outside for the paramedics, I tried desperately to revive her. I did a good enough job that by the time we got her to the hospital they could restart her heart, but she was brain dead on arrival. The emergency room doctor assumed that she died from depression. When I told him, “She wasn’t depressed, it was long Covid,” he looked at me with bewilderment and asked, “What’s long Covid?” Late last night I got a desperate Twitter message from a man whose wife could be the next Heidi. She has long Covid and was threatening to end her life. She had already told their eight-year-old daughter her plan. I called him immediately. Heidi and his wife both suffered from unexplained neurological tremors and internal chest cavity vibrations so bad they lost the ability to sleep. Like prisoners of war kept awake for days as a method of torture, their minds lost the ability to make sound cognitive decisions. I knew this man’s terror. Sadly, his call was not an anomaly. I have answered requests like his every single day since my wife’s obituary went viral and I began to share our story with the media. My wife, Heidi Ferrer, was a screenwriter with a history of social advocacy and an empathetic heart. She was talented, beautiful and the most dedicated mother you ever met; we often referred to her as “sunshine in a dress”. She defeated a decade-long battle with alcoholism only to find an adversary in long Covid that was far more insidious. Three weeks before she died, we were already terrified that she would die – not by her own hand, but from a stroke or a heart attack. She said her heart would often race out of control for no reason, and she was ahead of scientists in understanding that this virus also infects the brain. Heidi also suffered from ongoing gastrointestinal issues, exhaustion from just walking up a single flight of stairs, extreme body aches, brain fog and a host of other ailments. All of this – with no hope on the horizon of any cure let alone acknowledgment from the medical world – brought her to the place where she asked me that, if something happened to her, I would tell the world what long Covid is. I made this promise never thinking I would actually have to act on it – never imagining that only three weeks later I would come home to find that she had decided death was preferable to another minute in her own personal hell. Watching long Covid systematically take her apart, organ system by organ system, was the most terrifying deterioration of a human being I have ever witnessed. My wife was an avid 90-minute-a-day walker, ate only organic (and mostly vegan) food, and hadn’t had an alcoholic drink in three and half years. Within six weeks of noticing “Covid toes” and some gastrointestinal issues she could barely walk from excruciating nerve pain in her feet so extreme as to mimic advanced diabetic neuropathy. Long Covid doesn’t come for you all at once; instead, with methodical precision, it slowly robs you. Heidi lost her mobility and her ability to eat. She was a lifelong avid reader but the brain fog (better thought of as cognitive dysfunction) robbed her of the ability to retain information. Even urinating and eventually, and cruelly, sex became painful. Long Covid seemed to steal every part of her life that made it worth living. After Heidi’s obituary went viral, I connected with Survivor Corps, the world’s largest long Covid advocacy group. They asked if I would be willing to tell Heidi’s story on a broad scale. Recalling my promise to Heidi, I agreed. As I shared her story, my Facebook and Twitter inboxes began filling up with messages from long Covid sufferers around the world. They were in horrible pain yet felt gaslit by their doctors. They described the same tremors and vibrations that tortured Heidi. As with Heidi, no one believed them. My girl was the canary in the coalmine. Sadly, seven months later the global medical community has done little to accelerate research into these terrifying symptoms. I suspect that the risk of long Covid-related suicides will only increase. We will never have an accurate count of global infections, but preliminary research suggests that at least one in three people who get Covid will develop long Covid symptoms. If only one in 20 of those long Covid patients becomes disabled or seriously debilitated we could be looking at a disturbing increase in suicides worldwide. Suicide is not like death from natural causes or even a ghastly accident. It is planned and its psychological shrapnel wounds for generations. None of us – not me, my son, Heidi’s family and friends – will ever be the same. I am not trying to be an alarmist, but we are in a true crisis. The global medical community must band together to find answers for those suffering. They are all Heidi and they are running out of time and hope. Nick Güthe is a writer/director/producer and a senior adviser to Survivor Corps In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 and online chat is also available. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgGood morning. Joe Biden gave his most forceful endorsement of changing the Senate filibuster rule in order to pass sweeping voting rights legislation, saying he was “tired of being quiet” in a high-profile speech in Georgia on Tuesday. In one of the most significant speeches of his presidency, Biden drew a connection in history between the civil rights movement, the 6 January attack on the US Capitol by extremist supporters of Donald Trump, and the unprecedented efforts in many states to restrict the vote over the last year. He said America was at a moment to choose “democracy over autocracy”. But despite the passion, some prominent Georgia civil rights activists, proclaiming themselves more interested in action than speeches, declined to attend the event in Atlanta, where Biden and the vice-president, Kamala Harris, urged progress in Congress to pass key legislation currently stalled there. What did Kamala Harris say? Speaking before Biden, she said: “Do not succumb to those who would dismiss this assault on voting rights as an unfounded threat. The Senate must act.” Capitol attack panel closes in on Trump inner circle with three new subpoenas The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack closed in on Donald Trump’s inner circle on Tuesday, issuing new subpoenas to three White House officials involved in planning the former president’s appearance at the rally that preceded the 6 January insurrection. The subpoenas show the select committee is moving ever nearer to Trump in its investigation and suggests the panel is examining whether the former president’s speech suggested that the White House had advance knowledge of plans to attack the Capitol. Congressman Bennie Thompson, the chair of the select committee, issued subpoenas to the former White House strategists Andy Surabian and Arthur Schwartz, suggesting they helped coordinate Trump’s appearance by communicating with the organizers and speakers at the rally. Thompson also authorized a subpoena for Ross Worthington, the former White House official who drafted the speech Trump delivered at the rally. What did Thompson say? “The select committee is seeking information from individuals who were involved with the rally. Protests that day escalated into an attack on our democracy.” Fauci clashes with Rand Paul at Senate hearing as daily Covid cases soar The US recorded a record number of hospital admissions due to Covid-19, the Biden administration said, as daily infections soared to more than 1.35 million. Nonetheless, politics dominated a Senate hearing on the pandemic on Tuesday, as Republicans attempted to use the disease for political gain. Rand Paul of Kentucky clashed once again with Anthony Fauci, Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser. “In usual fashion, Senator, you are distorting everything about me,” Fauci said. “You keep coming back to personal attacks on me that have absolutely no relevance.” Paul, who has repeatedly used public health hearings for political grandstanding and launching personal attacks on Fauci, variously accused the immunologist of working to smear scientists and being responsible for school closures, while reiterating rightwing theories about the origin of Covid-19. Fauci has been subjected to death threats and said his family had been harassed “because people are lying about me”. How many cases of Covid are there in the US? According to Reuters there were 1.35 million new Covid infections on Monday, which is a record high. How many people with Covid are in hospital? There were 145,982 people hospitalised with coronavirus in the US on Monday, according to data from the Department of Health and Human Services. Reuters reported that the previous high was 132,051, set in January 2021. In other news … British prime minister Boris Johnson faces a make-or-break session of prime minister’s questions today, with furious Conservative MPs awaiting his explanation of the “bring your own booze” garden party in May 2020 when the UK was still in lockdown. A mass of Arctic air swept into the US north-east on Tuesday, bringing bone-chilling sub-zero temperatures and closing schools for the second time in less than a week. Schools in Massachusetts’ three largest cities, Boston, Worcester and Springfield, canceled classes. Protesters gathered in Fayetteville, North Carolina, for a second night in a row on Monday after a man was killed by an off-duty sheriff’s deputy. The man killed on Saturday was Jason Walker, a 37-year-old Black man who the deputy told authorities ran into traffic and jumped on to his vehicle. The landmark trial of a Greek sailing coach accused of raping a child has opened in Athens, a year after an Olympic champion effectively launched the #MeToo movement in the country by speaking out about her experiences. Stat of the day: Covid loses 90% of ability to infect within 20 minutes in air Coronavirus loses 90% of its ability to infect us within 20 minutes of becoming airborne – with most of the loss occurring within the first five minutes, the world’s first simulations of how the virus survives in exhaled air suggest. The findings re-emphasise the importance of short-range Covid transmission, with physical distancing and mask-wearing likely to be the most effective means of preventing infection. Ventilation, though still worthwhile, is likely to have a lesser impact. Don’t miss this: the men getting vasectomies to save the world A study in 2017 said the single most effective action an individual could take in terms of helping the planet was having one fewer child; this would save more than 25 times the emissions of the next biggest undertakings (living without a car and avoiding long-haul flights). With the climate crisis becoming ever more urgent, a growing number of young, childless men are taking the drastic decision of being sterilised for environmental reasons. … Or this: Trump’s new bar serves rip-off drinks and a side of narcissism The bar, named 45 Wine and Whiskey, in a nod to Trump having served as the 45th president, promises handcrafted cocktails in “the most exclusive setting”. It serves a range of president-themed drinks and is, according to the marketing material, a place to “relax and unwind”. That may have been the intention, but a recent visit by the Guardian revealed it mainly serves as an ode to narcissism, or as a world record attempt to cram the most black-and-white photos of one man into quite a small space. Climate check: Winter is fastest-heating season in most of US American winters are rapidly warming and December 2021 was no exception. In New York, last month’s average temperature was 43.8F (6.5C) – 4.7F above the 1991-to-2020 average, according to analysis by Climate Central. The American south had an especially warm December, with Shreveport, Louisiana (+13.4F), Dallas, Texas (+13.2F), and Memphis, Tennessee (+12.4F). “Winter is the season when we don’t think about heat the way we do in July or August – this is a sign that we live on a planet that’s changing,” a scientist said. Last Thing: Landmine-hunting hero rat dies in Cambodia after stellar career A landmine-hunting rat that was awarded a gold medal for heroism for clearing ordnance from the Cambodian countryside has died. Magawa, a giant African pouched rat originally from Tanzania, helped clear mines from about 225,000 sq m of land – the equivalent of 42 football pitches – over the course of his career. After detecting more than 100 landmines and other explosives, Magawa retired in June last year and died “peacefully” this weekend. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comHayley Mills has been given an Oscar statuette to replace the one that went missing from her London home in the late 1980s. The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (Ampas), which hands out the Oscars, posted photographs on its social media feed showing Ampas president David Rubin presenting Mills with a replacement award. Mills won the award – a half-sized statuette termed a “Juvenile Oscar” – aged 14 for her performance in the 1960 film Pollyanna, though as she was at boarding school in England she was unable to attend the ceremony and it was received on her behalf by Annette Funicello. She was the last actor to receive a Juvenile Oscar, which had been given out sporadically since 1934 with previous winners including Mickey Rooney, Shirley Temple and Judy Garland. However, Mills said that the statuette had vanished from her home in the UK while she was in the US making the Disney Channel show Good Morning, Mrs Bliss (which ran from 1988-89 and was the originator of the Saved by the Bell series). Mills told the Hollywood Reporter in September that the statuette “was taken”. She added: “I went to America to do a television show and when I came back, it had gone. Of course, I turned the house upside down, and I asked everybody I could think of, and I did everything I could … Maybe it will turn up one day.” In 2018 she told EW that “it’s not something you can replace … They’ve broken the mould. I spoke to the Academy, and I said, ‘Well, look, give me a big one then!’ They said, ‘I’m sorry, it doesn’t work like that.’” Mills, the daughter of established British star John Mills, had been spotted by the Walt Disney studios after her appearance alongside her father in the 1959 thriller Tiger Bay; after the success of Pollyanna, she starred in a string of Disney films including The Parent Trap and In Search of the Castaways, as well as British films such as Whistle Down the Wind and The Family Way.Andrew Lloyd Webber is calling for the government to recognise the transformative effect that classical music tuition can have on the lives of children in disadvantaged communities. The award-winning composer of hits including Evita, Cats and Jesus Christ Superstar spoke of his despair over the lack of adequate public funding for music, despite its life-changing benefits. He said: “We do know music empowers children. The evidence is that it absolutely improves academic standards [and] all aspects of behaviour because they’re having to take part in something … with other people and think of other people … It doesn’t have to be classical music … As Duke Ellington said, there’s two kinds of music, good and bad. “Drugs are greatly reduced in the schools where a music programme exists. Consider what the saving to the community is, having children much more engaged. It’s not about necessarily turning them into musicians, but the fact that music is something that liberates kids.” Lord Lloyd Webber said ministers did not seem willing to consider “the actual statistics”. “It is proven, but I’ve found, in dealing with this government, one’s been banging one’s head against a brick wall on so many issues – and this one is a no-brainer,” he added. He pointed to the work of the Music in Secondary Schools Trust (Misst), which partners with schools in disadvantaged areas to provide regular classical music tuition. Its latest report, which will be published on Thursday, presents compelling statistics on the impact of such programmes on 11- to 18-year-olds, such as improving self-confidence and resilience. Its research shows Misst students are “bucking the national trend”, with self-confidence, for example, increasing by more than 10% in schools that have the programme compared with those that do not. Lloyd Webber said: “At a time when schools are so under pressure that music teaching is at serious risk, programmes like Misst are needed more than ever before.” Misst was founded in 2013, after years of development at Highbury Grove school in Islington, north London, with the belief that young people’s lives could be transformed through high-quality music education. It provides 8,030 students with regular tuition and instruments through programmes that would otherwise not be available to them. However, the trust is crying out for funds, with a waiting list of more than 30,000 children. The trust wants to develop the programmes beyond London, having so far reached Warwickshire, Oldham and Middlesbrough. Its education programme costs about £200 a year for each child. The Andrew Lloyd Webber Foundation has donated £3.4m to the main Misst programme and a further £100,000 to other activities. Lloyd Webber said: “We calculated that … it would only cost £300m to implement this scheme across all schools. This one is actually oven-ready. It’s ready to go, but we can’t do it all. It’s got to the point where many thousands of children in schools want to join this. But we haven’t got the resource to do it.” Rachel Landon, the chief executive of Misst, said: “We’ve done this completely through philanthropy.” Having been turned down recently for government funds, the trust has submitted another proposal. At the moment, music training varies from one school to another, Landon said, adding: “We went to a school last year and they had no music whatsoever and now we’ve introduced the programme and it’s a really … amazing music department.” Lloyd Webber described the first concert he attended at Highbury Grove school as “one of the most extraordinary things that I’ve ever seen”. “There was [a] choir – where you’ve got [60] or more different languages spoken in the school – singing Mozart’s Ave Verum. Just on one level, you were seeing Muslims, Jews, Christians … singing and enjoying it … I felt we had to get ourselves involved,” he said. The Department for Education said: “We are committed to ensuring all children can enjoy the benefits of music and arts. We have invested over £620m between 2016 and 2021 on a diverse range of music and arts education programmes.”Hong Kong’s leader has vowed to introduce a swathe of new security laws for the city, in an address opening the first legislative sitting since the “patriots only” election cemented the removal of opposition from government. Carrie Lam did not detail the new crimes that would be created in the planned “local legislation”, which would meet a constitutional requirement for Hong Kong to have its own national security law. The requirement laid out in article 23 of Hong Kong’s mini-constitution, the Basic Law, lists treason, secession, sedition, subversion and theft of state secrets. Article 23 also prohibits foreign political organisations from conducting political activities in Hong Kong, or having ties with local political organisations. Hong Kong’s existing national security law was imposed by Beijing in June 2020, outlawing broadly defined acts as secession, foreign collusion, subversion and terrorism. Both Lam and Beijing had said it was necessary to impose the law because Hong Kong had not been able to pass its own – having faced opposition and protests over previous attempts. Beijing’s law has been used to arrest more than 150 people, including journalists and opposition politicians, amid a broader crackdown which has targeted thousands and sent others fleeing overseas after the mass pro-democracy protests of 2019 and 2020. The most recent iteration of the crackdown on dissent saw an electoral overhaul to ensure that “only patriots govern Hong Kong”, which the UK handed back to China in 1997, reducing residents’ democratic participation in the election of the legislative council and introducing extensive roadblocks to those who oppose the pro-Beijing government from running. The 20 December election saw the lowest voter turnout in decades and prompted several governments around the world to express concern about the “erosion of democratic elements” after pro-Beijing candidates took nearly every seat. In her speech on Wednesday, Lam said: “With the leadership and staunch support of the CG, Hong Kong was now back on the right track of one country, two systems.” With a chief executive election process scheduled for March, Lam pledged to use the rest of her tenure to establish a “constructive and interactive relationship” between government and the legislature, “to address longstanding problems in society in order one day to claim recognition from the public on the approved electoral system and build a bright future together”.If you want to understand how a group of teenagers with no journalistic experience created one of the most influential political social media accounts in the UK, then ask Travis Wright. The 18-year-old spent most of last year helping to build Politics For All which, before it was banned by Twitter last week, gained 100,000s of followers including cabinet ministers, celebrities, and sports stars. By day he was studying multimedia journalism at a sixth form college in rural Suffolk but when lessons finished he was writing breaking news tweets that were being shared by cabinet ministers and Match of the Day host Gary Lineker. The trick Politics For All used to go viral was simple, he said: “You’d follow a tonne of journalists. And you’d see a tweet here or there and you’d say: ‘That’s good, I’ll take that’.” If you aren’t an obsessive follower of UK political news or – like most of the world – don’t spend much time on Twitter, then you might be wondering why we’re writing about the closure of a single news aggregation account. But there’s two essential issues in the parable of Politics For All: How real political influence can be rapidly gained on Twitter – and how this influence can be very rapidly lost, all at the whim of the social network and with little transparency. Climbing the social ladder Essentially, if Twitter is the place where the UK political news agenda is shaped, then Politics For All was the loud foghorn in the corner of the room. It was reaching tens of millions of people a month with its emoji-laden tweets where everything was treated as breaking news. It could shift narratives with a keen eye for highlighting details that other people had missed. And it also understood the fastest route to success on Twitter: aggressively stealing the work of mainstream journalists and rapidly repackaging it in a provocative format that takes advantage of every flaw in the site’s algorithm to maximise engagement with audiences. Or as another of the account’s former administrators put it: “We just looked at Twitter a lot. People think it was a massive organisation but it was basically ripping off people. The idea was to be first to nick it.” Politics For All was registered in 2019 by Nick Moar, a teenager from Bath, who clocked that the tactics used to cover football transfer news on Twitter – providing a one-stop rapid aggregation service of mainstream outlets with limited context – could be applied effectively to politics news. (Just to underline how its later success was mildly preposterous, the account’s username was actually @PoliticsForAli – with the “i” written in upper case – because someone else had already bagged @PoliticsForAll. This inevitably lead to a lot of speculation about who was Ali and why he wanted all this politics news.) Following a few early viral tweets, the account began to pick up momentum in early 2021. By the end of the year it had 450,000 followers and far more interactions than many mainstream news accounts. Its tweets were getting more than 80m views a month. The model was simple. When Moar or one his team saw a news story they felt would go viral, it would be rapidly shared with three 🚨🚨🚨 emojis, often rephrasing the original story to be more shareable. After waiting a few minutes to maximise engagement on the tweet, a link to the original source would be added – often to the annoyance of the full-time journalist who might have spent weeks doing the reporting but was getting less credit. Chris Lochery, one of the authors of the delectable media gossip newsletter Popbitch, memorably called Politics For All a “hungry little content piggy” after it tweeted out three of his stories in the space of an hour. It was essentially a modern twist on the traditional tabloid news model. Wright said Moar instinctively understood how news websites are full of information that might interest younger audiences – but this info is often hidden in dull news stories that are excessively long: “Some of the Times articles were really long-winded but he would find that nugget in the 12th paragraph that would make it go viral.” Potential admins – almost entirely teenagers and university students wanting to break into the media industry – would message the account and ask to be involved. A few test tweets later and they’d find themselves added to a WhatsApp group with fellow (essentially unpaid) staff and often given control of the main account, with the ability to tweet to hundreds of thousands of people. It was chaotic, unstructured, and somehow worked. Click, click… boom! Politics For All was often accused of leeching off the work of others and spreading disinformation with its framing of news stories. But talk to the individuals involved and they say the account was essentially a creation of Twitter’s own incentive structure. The challenge for the young men who ran the account – and it was almost an entirely male team – was to crack Twitter’s algorithm and maximise engagement, which would lead to more power and followers, which then led to further engagement. Many journalists get a thrill from pressing publish on a story they know will be big news. Wright found a similar level of enjoyment from aggregating other journalist’s stories on Politics For All: “It was just that buzz from clicking the button and typing a few words and just seeing the likes go up, seeing the retweets go up, seeing the follows go up.” This rapidly growing influence brought some issues, with the government increasingly concerned about what the teenagers were posting. One message posted in the admin WhatsApp group showed Moar had received complaints from a Downing Street adviser who was upset that the government had not given a right of reply to one of the Politics For All tweets. The admins were told it was “Carrie related”, a reference to the prime minister’s wife. The site also struggled to monetise, with admins given token payments of £50 when small sums of advertising cash arrived. Moar took a part-time job writing tweets for the right-leaning Spectator magazine and there was growing speculation about the service’s stated political impartiality. Ironically, multiple admins said Moar had actually been a Labour party member. (He declined to comment for this newsletter.) Wright was eventually asked to leave the service in the autumn. Shortly afterwards the account made some messy attempts at original reporting, including tweeting insider documents from the Salisbury rail crash without appropriate context. “They had a lot of power and they didn’t understand how to wield that power, it’s like a child like having all the candy,” said one former admin. “It provided a service but the service obviously altered and it felt slightly toxic. Everything was done for clicks.” Kept in the dark Earlier this month Twitter permanently banned Politics For All and its associated accounts without warning, citing its rules on platform manipulation – leading to suggestions that it may have engaged in excessively aggressive tactics to drive up engagement. But the admins remain in the dark, the social network has so far refused to elaborate on the reasons for the ban and there is no right to appeal. Westminster has noticed. Government officials have talked to the Guardian about whether the deletion of Politics For All is an issue that ministers should consider while framing journalistic protections in forthcoming online harms legislation. In some ways the flaw with Politics For All might have been that its approach was too refined, too obvious, and perhaps sailed too close to the wind. Two kids in a trenchcoat – or at least a group of teens with a WhatsApp group chat – worked out how to game Twitter, which is embarrassing for the social network. But these days many click-chasing mainstream news sites are also just rapid aggregators, ripping off anything resembling an exclusive from their rivals as fast as possible. Enormously popular news sites such as MailOnline operate on the same basis as Politics For All: humans like to consume provocative news stories and are rarely bothered about the original journalistic source. But perhaps most crucially, Politics For All reveals the motivation behind a lot of journalism in 2022: Posting online is addictive. As Wright puts it, aggregation of other people’s stories is just really fun: “I was trying to do reporting in London and asking people questions, but I was awful at it. But doing aggregation, I enjoyed a lot more.” If you want to read the complete version of the newsletter please subscribe to receive TechScape in your inbox every Wednesday.The US competition watchdog can proceed with a breakup lawsuit against Facebook’s owner, a federal judge has ruled. Mark Zuckerberg’s Meta, the parent of Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp, had asked a court to dismiss an antitrust complaint brought by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) for the second time. However, Judge James Boasberg said on Tuesday that the FTC’s revised lawsuit should be allowed to proceed. “Ultimately, whether the FTC will be able to prove its case and prevail at summary judgment and trial is anyone’s guess. The court declines to engage in such speculation and simply concludes that at this motion-to-dismiss stage, where the FTC’s allegations are treated as true, the agency has stated a plausible claim for relief,” wrote Boasberg, of the US District Court for the District of Columbia. The FTC, under the new chair, Lina Khan, wants to force Meta to sell its photo-sharing app Instagram and its messaging service WhatsApp in one of the biggest challenges the government has brought against a tech company in decades. Its lawsuit accuses Meta of pursuing a “course of anti-competitive conduct”. The FTC originally sued Facebook during the Trump administration, and its complaint was rejected by the court in June last year. The agency filed an amended complaint in August, adding more detail on the accusation that the social media company had crushed or bought rivals. Meta’s platforms are used by 2.8 billion people around the world on a daily basis. Boasberg said this time round the FTC had been “far more robust and detailed” in presenting its case. He wrote: “The agency has also explained that Facebook not only possesses monopoly power but that it has wilfully maintained that power through anti-competitive conduct – specifically, the acquisitions of Instagram and WhatsApp.” In his ruling denying dismissal, the judge, however, said that the FTC could not press allegations that Facebook blocked competing apps from accessing its platform as a way to maintain its dominance, saying the policies had been abandoned in 2018. Meta said that it was confident the company would win in court. “Today’s decision narrows the scope of the FTC’s case by rejecting claims about our platform policies. It also acknowledges that the agency faces a ‘tall task’ proving its case regarding two acquisitions it cleared years ago,” a spokesperson said. Meta shares closed up 1.9% on Tuesday, closing at $334.37 and valuing the company at $930bn (£683bn).I have always been fascinated by the human memory – its capacity, its acuity, its connections to emotions and our basic senses. Somehow the blob of gray gunk in my skull manages to recall everything from the statute of frauds I memorised in law school to the lyrics of pretty much any new wave single released in the 1980s. It’s the reason one whiff of Ralph Lauren Polo cologne takes me right back to a gropey nightmare in the cab of a pickup truck with the high school quarterback. But despite memory’s remarkable breadth and depth, we also know that it is fallible. Fragile. Even manipulable. Cognitive research has proved, for example, that eyewitness memory is far more confident and far less accurate than we instinctively believe. If we can’t believe our own memories, how can we trust ourselves? Memory is also reversible, and what we have forgotten is often as telling as what we recall. In my new book, The Girl She Was (entitled Find Me in the US), Hope Miller has lost not just some of her memories but all of them, after she was found thrown from an overturned SUV. The doctors initially thought she would regain her memories within days or weeks, but 15 years later, she has built a path forward in the small town where she was found, under a name of her own choosing. But what if the foundation on which her new life was built is a fraud? When Hope suddenly vanishes, the search for her entails a hunt for whatever memories she may have been running from. Failing memory provides infinite stories, both fictional and factual, classic and new. Here are some of my favourites. 1. Before I Go to Sleep by SJ Watson It’s no surprise that Watson’s debut thriller took the books world by storm when it was released in 2011. We all covet sleep, but what if every time you slept, your memory was erased? Christine is in this unenviable position. Even worse, the person she relies on to reorient her daily routine might not be trustworthy. 2. Under My Skin by Lisa Unger A year after the unsolved murder of her husband Jack, a grieving Poppy is playing with a serious cocktail of sleep deprivation, pills, and alcohol abuse. Between the nightmares and blackouts, she can’t remember entire blocks of time, and what she can remember might be real or wholly imagined. As she draws closer to the truth about her husband, her grip on reality only gets more tenuous, and now there’s a stranger lingering on the periphery of her life. Or is there? 3. What Alice Forgot by Liane Moriarty From what Alice Love can remember, she’s not yet 30 years old, married to the love of her life, expecting their first child … until she wakes up on a gym floor and lands in the hospital only to learn that she’s a 39-year old mother of three about to get divorced. As she tries to reconstruct her life over the preceding decade, she wonders if perhaps the amnesia is a blessing in disguise. 4. The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat by Oliver Sacks Remember Guy Pearce’s character in the film Memento, who woke up each day unable to form new memories? Renowned neurologist Oliver Sacks proved himself also to be a gifted storyteller in this collection which explores that neurologic condition (called anterograde amnesia) and others. Sacks presents patients’ case histories with extraordinary compassion. 5. The Sense of an Ending by Julian Barnes Winner of the 2011 Man Booker Prize, Barnes’s acclaimed novel grapples with how memories dictate our perception of our place in the world, and what happens when we’ve forgotten something intrinsic to this. If you don’t often think about your past, you will after reading this captivating tale. 6. Yesterday by Felicia Yap Imagine an alternative reality in which social distinctions are made not by wealth, race or class, but by one’s ability to remember. In Felicia Yap’s inventive debut, the masses are the “monos” who retain only one day of memories; the elite “duos” can retain two; and all must rely on their written diaries, which may or may not be accurate. When a woman is murdered, how can anyone determine the truth, as memories are consistently erased and altered? 7. The Flight Attendant by Chris Bohjalian Memory loss resulting from being blackout drunk leaves Cassandra Bowden flying without a proverbial net when she wakes in a Dubai hotel room next to a dead man, with no idea whether she killed him. What’s a single professional woman to do? Lying to colleagues and the FBI might not be the best choice. But after she does just that, figuring out who the murderer is might be her only way out. 8. In the Woods by Tana French Childhood trauma is difficult to overcome, and no more so than the murder of a childhood friend. This is what Detective Garda Rob Ryan is confronted with when a child is found murdered in the same woods where he survived a vicious attack of which he has few memories. Can Ryan rely on his fragments of memories to solve the current case and the one from his childhood? 9. The Book of Memory by Petina Gappah “Memory” plays a dual role here. Memory is the name of the novel’s narrator, a woman with albinism writing her story from a Zimbabwe maximum security prison where she is being held for murdering a white man. As Memory struggles to recount the events that led her to a jail cell, she must sort through a tangle of sometimes foggy recollections from her complicated past. 10. Last Words by Michael Koryta It’s not often that a suspect in an unsolved murder is the one to call for the reopening of a cold case. Ten years ago, Sarah Martin disappeared into an elaborate, unmapped cave system in a small town in southern Indiana. Days later, Ridley Barnes emerged from the caves carrying the teenager’s lifeless body. Barnes was the natural suspect, but insisted that he had no memory of how or where he found Sarah, or even whether she was dead or alive. Now he is the one who asks private investigator Mark Novak to take a second look and help him find out if he is a murderer. The Girl She Was by Alafair Burke is published by Faber. To help the Guardian and Observer, order your copy from the Guardian bookshop. Delivery charges may apply.When you’re pregnant, it’s understandable that you might feel cautious. After all, you’re told to avoid all sorts of things – soft cheeses, alcohol, certain medications – because they could be bad for the baby. You might find it surprising to be recommended a medical treatment that is still quite new. This partly explains why levels of Covid vaccination during pregnancy still seem to be relatively low. In August 2021, only 22% of those who gave birth had received the Covid vaccine. This leaves them and their babies at risk: between May and October 2021, 96% of those admitted to hospital with Covid symptoms while pregnant were unvaccinated. In response, the government has launched a campaign urging anyone who is pregnant to “get boosted now”. It’s an important step, given that a Covid infection doubles the chances of a baby being born pre-term and roughly triples the chances of stillbirth. But it has taken a long time to get here, and the messaging around pregnancy and Covid vaccines so far has added to the reluctance among those who are pregnant to get the vaccine. We now have a great deal of evidence that getting the vaccine does not increase the risk of experiencing a pregnancy complication. But back in December 2020, when the vaccines were first approved, there had been no clinical trials in pregnancy, so the government decided it wouldn’t offer the vaccines to pregnant people at all. It quickly became clear that this was a problem, as many who were pregnant were also at high risk from Covid – either because they had preexisting conditions or because they were healthcare workers who would be highly exposed to the virus. This led to a change in the policy only a couple of weeks later, allowing those who were high-risk to receive any of the approved vaccines. At this point, it didn’t matter on a practical level that they weren’t available to others who were pregnant – they weren’t being offered to most under-50s anyway. However, it set a tone of caution around Covid vaccines and pregnancy. And crucially, when the rules were changed again in April to allow anyone who was pregnant to receive either the Pfizer or Moderna vaccine along with their age group, the government stopped short of actually recommending that they do so. By then, we had data on the safety of Covid vaccines in pregnancy, but many people didn’t know where to look for it. This is where I started trying to close the information gap, using social media to speak directly to those making this decision for themselves and their babies. It wasn’t until July 2021 that the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) changed its policy from “we’re offering it” to “we’re recommending it”. And it wasn’t until December that The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation finally began to prioritise those who are pregnant for the vaccine. Although these gradual shifts in policy reflect the way in which evidence has built up, these drip-by-drip changes have, in my experience, had a real effect on the view of the vaccine. Many ordinary people have tuned into the message once, and the first thing they hear remains with them. Last August, when I was speaking to pregnant patients, I would say, “It’s safe, it protects you and your baby, and the RCOG recommends that you get it,” and they would respond, “But I was talking to someone in February and they told me not to.” Worse still, the changes in policy weren’t always communicated at ground level, with some of those who were eligible for the vaccine being turned away from vaccination centres because they were pregnant. A useful point of comparison is Canada, which initially only offered the vaccine to high-risk pregnant people, then extended it to everyone in the same month as the UK. But the Canadian authorities decided that if there was enough evidence to offer the vaccine to someone, there was enough evidence to recommend it. When the policy changed, they came out strongly with a message calling for anyone who was pregnant to come forward to protect themselves and their baby. As a result in Ontario, by September 2021, almost 60% of them were vaccinated against Covid. The UK didn’t come out with a confident message at first, which has left us struggling to get vaccination rates up. Meanwhile, the job has been made harder by those who are actively spreading misinformation about the safety of the vaccines. However, I hope that the trusted voices of the NHS and RCOG behind this new campaign will give those who are making this decision confidence that these vaccines are safe in pregnancy and are the best way to protect themselves and their babies from the potentially devastating consequences of Covid. Viki Male is a lecturer in reproductive immunology at Imperial College LondonChana masala, chole masala, channay, chholay: whatever you call it, this has fair claim to be the most popular curry in India, where it’s sold on the streets, served at parties and eaten at all times of day from breakfast to late-night snack. Cheap, nutritious and easy to make in quantity, it reheats well and, most importantly, tastes great. Prep 15 min Cook 40 min (if using tinned chickpeas) Serves 4-6 450g drained cooked chickpeas (or just under 2 x 400g tins), or 200g dried chickpeas ½ tsp bicarbonate of soda, if using dried chickpeas 1 tbsp vegetable oil 1 large onion 1 tsp cumin seeds 6 garlic cloves 25g root ginger 2-4 green chillies, to taste 30g fresh coriander 1 tbsp ground coriander 1-2 tsp chilli powder 1 tsp ground turmeric 1 x 400g tin plum tomatoes 1½ tsp fine salt 1 tsp garam masala (see step 9) 1 tbsp lemon juice 1 If using dried chickpeas … Soak the dried chickpeas, if using, in cold water overnight, preferably with a half-teaspoon of bicarbonate of soda added, then drain, put in a pan, cover generously with cold water and bring to a simmer. Skim off any scum, turn down the heat and cook until tender – how long this takes will depend on the age of the chickpeas. Make sure there’s always at least 500ml liquid in the pan. Once the chickpeas are tender, pour 500ml cooking liquor into a jug, then drain off the rest. 2 … and if using tinned If, however, you’re using tinned chickpeas, put them in a pan with 500ml water (you can make some of that amount up with the liquid from the tin), bring to a simmer and cook for five minutes. 3 Saute the onion Peel and finely chop the onion. Put the oil in a large, heavy-based pan over a medium heat and, once it’s hot, add the cumin seeds and fry, stirring so they don’t burn, until aromatic. Add the onion and turn the heat down, then cook, stirring regularly, until soft and golden. 4 Make the curry paste While the onion is cooking, peel and roughly chop the garlic and ginger, then put them in a mortar or mini chopper with the chillies (stalks removed but seeds and pith left in, unless you really don’t like heat) and about 25g of the fresh coriander. Grind or blitz to a fairly smooth paste, adding a splash of water if necessary. 5 Stir in the paste and spices Scrape the paste into the onion pan and fry, stirring, for a couple of minutes, then add the ground coriander, chilli powder and turmeric (and a splash more oil if the mix looks in danger of catching), and cook, still stirring, for a couple of minutes more. Roughly chop the tomatoes if using whole ones (if you have access to ripe fresh tomatoes, you can use them instead). 6 Add the tomatoes and chickpeas Add the tomatoes to the pan, stir in the chickpeas and their cooking water and the salt, then turn up the heat to bring the gravy to a lively simmer. Turn down the heat to medium low, and leave to bubble away for about 20 minutes, until slightly thickened. Stir in the garam masala (see step 9 if you want to make your own) and lemon juice, and check the seasoning. 7 Finishing touches Turn off the heat and leave the chana masala to cool slightly, then roughly chop the remaining coriander leaves, scatter on top and serve. Chana masala is often served with flatbreads such as chapati, or pav buns, poori or rice, and with raita and/or a kachumber salad of chopped onions, cucumber and tomatoes, but it also makes a good vegetarian side dish. 8 Alternatives Replace 50g of the dried chickpeas with chana dal for a slightly thicker consistency. If you prefer things milder, stir in a couple of spoonfuls of plain full-fat yoghurt. And bulk out the dish, if need be, by adding two medium potatoes, peeled and cut into chunks, to the pan in step 6 (in which case you may need to cook the curry for longer, and add a little more water). 9 DIY garam masala To make your own deliciously aromatic garam masala, as per Madhur Jaffrey’s recipe, very slightly adapted for practicality, put the seeds from eight cardamom pods in a spice grinder or mortar with a teaspoon of black peppercorns, cloves and cumin seeds (preferably black, but brown will do), a stick of cinnamon and a third of a nutmeg, finely grated, then grind to a powder. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoThe story of Japanese jazz is about music and a movement, but also a nation’s state of mind – a daring vision of a better future after the second world war, sounded out on piano, drums and brass. Jazz is a distinctly American art form – the US’s greatest cultural achievement, in fact, along with hip-hop – and a healthy scene had formed in the 1920s and 30s as American players toured the clubs of Tokyo, Kobe and Osaka. But Japan had historically been an insular nation – its policy of sakoku, which for more than two centuries severely limited contact with the outside world, had only ended in the 1850s – and an increasingly nationalist government, feeling jazz diluted Japanese culture, began to crack down. By the second world war, “the music of the enemy” was outlawed. After the country’s surrender, occupying forces oversaw sweeping reforms. American troops brought jazz records with them; Japanese musicians picked up work entertaining the troops. There was a proliferation of jazz kissa (cafes), a distinctly Japanese phenomenon where locals could sit and listen to records for as long as they wanted. For some, jazz was the sound of modernity. In those early postwar years, Japanese musicians were essentially copying the Americans they admired. “That’s what you do,” says Tony Higgins, co-curator of the J Jazz reissues series. “You start off imitating and then you assimilate and then you innovate.” Higgins and his fellow curator Mike Peden, both Britons, are longtime collectors who have spent vast quantities of time tracking down records, investigating labels and poring over obi strips (a band of paper wrapped around Japanese LPs). For the past few years, the pair have worked on Japanese jazz reissues for BBE Records, typically drawing from the late-1960s to the mid-80s, a period of fantastic innovation when a generation of musicians found their own voice. These releases have been part of a broader wave of Japanese jazz of the era reissued for western ears on labels such as Light in the Attic, Impex and We Release Jazz. “It’s humbling that there’s a lot of people obsessed with this sort of music worldwide,” says saxophonist Koichi Matsukaze. Matsukaze’s 1976 album At the Room 427 is set to be reissued as part of the J Jazz Masterclass series this month, and follows the 2018 reissue of his classic Earth Mother, from 1978. “I am at an elder age and I’m still active in my music,” he adds. “All of this is my origins.” To discuss the birth of modern Japanese jazz, Toshiko Akiyoshi provides an important base. The pianist was discovered playing in a club in 1952 by touring star Oscar Peterson and would go on to have a glittering career at home and stateside. Akiyoshi was the first Japanese artist to break away from simply copying American artists and develop a distinctive sound and identity that incorporated Japanese harmonies and instruments. At age 92, she’s still active today. By the late 1960s, the example of Akiyoshi, eclectic saxophonist Sadao Watanabe, and others spurred young artists to evolve away from Blue Note mimicry towards free jazz, fusion funk, spiritual, modal and bebop. These daring virtuosos implanted rock and electronic elements, or took influences from Afrobeat and flamenco music. The shift from mannered play to freewheeling individualism was reflected in a move away from sharp suits to a more unkempt look, and collaboration became important: take pianist Masabumi Kikuchi, who wrote and recorded with other artists to the point of being an almost guru-like figure in the scene. The technical proficiency of Japanese recording studios ensured many of the LPs are among the best sounding jazz records ever recorded, and while it would be wrong to apply an “independent good, majors bad” binary (large record companies produced plenty of far-out music too), the 1970s also saw the rise of smaller, private labels in Japan, such as Three Blind Mice, which offered extra opportunities for individualistic artists to record. “You started to sense a drift away from the short-form hard-bop numbers into more open ended, free-form music – quite psychedelic actually,” explains Higgins. “They ditched the suits and just dressed how they wanted to dress. They are influenced by what Miles [Davis] is doing in his electric music, but they are writing more of their own material, improvising more.” When asked if it was his intention to push the boundaries of Japanese jazz on his classic albums First and Mine – two projects released in 1970 that projected this new, uninhibited approach to the genre – saxophonist Kohsuke Mine says: “I did not think like that at all. I think we just recorded what came out naturally at the time.” Matsukaze, though, saw his music as actively rebelling against his musical forefathers. “In Japan, there’s this elder and subordinate culture,” he explains. “In the music scene, there’s your superiors saying, ‘Oh you have to play Charlie Parker.’ I was, at the time, very young and still growing [musically]; there were student demonstrations and society in Japan was very volatile. That kind of spirit was in Japanese jazz as well. I was very anti-establishment. Some people would say, ‘You should play standards,’ but I hated doing that. I would rebel against that. At the time, I considered myself an outsider.” Matsukaze’s music encapsulates the power and passion of the era. The title track from Earth Mother – full of melodic hooks, elastic baselines and zigzagging solos – kicked off the very first J Jazz compilation, and At the Room 427 goes further back in time. Matsukaze’s debut album was recorded live in November 1975 in front of a small audience in a classroom at Chuo University. On Little Drummer, Matsukaze and his small band intensely wrangle their instruments in a way that almost sounds like they’re dueling one another. It forms a thrilling, improvisational composition, like a blindfolded motorist on the highway putting their foot to the floor yet never crashing. He might have rejected expectations to play the classics, but Matsukaze distinguishes himself on the Billie Holiday classic Lover Man, as his slinking, sensual saxophone wails lead the band like a flaming torch. The mid-1980s marks the end of the period covered in the J Jazz series. “For me, it becomes less interesting [after that], they’re playing MOR sort of stuff,” says Higgins. “The whole digital technology thing comes in. The sound of drums changes, keyboards change. There’s a general sonic tone, that sheen, across the music that appeals to me less.” In the years since, Europe and the US have indulged in a decades-long fascination with Japanese culture that doesn’t appear to be subsiding. The popularity of anime is at an all-time high, while there’s been a new interest in the Japanese city pop genre of the late 1970s and 80s. Now, it’s Japanese jazz that’s ripe for excavation. “Many of these albums were hardly accessible outside Japan back then,” explains Stephan Armleder of We Release Jazz, but the arrival of the internet “gave us this insane access to a gigantic archival database for music: blogs, message boards, YouTube, Discogs”. Putting together a reissue is not a straightforward business, with rights holders that need tracking down and dust blown off decades-old contracts: it took two years for Peden and Higgins to secure the licensing to every song on the first volume of J Jazz. But it’s worth it for the acts of preservation, like the Tohru Aizawa Quartet’s album Tachibana, reissued in 2018. Higgins believes only about 200 copies were ever pressed and many of those were used by the man who funded the project – the Tachibana of the title – as a kind of business card to promote his hotels. It’s easy to envision such a record becoming lost in time. Another classic that found a new life online is Ryo Fukui’s album Scenery: one posting of the 1976 LP, uploaded in 2015, has almost 12 million YouTube plays. The pianist’s playing is smooth and nuanced as he navigates American classics like It Could Happen to You. “Now I just need to become the kind of person that hosts sophisticated dinner parties,” wrote one commenter on YouTube. “I’m astounded that all these young jazz fans across the world found out and really liked Ryo Fukui’s music,” says his widow, Yasuko Fukui, speaking to me from her jazz club Slowboat, which she ran with Ryo until his death in 2016. “I’m sincerely happy that this is happening.” Living in the northern city of Sapporo, Fukui was focused on sharpening his craft when a director from Trio Records happened to catch a live performance by the Ryo Fukui Trio while on a business trip. “Initially Ryo didn’t think his skills were good enough to be recorded, so he didn’t say yes quickly,” says Yasuko. “But the director was persistent.” Fukui followed it up one year later with the album Mellow Dream, but spent the rest of his life recording only sporadically. He focused on running the Slowboat club in Sapporo, where he’d perform as many as four times a week. Eventually, fans who knew his work from YouTube began showing up at the club. Fukui died in 2016. Two years later, Scenery was repressed on vinyl by We Released Jazz. “Ryo Fukui embodies, for us, the magic of Japanese jazz,” says Armleder. “He combines a true respect for tradition and the history of jazz with a dedication to perfecting his skills, and adds his own flair and passion.” The popularity of rediscoveries like this means the price of original Japanese jazz pressings has gone through the roof. Higgins, one of the chief figures driving that interest, says that nowadays he couldn’t afford to build his personal collection, though I point out the flipside is that the value of his collection has skyrocketed. “That’s one of the reasons we want to reissue them,” he says of rising costs. “It’s nice to have an original copy, but I’ve never subscribed to the idea of sitting in a jazz bunker clutching my originals. I want people to hear them.” These reissues might be pressed on brand new vinyl, but between the grooves, you still feel change happening. It’s the sound of catharsis for these musicians, for whom no boundary was above testing. With thanks to Kensuke Hidaka for acting as translator.Benefits must be increased by twice as much as planned this year if the poorest households in Britain are to be supported through the cost of living crisis, a leading economics thinktank has said. Warning the government that its current plans were not fit for purpose amid the worsening squeeze on families, the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS) said an additional £3bn needed pumping into the welfare system in response to soaring energy bills and mounting inflationary pressure. Instead of a planned 3.1% increase in the value of benefits, it said payments needed to rise by about 6% to protect the poorest in society from high inflation hurting their finances. Boris Johnson is under growing pressure from his own MPs to act on the rising cost of living amid warnings that failure would push many more people into fuel poverty and severely undermine the government’s promise to level up poorer areas. The prime minister and the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, have faced calls from cabinet members and backbench Conservatives to cancel the planned 1.25 percentage point increase in national insurance from April and ditch VAT on energy bills. The IFS said the planned tax rise and high inflation meant average take-home pay in Britain was likely to fall this year, with the poorest in society finding it hardest to tide themselves over. Industry leaders have warned gas and electricity bills are expected to rise by more than 50% from April when Ofgem, the energy regulator, lifts its price cap to account for soaring costs on the wholesale market. Benefits are due to rise from April by 3.1%, in line with September’s inflation rate as part of the government’s annual uprating process. However, the Bank of England has said inflation could peak close to 6% in the same month. The IFS said this meant the poorest in society faced a 3% cut in their real benefit levels and living standards this year, even before taking account of the £20 reduction in universal credit imposed by the government in October. Robert Joyce, the deputy director of the IFS, said: “We have become used to an era of low and stable inflation. But the way in which we increase benefits each April is not fit for the period of high and rising inflation we now face.” He said given acute pressure on households it would be preferable to raise benefits by the actual inflation rate in April. If that was 6%, it would cost an additional £3bn, or £4.5bn if the state pension was also included. “This need not be a permanent increase. Future uprating can be adjusted once inflation has fallen back,” he said. Raising benefits by 6% this year would mean preventing a £290 real fall in benefit income year on year for the 10m households in receipt of state support, the IFS said. The IFS said increasing benefits could be preferential to other options for helping households with the cost of living squeeze because it was already targeted at the poorest in society. The thinktank estimated that overall energy bills were likely to rise by £14bn this year, meaning compensation for households broadly across the population would prove very expensive or only extremely partial. It said abolishing VAT on domestic fuel – a policy called for by Labour and backbench Tories – would be less preferable because there were environmental downsides and would only reimburse households for less than one fifth of the increase in energy costs. A spokesperson for the government said it recognised people were facing pressure with the cost of living and was taking £4.2bn of action to help. “This includes increasing benefits in-line with the inflation measure from September, the energy price cap which is saving 15 million households £100 a year on average, and winter fuel payments, which are supporting over 11 million pensioners with their energy bills. Our £500m Household Support Fund is also providing low income households with essentials over winter.”Whitbread, the owner of the Premier Inn hotel chain, says it expects cost inflation for the hospitality sector to reach 7-8% in the coming months. Higher labour costs, rising energy bills and increased construction costs for its new hotels are putting pressure on the FTSE 100 company, says Whitbread’s chief executive, Alison Brittain. The group said it expected to offset these increased costs through charging higher rates for rooms in its 800 Premier Inn hotels, as well as through cost efficiencies and by growing its estate. The company, which also owns restaurant chains including Beefeater, Bar + Block, and Brewers Fayre, said higher levels of inflation would affect about £1.4bn of its cost base until April 2023. Brittain said the company had brought in a 5% staff pay rise in the last quarter of 2021, in order to retain workers and attract new ones amid a squeeze on hospitality staff. She said she anticipated increasing wages again in the spring for staff who are paid hourly rates. “That [labour costs] is quite a large part of inflation for us, so are energy bills which are highly inflationary,” Brittain said. “Construction costs are higher, and so that impacts our building of hotels where we are not contracted, where we are looking at new hotel builds.” Whitbread said that demand at its hotels and restaurants was dampened in December and during the festive period by fears about the spread of the Omicron variant. The company’s food and beverage sales were 17.2% lower in the six weeks to 6 January than during the same period in 2019, as consumers stayed at home and many Christmas parties were cancelled. In recent weeks, governments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have also introduced more restrictions on consumers eating out and drinking inside hospitality venues. However, Whitbread said accommodation sales at its UK Premier Inn hotels over the past six weeks were 5.1% higher than during the same period in 2019. Before the news of the Omicron variant affected consumer behaviour, Whitbread had benefited from consumers taking domestic holidays, as like-for-like accommodation sales grew by 5.5% in the three months to the end of November compared with 2019. However, this contrasted with food and drink sales, which slid by 13.4% during the period, leading Brittain to describe the “value pub and restaurant sector” it now operated in as “more challenging”. Anticipated slower trading in January and February combined with supply chain disruption have caused Whitbread to delay £20m of spending on marketing and refurbishment of its venues.A man has been detained in connection with the unsolved case of three British family members and a French cyclist who were shot dead in the French Alps in 2012. Saad al-Hilli, an Iraqi-born engineer, his wife, Ikbal, and her mother, Suhaila al-Allaf, were gunned down in a layby on remote forest road outside the village of Chevaline, near Lake Annecy. The couple’s two young daughters survived the attack. A local cyclist, Sylvain Mollier, was also shot dead at point-blank range after apparently stumbling on the scene. No one has been charged over the attack, one of France’s most notorious recent unsolved crimes. Police sources told French media an unidentified man had been taken into custody and his home searched. The man’s movements and whereabouts on the day of the killings, as well as the days before and after, were being verified, the sources said. Line Bonnet, the public prosecutor in Annecy, said in a statement a person had been arrested at 8am on Wednesday by detectives in Chambéry, adding that further details would be released “after the detention” but that the investigation was covered by judicial secrecy laws. BFM television said the suspect was a married man who had previously been questioned as a witness. The arrest follows a detailed recreation of events by gendarmes in September, on the ninth anniversary of the killings. French and British police have so far failed to make any real progress in the case despite a massive effort involving officers on both sides of the Channel. The bodies of Hilli, 50, and his dentist wife, 47, who lived in Claygate, Surrey, and were on holiday in the region, were found along with that of Allaf in their UK-registered BMW car. More than two dozen used bullet casings were found near the vehicle. In one of many unexplained twists in the case, it emerged that Ikbal’s previous husband, an American dentist, died from a heart attack on the same day as the shootings, although police have said the deaths were not connected. Hilli’s then seven-year-old daughter, Zainab, was pistol-whipped and badly beaten during the attack, possibly after the killer ran out of ammunition, police have suggested. Her sister Zeena, then four, hid in the footwell of the vehicle. Several suspects have previously been detained in connection with the case, including Hilli’s brother Zaid, who was arrested on suspicion of murder in 2013 but later told there was insufficient evidence to charge him with a crime. Zaid, from Chessington, Surrey, admitted he had fought with his brother in October 2011 after months of arguments over a £1m property that the family owned in Claygate, but strongly denied any suggestions he was involved in the killings. A 35-year-old Iraqi man identified only as S was also questioned by police following a tipoff from a fellow former prisoner that he had claimed to have been offered “a large sum of money” to kill Iraqis living in the UK. He was released without charge after it was established he was not in France on the day of the killings. A former soldier in the French Foreign Legion, Patrice Menegaldo, who was living locally at the time and later killed himself in 2015, was named as a prime suspect in a book published three years after the shootings. Detectives suggested he fitted the profile of the professional hitman believed to be behind the crime. The book also contained a claim from Hilli’s brother that there had been a “cover-up” and that Mollier was the killer’s real target. A passing motorcyclist from Lyon was also traced and ruled out of the inquiry.Mary Soames, a daughter of Winston Churchill, described the prospect of her father’s enforced resignation from Downing Street, largely because of illness, as “his first death”. Prime ministers rarely leave office willingly. Margaret Thatcher memorably had tears in her eyes as she drove away from her home of 10 years. Perhaps she was remembering the gentle advice from her closest adviser, Charles Powell, immediately after her third election triumph in 1987, suggesting that after two further years in office it would be wise for her to resign willingly. “There comes a point when your reputation and standing as an historic figure are more important to your party, to your cause and to the country than even yourself can be,” he wrote, suggesting it would then be time for her to contribute in some other way. Thatcher, of course, ignored him, instead granting an interview in which she said she intended “to go on and on”, only to be defenestrated by a party with an accumulated resentment of her divisiveness. Geoffrey Howe, the former cabinet minister who wielded the knife in the Commons, was later to explain: “The insistence on the undivided sovereignty of her own opinion – dressed up as the nation’s sovereignty – was her undoing.” In her memoirs she understood the source of her defeat, reflecting that “a prime minister who knows his or her cabinet has withheld its support is fatally weakened”. For Boris Johnson, facing the biggest test of his term in office, there will be a similar reluctance to give way. His brief tenure contains a legacy of sorts, the negotiated departure of the UK from the EU, but not so long ago his advisers were briefing the Times he intended to stay in office for 10 years. He is probably assured the cabinet, many of them uninspired placemen and women, will not yet move upon him, even though he will be watching every move of Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, and Rishi Sunak, his chancellor. His concern will be the court of public opinion, its impact on the parliamentary party, and the real threat that either Sue Gray, the ethics adviser, or the police will do for him. Prime ministers have had the Metropolitan police on their case before. Tony Blair famously was pursued by the Met over allegations that peerages were offered to party donors who were asked to disguise donations as loans, and therefore not declared. The loans, it was alleged, might be turned into donations if a peerage was granted. In his autobiography Blair recalled: “From the day the story broke to the day I left it was a running sore.” The file was closed soon after he left office and Blair said the 18 months had been “an absolute hell” for all those involved. Blair became convinced Gordon Brown had used the scandal internally to push him to go, something Blair had already agreed to do in principle. Many, including some Downing Street staff, were arrested, and Blair was interviewed three times, twice in office, but not arrested or interviewed under caution. It was the first time a prime minister had helped the police with their inquiries. Channel 4 later reported the police had on one of the occasions sought to interview him under caution, and Blair declined, saying to do so would require him to resign as prime minister. The police reconsidered. Eventually the Crown Prosecution Service dropped the case because there was no evidence of an explicit agreement that the cash would lead to an honour. In reality, Johnson’s fate is less dependent on the police and more on Gray, on whose mercy he threw himself during prime minister’s questions on Wednesday. The Johnson and Blair cases – potentially breaking the lockdown laws and the 1925 Honours (Prevention of Abuses) Act respectively – are of course very different, and carry very different penalties. Although cash for honours is reprehensible, and a feature of a corrupted political system, the offence perhaps does not have the same public resonance as a breach of the lockdown rules, since those rules applied to everyone. It is the reek of hypocrisy, the betrayal of an assumed sense of national shared sacrifice, that is so dangerous to Johnson. The day after the party, 24 hours after the last empty cans were being cleared from the Downing Street garden, Johnson stood on the steps of No 10 to applaud NHS workers. But there is one other parallel between the Blair and Johnson case. In both there was a sense that stories were being fed by internal party sources as a political rivalry. In his short time in office Johnson has managed to offend some knowledgable and merciless people. His efforts to show he is prime ministerial material – always an uphill task – are not made easier by the leaks. It is possible he will survive – some politicians, such as Michael Heseltine, adored crises, and others, such as John Major, hated them. Johnson, who likes to be loved, seems uncomfortable confronting his mistakes. Tory MPs will now have to decide whether the Johnson prime ministership has made a discrete but recoverable error of judgment, or is instead incapable of functioning effectively owing to personality defects – the verdict passed on three recent holders of the office, Brown, Major, and Theresa May, politicians whose reputations have improved out of Downing Street. The fear is less that Johnson is accident prone, or weak, but fundamentally dishonest, utterly lacking what Blair once described as an “irreducible core”. The Tory MP Huw Merriman urged his colleagues to see Johnson “in the round”. The worry for Johnson is that too many MPs have indeed looked at that larger picture – and seen something irredeemable.December 1925 was a busy month for June. A fixture of the West End stage since childhood, her surname, Tripp, had been excised by the impresario Charles B Cochran because it “sounds a bit comical for a dancer”. She spent the days rehearsing for a musical, Kid Boots, the evenings starring in another, Mercenary Mary, and then would “rush to the studio at midnight”, to act in a horse-racing short film opposite the fading American film star Carlyle Blackwell. The studio was at Poole Street, Islington, in north London, built five years earlier by Paramount but now rented out, most often to a British company, Gainsborough, run by Michael Balcon. The short, Riding for a King, starred the celebrated jockey Steve Donoghue and had its premiere in January 1926, with June in attendance. Two days later, she collapsed during a performance of Mercenary Mary and shortly after underwent an appendectomy. Daily Express readers subsequently learned that she would “not be able to dance for six months”. By February, she was recuperating on the Riviera. It was there that she received a telegram from her old friend Ivor Novello, who offered film work. “No dancing required. You will act beautifully and we shall have fun.” Novello was Britain’s preeminent male star. The Rat, Gainsborough’s film of a play he had co-written for himself, had just been released, and now Balcon had him lined up for the lead in a murder mystery, The Lodger. June was to play Daisy, the landlord and landlady’s daughter who falls in love with a man who may or may not be Jack the Ripper. It was her first significant film role. If Novello’s telegram named the film’s director, it could not have meant much to June, since neither of his two films had yet been released. On her arrival at Poole Street she encountered “a short, corpulent man named Alfred Hitchcock”, as she wrote in her 1960 memoir The Glass Ladder. He had started his career at the studio when it was still Paramount’s, and would in future describe himself as “American trained”. After the Americans left he was hired by the nascent Gainsborough, and worked his way up to the director’s chair by the time he was 25. His first two films, The Pleasure Garden and The Mountain Eagle, were made in Bavaria and northern Italy. Coming home after finishing the latter, late in 1925, Hitchcock had proposed to his assistant director Alma Reville, and she, too seasick to speak, had made “an affirmative gesture”. The Lodger, his third film but “the first true Hitchcock movie” as he put it to François Truffaut, was derived from a novel by Marie Belloc Lowndes, as well as a comic stage adaptation, Who is He?, that he had seen as a teenager. The morning after production began in February 1926, with a night shoot on the Victoria Embankment, it was reported that Gainsborough had bought Poole Street outright. What was not reported, though, was that this was another aspect of June’s contribution to The Lodger, through her secret romance with the racing-car driver Woolf “Babe” Barnato. When they met, June was unaware just how rich, and how married, Babe was. His father Barney, “a poor Jewish lad who, born in London’s ghetto”, as June later put it, had gone out to South Africa in the 1870s, made millions in diamonds, then gone mysteriously overboard on a voyage back from the Cape in 1897. At one point he had been up there with Cecil Rhodes. As it happened, June’s Riding for a King co-star Carlyle Blackwell was a beneficiary of the same legacy, through his (initially bigamous) marriage to Babe’s sister, Leah. One source says it explicitly, but it was the Barnato fortune that paid for Gainsborough’s studio. British films were at a low ebb in the mid-1920s, kept off the screen by the all-conquering Americans; to compete with the new empire, Gainsborough drew on inherited wealth accumulated under the old one. In return for the Barnato’s money, their two partners, June and Blackwell, were given roles. June had barely been in a film before, and every previous Gainsborough film had had a US female lead. Blackwell was given a job on the board and is credited as producer on The Lodger. The Barnatos enabled Gainsborough to survive the American onslaught: a month after The Lodger was released in February 1927, the government brought in the famous Cinematographic Films Act, designed to protect the British studios by establishing a quota. Naturally enough, June appeared in reports from the set of The Lodger that appeared in the press in early 1926. In one, by the Daily Mail’s Iris Barry, she emerged from her dressing room “to discuss the merits of an intensely golden wig she must wear”. In another, the Evening News printed a photo of the director playfully threatening her with a poker, along with a vivid portrait of “the autocrat of the studio” at work. June herself provided an account of Hitchcock’s methods in The Glass Ladder, which was published before his notorious mistreatment of Tippi Hedren on the set of The Birds came to light. In one scene, she writes: “All I had to do was carry an iron tray of breakfast dishes up a long flight of stairs, but by the time Hitch was satisfied with the expression of fear on my face and the atmosphere established by lights and shadows, I must have made the trek 20 times, the tray seeming to grow heavier every passing minute. During that exhausting hour and a half, I felt a strange sickening pain somewhere in the region of my appendix scar, but forbore to complain or ask for a rest, because delicate actresses are a bore and a nuisance, and in any case, this scene ended my work on the film.” Within weeks June was at death’s door. After a second operation, she had to deny rumours “that she would probably dance no more”. In July 1926, she went to recuperate in Dorset, where she was photographed with Babe in the Daily Sketch – one of the few occasions their relationship was even hinted at in public. Only the very end of the shot is in the film. What happened to The Lodger in the summer of 1926 has become one of the founding myths of Hitchcock’s early career: supposedly, it was rejected by its distributor (like Hitchcock’s two previous films) and the director’s career was in trouble until the Observer’s film reviewer Ivor Montagu was brought in to re-edit it, leading to the film’s triumphant first screening in September of that year (and the subsequent release of The Mountain Eagle, Hitchcock’s previous film). This is exaggerated; what really happened was less of an underdog story. None of Hitchcock’s films were shelved, and the extent of Montagu’s intervention has been inflated. If there was tension between Hitchcock and Gainsborough, it is more likely to have been because Hitchcock was poached by a rival studio very soon after The Lodger was shot. It was June’s career that was in the balance. She had sailed to Rio with Babe, briefly her fiance, where she was offered and had to decline a new stage musical, Sunny, opening that autumn: “The trouble lay in my right side where muscles had been cut or damaged during the last operation.” But by December, back in London, she was dancing again. Within a couple of years she was on Broadway, taking the lead in what was meant to be a smash hit, Polly, opposite future Hitchcock star Cary Grant (then still billed as Archie Leach). By then she was free of Babe, and after Polly flopped June entered into what she herself characterised as a Rebecca-esque marriage to an aristocrat, one Lord Inverclyde, who kept her out of showbusiness. After their divorce, she returned to the West End limelight, but never made a film as significant as The Lodger. Might things have been different if Hitchcock hadn’t almost killed her? • The First True Hitchcock by Henry K Miller is published in the US on 25 January and in the UK and elsewhere on 23 FebruaryHow can it be that, in these first weeks of 2022, the world is allowing millions of Afghan children to face death from starvation? And this after months during which the UN, a score of governments, the EU and the Arab League, not to mention US ex-army commanders, ambassadors and humanitarians, have been publicly pleading for immediate action to stop the cascade of Afghan lives lost to famine and malnutrition. On Tuesday, Martin Griffiths and Filippo Grandi, UN humanitarian and refugee coordinators, once again begged countries to send food and urgent supplies. They announced the biggest humanitarian appeal mounted since 1945 for a single country, a $4.5bn request to help more than 23 million Afghans on the edge of starvation. For the devastation the world was warned about months ago is no longer a distant prospect. “Let us eat” was the stark banner under which protesters demonstrated a few days ago in Kabul, as the guarantees of assistance made by world powers in August have melted into a trail of broken promises. Dawn in Afghanistan sees long queues of women and children outside bakeries for the one food staple still available – bread – and even that is in short supply due to a 40% drop in wheat production after the worst drought in decades. Griffiths forecasts that if we do not act, 97% of Afghans could soon be living below the poverty line. In other words, to be Afghan today is to be sentenced to dire poverty or destitution. Aid workers are finding children huddled together under threadbare blankets in temporary camps and hovels or lying wrapped in their mothers’ burqas outside hospitals waiting for treatment that is simply not available. Until August, 30 million Afghans depended on World Bank-managed healthcare. Now, more than 90% of the country’s health clinics lack the funds to stay open. Only 11% of Afghans have had a Covid vaccine. International aid workers are courageously doing their best to keep some food aid moving, some clinics functioning and some schools open for boys and girls. But their work is undercut and any progress is cancelled out by the withdrawal of the aid money that previously accounted for 43% of Afghanistan’s GDP and funded 75% of public expenditure, and by the freezing of banking transactions and trade with Afghanistan, with the result that there is little private cash circulating either. This is the new world order revealed at its most selfish and morally defective: countries are locked into the narrow nationalism of “America first”, “Britain first”, “China first”, “Russia first”, “my tribe first”, and trapped in a geopolitics that puts military and economic sanctions before food for the hungry. Even after America’s $308m contribution on 12 January, the 35-country, US-led coalition that ruled Afghanistan for 20 years under the banner of helping the Afghan people has still put up only a quarter of the money that would allow UN humanitarians to stop children dying this winter. This is not an isolated incident. Our liberal world order is proving itself neither liberal nor orderly. What has also been destroying thousands of lives in the past year is an equally counterproductive failure to vaccinate, test and provide treatments for poor people across the world, with the result that we have spawned new Covid variants, endangering us all. Now we are witnessing a similarly shameful and self-defeating failure to prevent famine. Our reluctance to act is not only a moral outrage but will have real-world consequences. These may take the form of mass migration to the west, rising production of heroin and the recruitment of terrorists who will claim that the world’s failure to act proves coexistence is impossible. The UN security council has finally agreed to offer financial institutions and commercial actors legal assurances that they will not be in breach of sanctions if they engage with humanitarian organisations. It is an important step, but one that does not yet guarantee that enough help will come. So we must make a success of the $4.5bn humanitarian appeal and augment it with all of the $1.5bn held in trust at the World Bank for Afghanistan (currently only $280m has been released). But even these initiatives amount to just 30p a day per person in Afghanistan for all their food, shelter, healthcare and schooling, and are no more than stopgap measures to get us through the winter. Humanitarian programmes alone cannot replace that 75% of public expenditure that until August came from aid agencies abroad, or substitute the networks of governmental provision built before the Taliban takeover that are now collapsing. And so, we must find a way to ensure dollars can come into the country, or for local banks to issue a stable Afghan currency, so food and salaries for teachers and health workers can be paid. Nothing should detract from our condemnation of the regime’s repression, abuses of human rights and extrajudicial killings. It must receive no political recognition from any aid we give to the Afghan people. But on condition of demonstrable progress, for example, on women’s and girls’ rights and with aid going through the UN and NGOs, some economic sanctions could be relaxed. If the killings stop and there is a more inclusive government, some development assistance could begin. The next step must be a UN-backed pledging conference, and I have written to both the UK foreign secretary and the EU president asking them to co-convene it. The Gulf states – Saudi Arabia, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates – have the money and have made offers to provide assistance, but they fear an American backlash. Realistically, it will require the US to break the logjam and end the cycle of starvation and death. To turn our backs now on ordinary Afghans in their hour of greatest need would be the final insult: a badge of shame that the free world would carry for ever. Visiting Kabul a few days ago, a colleague at the organisation I chair, Education Cannot Wait, met a young girl pleading to go back to school. Her name was Arezou. It is the Dari word for wish, indeed for hope. And it is hope that we must offer her and a despairing Afghan people. Now. Gordon Brown is the WHO ambassador for global health financing, and was UK prime minister from 2007 to 2010Right now, Tamara Rojo is putting the finishing touches to the first ballet she has created for English National Ballet – a new version of Raymonda – but it will also be her last. She announced on Tuesday that she is leaving the company, where she is artistic director and lead principal, to take up the artistic directorship at San Francisco Ballet. It’s a blow for Britain’s ballet scene, where the sharply intelligent Rojo has been an innovative leader and an articulate advocate for the art form, turning ENB from a respected but unexciting touring company into a news-making organisation. It doesn’t feel that long since Rojo arrived in the job but it’s almost 10 years – testament to the fact that things have never become predictable in her time there. When she started, she was one of the world’s leading dancers at the Royal Ballet, with little management experience but plenty of brains and ambition. She brought star quality to ENB and continued to dance, combining the two roles in a seemingly impossible balancing act of early morning body conditioning, daily class with the rest of the company and morning rehearsals, then in the afternoon running the company (and in the evenings when not performing, out networking and fundraising and all the other things artistic directors have to do). You could see the results for the company on stage, although there were some rumblings about Rojo’s management style, and a number of dancers left. She brought in Cuban ballerina Loipa Araújo to coach the dancers and new signings: Alina Cojocaru, poached from the Royal Ballet, Precious Adams from the US and the brilliant Russian Maria Kochetkova, as well as some virtuoso young men, including César Corrales, Jeffrey Cirio and Isaac Hernandez (who is her partner – the couple have a nine-month-old son). Rojo has also overseen the company’s move from its cramped HQ in South Kensington to slick, vast new studios in Canning Town, representing not just a geographical shift, but a move from a spot associated with upper crust heritage – round the corner from the Royal Albert Hall; Princess Diana used to escape across Kensington Gardens for lessons there – to the east of the capital where the mood is all about change, renewal and creativity. Rojo turned the company into one worth talking and writing about. She was always walking a tightrope between artistic innovation and staying financially afloat (ENB’s bank balance is much more precarious than that of the Royal Ballet behemoth), serving regular helpings of The Nutcracker and staging some big glitzy romps such as Le Corsaire to win crowds. But her biggest success was in asking contemporary/kathak choreographer Akram Khan to reinvent one of ballet’s most cherished works, Giselle. The triumphant result was a brooding, intense ballet, setting the turbulent story of love and betrayal in a community of migrant factory workers, and was a reinvention for the company – the dancers performing with a new energy and urgency. The work has toured internationally. Elsewhere, Rojo commissioned another contemporary choreographer, Russell Maliphant (along with Khan and ballet choreographer Liam Scarlett) to make a moving triple bill, Lest We Forget, marking the centenary of the first world war. She has continually championed female choreographers, of whom there have been embarrassingly few in the ballet repertoire, staging an all-female triple bill, She Said, with works from Annabelle Lopez Ochoa, Yabin Wang and Aszure Barton. She gained rare permission for the company to perform Pina Bausch’s punishing Rite of Spring. With their wild hair and bodies flying, the dancers couldn’t have been further from classical ballet’s poised prettiness. And she got the great William Forsythe to make the joyful Playlist (Track 1, 2) leaping and spinning to house music in a piece of pure balletic pleasure. The risk-taking doesn’t always pay off – Khan’s 2021 piece Creature was the equivalent of those dark TV dramas where the lighting’s too gloomy and you can’t hear what the actors are mumbling, but you can’t resent the ambition to push the agenda and keep ballet a vital, living art form. Rojo’s vision has always been to tie together classical ballet’s heritage with modern theatrical sensibility and meaty female characters, and in her Raymonda – a Florence Nightingale-inspired story set in the Crimean war – she’s putting her money where her mouth is. Even though it might be her swansong for English National Ballet, it’s only the beginning of the next gripping chapter of Rojo’s career.Boris Johnson has admitted attending a gathering in the Downing Street garden during the first lockdown and apologised to the nation while arguing it was a work event and “technically” broke no rules. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, rejected Johnson’s version of events and called on the prime minister to resign. “The only question is: will the British public kick him out, will his party kick him out, or will he do the decent thing and resign?” Starmer said. Starmer castigated the prime minister as “a man without shame” and someone who the public believed to be a liar, saying Johnson was trying to wriggle out of responsibility. In a much-anticipated and carefully worded statement just before prime minister’s questions, Johnson acknowledged mass public anger after an email emerged inviting about 100 No 10 staff to a socially distanced “bring your own booze” event on 20 May 2020 to enjoy the sunny weather. “Mr Speaker, I want to apologise,” he told a packed Commons. “I know that millions of people across this country have made extraordinary sacrifices over the last 18 months. I know the anguish that they have been through, unable to mourn their relatives, unable to live their lives as they want or to do the things they love.” He said: “I know the rage they feel with me, and with the government I lead, when they think that in Downing Street itself the rules were not being properly followed by the people who make the rules.” Johnson said that on the evening concerned he joined the event for about 25 minutes from around 6pm, saying that, with the No 10 garden being used as “an extension of the office” amid lockdown, he believed it was a work event. “With hindsight I should have sent everyone back inside,” he said, arguing that the event “could be said, technically, to fall within the guidance” of the time. Johnson said he accepted many would disagree, adding: “To them, and to this house, I offer my heartfelt apology.” He said it was important that Sue Gray, the senior civil servant investigating the gathering and series of other allegedly lockdown-breaching events in No 10 and elsewhere in government, be allowed to complete her report. At Wednesday’s briefing for lobby journalists, the prime minister’s press secretary, Rosie Bate-Williams, declined to answer basic factual questions about the 20 May party, including when and how Johnson found out about it, and whether his wife was present. Instead, Bate-Williams repeatedly said: “On all of the matters around the specific details, that will be for the independent review to determine.” She said Johnson had not seen the email from his principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds, inviting colleagues to “socially distanced drinks”. But she declined to repeat the prime minister’s previous public assurances that he acted within Covid guidance, saying she did not want to “pre-empt” the findings of Gray’s review. Asked whether Johnson would resign if Gray found he had broken Covid rules, Bate-Williams said: “That is a hypothetical question on the basis of the findings, so I’m not going to get into that.” In the exchanges after the statement in the Commons, Starmer ridiculed Johnson’s version of events, calling it “the pathetic spectacle of a man who has run out of road”. Starmer said Johnson’s defence, “that he didn’t realise he was at a party, is so ridiculous that it’s actually offensive to the British public”. Starmer added: “He’s finally been forced to admit what everyone knew, that when the whole country was locked down he was hosting boozing parties in Downing Street. Is he now going to do the decent thing and resign?” Accusing Johnson of being “contemptuous of the British public”, Starmer asked why he did not stand down for breaking or mocking rules when others, such as the former health secretary Matt Hancock and ex-No 10 press secretary Allegra Stratton, had done so. Attending the event was a clear breach of lockdown rules, Starmer said, adding that in assuring the Commons he had no knowledge of such things Johnson had broken the ministerial code, seen as a reason to resign. Johnson had pretended to be “sickened and furious” when evidence emerged of parties, Starmer said, adding: “Now it turns out he was at the parties all along. Can’t the prime minister see why the British public think he’s lying through his teeth?” In response to the barrage, Johnson eschewed his usual combative style at PMQs to repeatedly apologise, saying: “I accept that we should have done things differently on that evening.” But he also urged Starmer to wait for Gray’s inquiry, and used his final answer to talk up his government’s record in tackling Covid. • Join our journalists for a Guardian Live online event on the No 10 lockdown party and Boris Johnson’s future on Wednesday 19 January. Book hereAfter months of sabre-rattling from Vladimir Putin over Ukraine, Russian officials have been on a diplomatic tour of Europe this week, meeting the US in Geneva and Nato in Brussels. Amid this diplomatic whirl, Europe’s biggest diplomatic club has been absent. The EU has no formal role in the talks, although its officials are drawing up possible sanctions to levy against Russia if the Kremlin decides to invade Ukraine. The EU’s exclusion from talks on war and peace in its own backyard hurts. “Between Putin and Biden, Europe is sidelined,” ran a Le Monde headline last week. The EU’s top diplomat, Josep Borrell,struck an insouciant note. “I don’t care,” he said when the BBC asked whether the US should have gone ahead with the Geneva talks. The Russians, he said, had “deliberately excluded the EU from any participation” but he had been assured by the US that “nothing will be agreed without our strong co-operation, coordination and participation”. Officials have downplayed the exclusion of the EU. “European allies are at the table, because European allies are in Nato,” said the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg. After Nato-Russia talks, Stoltenberg plans to brief EU defence ministers meeting in the port city of Brest in north-western France on Wednesday evening. The two organisations have 21 member countries in common and pages of pledges to improve cooperation. Not everyone buys this reassuring story about Europe’s absence from the top table. “It gives me huge concern,” Radosław Sikorski, a Polish former foreign minister, who now sits in the European parliament, told the Guardian. “The EU is a neighbour of both Ukraine and Russia, these are countries with whom we have intense relationships. And what happens between them affects several member states. Of course we should be there and I am astonished that we are not.” The EU’s foreign policy chief, then Catherine Ashton, was at the table with the US, Russia and Ukraine in 2014 in Geneva, following the invasion of Crimea. France and Germany later switched to the narrower Normandy format, talking to Kyiv and Moscow, in an attempt to end the conflict in Ukraine. “It was the actions of some member states, Germany and France, and a diplomatic mistake by Ukraine to accept the Normandy formula, and then the Minsk formula, that has got us nowhere,” argues Sikorski. “Through a series of missteps we have ended up with the EU excluded from an issue of vital importance for us.” In an uncomfortable irony the crisis is unfolding as EU defence and foreign ministers gather this week in Brest to discuss how the EU can be a more powerful player in a global order challenged by authoritarian powers and rogue actors. The search for the EU’s “strategic autonomy” is championed by France, which took charge of the EU rotating presidency this month. Europe, a senior French government official said, must be “fully sovereign, free in its choices and master of its own destiny”. Another Russian invasion of Ukraine is an obvious big test for “sovereign” Europe. More than 100,000 Russian troops are stationed around Ukraine’s borders and US intelligence has reported that 175,000 could be deployed by the end of January. EU leaders have warned of “massive consequences” in response to any further military aggression against Ukraine. The precise consequences are a closely-guarded secret, as officials believe telegraphing the details would advantage Putin by allowing him to calibrate his response. Even senior diplomats say they are in the dark about exactly what the European Commission has prepared. Nonetheless, a broad list of options has emerged, covering finance, technology and individuals. In the event of a fully-fledged invasion, Russia could be cut off from Swift, the bank-messaging system that connects 11,000 corporations in more than 200 countries. Oligarchs close to the Kremlin could see their assets in western jurisdictions frozen. The EU would also be under pressure not to approve the controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline, which is complete, but must clear regulatory hurdles before Russia can start pumping has to Germany. “The Swift option is an option being looked at closely,” said veteran French diplomat Pierre Vimont, who was the top civil servant at the EU’s foreign service between 2010 and 2015. “It has to be looked at closely, and maybe more tailor-made financial sanctions, and also individual sanctions.” The final outcome would depend on the nature of the Russian aggression, he said. “If the Russians go ahead with a large-scale direct military invasion, one could expect that the EU would respond in equal strength.” Diplomatic sources suggested a full-scale invasion would unify the EU to act, whereas a continuing campaign of Russian hybrid attacks, disinformation and support for proxy forces in the Donbas makes the decision more difficult. European countries trade more with Russia and have more to lose than the US, making the sanctions calculus more complex. “If on the contrary there is still pressure from Russia, but we remain with the same level of tension it will be more difficult,” Vimont said, referring to Nord Stream in particular. “It seems this will very much depend on the circumstances.” Meanwhile, member states remain divided over whether to set up an EU military mission to train the Ukrainian army, adding to an EU civilian mission that has been on the ground since 2014 to help Kyiv improve police, courts and border forces. Poland, the Nordic and Baltic states would like to see a fully-fledged army-training mission with EU boots on the ground, whereas other countries wonder whether the same outcome could be achieved by increasing financial aid to Ukraine. The question has gone to and fro, since Ukraine’s government requested a military training programme last July. Sikorski argues Ukraine has much bigger needs from European countries. “What Ukraine really needs is a batch of anti-ship, anti-aircraft and anti-tank missiles, but these would be national decisions. I hope the member states are preparing contingency plans to do that if Putin fulfils his threats.” Tomáš Valášek, a member of Slovakia’s parliament and former ambassador to Nato, argued against assuming the EU would be divided, pointing to the bloc’s decision to levy wide-ranging economic sanctions against Russia in 2014 – measures that remain in place. “Historically the track record suggests that when Russia crosses red lines we do the right thing, rather than the opposite.” “What [Putin] has done more recently, with the massing of 100,000-plus troops in Ukraine, and now with the unprecedented demands of a security architecture, that has actually had a unifying effect. We have crossed from a situation of a merely normal level of subterfuge and provocation to something new, something that is already unifying Europe.”Without wishing to sound like an episode of Poirot, I remember well what I was doing on the evening of 20 May 2020, when more than 100 people were invited to a BYOB party in the prime minister’s garden, “to make the most of the lovely weather”. While they recovered from an “exceptionally busy period” with, it might be presumed, laughter, companionship and their own bottles of wine, I was at my house. Like them, I, too, had a glass of wine, although I had drunk it by myself. I had then gone for a walk around my block where I had bumped into a friend out on his “daily permitted exercise”. We spoke a little, at a distance of more than two metres. He offered his condolences. I thanked him and returned home, alone. 20 May 2020 was the day I buried my sister. Like those assembled with their bottles in Downing Street, I, too, had broken the government’s existing guidelines, implemented to mitigate the spread of Covid-19, in a familiar garden. After my sister Karina’s funeral, I had gone to my mother’s house. It was a baking hot day and, while the circumstances didn’t really allow me to “make the most of the lovely weather”, the sunshine did permit me and my other sister, Kirsty, to sit in our mum’s garden, at the state-appointed distance from each other, and recall the many joys, as well as strains, that Karina’s life had brought. There were three of us in the garden, from three separate households, one more than was permitted. It might not have been exactly to the letter of the law, but we reckoned it was the least our grief would permit. Luckily we could remain physically, if not emotionally, distanced from each other. Karina had died of Covid and we felt we should take the best precautions possible to prevent the disease’s spread. We sat at three different points in the garden, on familiar garden furniture in the most unfamiliar of circumstances. We didn’t hug, didn’t allow ourselves any of the consolation of physical touch: we thought it would be safer that way. Physical contact was, after all, what they had instructed us to avoid. For 48 years my mother had fought to keep her disabled daughter happy and alive. For 48 years, whenever Karina had been ill, my mother had slept in hospital chairs for weeks on end, gone days without sleep, sacrificed her own health for Karina’s wellbeing, driven by a love that only a parent can know. And now Karina was dead. And we couldn’t hug each other. It was bleak, yes, but then it was a time of incomparable global uncertainty. An unparalleled, unifying swathe of sadness had devoured us all. Pain like ours was tearing through families the world over. So, in some ways, it felt like we were all in it together. A couple of hours earlier, we had driven in separate cars to the cemetery in which my father is buried. Two gravediggers stood by a fence as we watched six strangers, wearing masks and latex gloves, lower Karina’s coffin into a freshly dug plot adjacent to his. A priest, somewhat concealed behind another gravestone, invited me to speak. I attempted to hold back tears as I gave thanks for the extraordinary role Karina had played in our family. A tinny speaker played Abba’s Thank You for the Music, the lyrics a little drowned out by the rustle of the willow tree above. We threw some earth on her coffin, got back in our separate cars and went back to my mum’s for a slice of chocolate cake on disposable plates. I had brought my own. Our story was just one of thousands similar happening up and down the country. We were, we consoled ourselves again, all in it together. That evening, as I walked alone, the streets were piercingly quiet. How sad it all is, I thought, how devastatingly sad. And yet, what consolation there is in seeing and hearing these manifest absences; silences that speak of self-denial and mutual respect. The sepulchral pallor that my corner of London had been bathed in was the result of a shared commitment to rules, designed by them, to keep us, our loved ones and our wider society safe. I walked past my neighbours’ houses; friends numbed by screentime and family dynamics, unsure how long this would all last, no access to society beyond their phones, windows open to mitigate against that lovely, lovely weather. I couldn’t help but feel grateful that my community was taking the deaths of people such as my sister as seriously and profoundly as I was. Their confinement spoke of a silent but wholehearted sympathy for families such as mine. They knew, they felt too, that we were all in it together. Well, not all of us, it turns out. Not them. Just under two miles separates my corner of London from the garden of Downing Street. I am, today, haunted by the tinkling of those glasses there on that sun-drenched night, the echoing of their thin laughter, the stifled chuckles as they practised their imagined denials and, most perniciously, the leadership that encouraged it to happen. Their actions feel like direct assaults in the face of my family’s, and all of our shared national, tragedy. To me, and I’m sure many others, the revelations of the manifest and repeated failures of those in power to understand, empathise or show solidarity with what the people of this country experienced during that time have released from the body politic a stench so toxic that I can’t see how they will be able to put it back in the bottle, no matter how desperately they try. They can’t point the finger anywhere else this time, can they? After all, they brought the bottle themselves. Rory Kinnear is an actor and playwrightGrace Mirabella’s 17 years as editor of American Vogue, the core publication of Condé Nast’s magazine empire at its most expansive, are usually evaluated as a successful business intervention. She took the magazine from a circulation falling towards 400,000 in 1971 to rising above a million and half in 1988. Fleeing advertisers returned with such big budgets that her hefty September issues required the US Post Office to make special delivery arrangements. But Mirabella’s lasting value to fashion was her belief that the US had its own style of glamour, and that its major creators deserved international acclaim for what a Mirabella favourite, Bill Blass, called “a certain nonchalance”. She had seen as a wartime teen how good women looked when dressed for hard work, and wrote that she arrived on Seventh Avenue, Manhattan, in the early 1950s at the same time as sportswear; by the end of her Vogue tenure, US ready-to-wear, much of it based on that sportswear tradition, was part of the global uniform, and American brands had opened stores in Paris, London, Milan and Tokyo. In the royal court-like atmosphere of the leading glossy, the ascent of Mirabella, who has died aged 92, had been unlikely. She was not journalistically ambitious, having been forwarded from an entry-level position at Saks Fifth Avenue to Vogue to check the “must list” of merchandise sent by advertisers to be included in editorial shots. She briefly escaped to fashion PR in Rome, but Vogue drew her back, though to limited advancement; she wrote the shopping column threaded through the opening pages, edited sportswear, and was looking for a job elsewhere when Diana Vreeland, who arrived as editor in 1963, clomped down the corridor and invited Mirabella to be her personal assistant. Mirabella had a schoolgirl crush on Vreeland and was for eight years the practical operative behind her boss’s fantastical features by, for and about the rarefied world of the Beautiful People; she did all the menial tasks, down to trying on accessories for Vreeland to inspect. Despite her devotion, Mirabella did not share Vreeland’s view of fashion as performance art for the very few, preferring easygoing clothes for the many. Her other mentor, Alexander Liberman, editorial director of Condé Nast, commended her to the company’s chairman Si Newhouse, who needed Vogue for its secure revenue (from ads and newsstand sales more than subscriptions) and a solid identity so that he could extend into new publications. Vreeland’s pzazz supplied neither, and in 1971 Newhouse deposed her abruptly. Mirabella was on a fashion shoot a continent away when the phone call appointing her to editor-in-chief came. Most Vogue staffers were amenable to Mirabella’s democratisation project, but there was hostility outside the company, accusations that Newhouse was taking the magazine middle-class, that Mirabella was an unconnected nobody from Newark, New Jersey, who had soon redecorated Vreeland’s red lacquer shrine of an office in neutrals. She had never hidden that she was the daughter of a Cuban-rum salesman and gambler, Anthony Mirabella, and a migrant from Italy, Florence (nee Belfatto); she first began working while at high school to help pay her father’s debts, and was proud of her degree in economics from Skidmore College. However, Mirabella’s magazine agenda of wearable American clothes, shown on healthy models, including, at last, black women on the cover, and her introduction of sections on health, fitness and cosmetics, and skincare from laboratories rather than magical cauldrons, happened to be fashionable. The campaign against smoking that she began after her marriage in 1974 to the surgeon William Cahan, who specialised in lung cancer, was confined by the ad department to occasional issues that did not have ads from tobacco clients. But modes always move on. The publisher Hachette launched a US version of Elle magazine in 1985, with young fashion mixed with other features for the MTV generation, and Newhouse envied its big initial success. In actual fashion, there was a revival in extravagant haute couture, with celebrities to flaunt it. Newhouse wanted that, too. “My favourite subject is women and theirs is glitz,” Mirabella shrugged. When she complained to Liberman that she was still shut out of the business side of publishing where the real decisions were taken, he told her: “Women are cheap labour and always will be.” He had a new protégé, Anna Wintour, brought in as creative director. On 28 June 1988 Mirabella heard third-hand about an announcement on a television programme that reported Wintour was replacing her. That was the way in Condé Nast, and in retrospect she merely said: “Name the editors who weren’t fired like that.” Within two days, Rupert Murdoch and his News Corporation had offered her a magazine to command, under her own name. Mirabella, aimed at over-30s, launched well but its fashion-plus-features formula had already been pre-empted by the more youthful Elle. Readers, then ads, waned; corporate suits pushed the disheartened Mirabella out of decision-making and she left in 1996. In her payback memoir, In and Out of Vogue (1995), she wrote of Newhouse and Liberman: “They are in the communications business but they don’t know how to communicate,” but she confessed herself that she had never spoken again with the revered Vreeland after her fall from power. Cahan died in 2001. Mirabella’s two stepsons, Anthony and Christopher, survive her. • Grace Mirabella, magazine editor, born 10 June 1929; died 23 December 2021A rush to buy £1m-plus homes in the countryside in the Covid-inspired “race for space” and the warehouse boom at the end of last year have helped the high-end estate agent Savills to significantly upgrade its profit forecasts. In further evidence that the UK property market is flourishing, the estate agent Winkworth also released figures on Wednesday lifting its profit outlook. Savills, which handles commercial and residential property deals around the world, said the past nine weeks had been “extraordinarily strong”, particularly in the UK and Asia Pacific. Continental Europe and the Middle East, and North America also improved, more than eliminating the losses of 2020. The London-based company said a continued exodus of people from cities to buy country houses during the pandemic had boosted its UK business, while the prime central London market also clearly began to improve. Most of the buyers are British, while international buyers tend to be domiciled in the UK. Other property agencies have reported a return of overseas investors, particularly from Hong Kong. Savills said: “Currently there is a definite shortage of sale stock, so despite outperformance in 2021, our expectation of a moderation of activity in 2022 remains intact.” Logistics and retail warehouses in Britain also experienced significant volume increases year-on-year as a surge in online shopping sparked by the pandemic led to booming demand for warehouse space. However, office leasing remained weak and below historic averages in the majority of markets, Savills said. Demand for office space has largely dried up as many companies, including London banks and insurers, have scaled back their offices, asking staff to work from home because of the pandemic, as per government guidance, for example in the UK. Savills expects underlying profit before tax for 2021 to be “very significantly” ahead of the top end of its previous range of forecasts. The estate agent’s expectations for the current year are unchanged, as rising inflation in many markets is pushing wages to the highest rate for many years. The firm expects commercial deals to normalise and activity in some residential markets, particularly in the UK, to slow. The property analyst Anthony Codling said: “The housing market made hay during lockdown, but the opening up of the economy and relaxing of travel restrictions this year is likely to lead to more normal patterns of activity … therefore, this year hay make be taken out rather than put in Savills barns.” Winkworth, a franchisor of real estate agencies focused on London, said its 2021 revenues had been better than expected and it would beat the broker Shore Capital’s forecast of annual pre-tax profit of £2.8bn. Sales agreed were 13% higher than in 2020 and 42% above those of 2019, and the rental market, which makes up half its business, was also strong. Dominic Agace, the Winkworth chief executive, said: “We are conscious of the rising interest rate environment, but the cost of finance remains at a record low and we believe that there is still pent up desire from households to relocate. “Buyer demand over the end of year break has been reported at record levels and sellers finally seem to be returning to the market. While this may hold back the solid growth in prices of the last two years, it bodes well for the number of transactions and we expect another busy year.” Vistry Group, the housebuilder formerly known as Bovis, also had a bumper year and expects to have made an adjusted profit before tax of £345m, up from £144m in 2020. It built nearly 2,000 more homes last year than in 2020, the first year of the pandemic, with completions rising 41% to 6,551.The price of goods and services in the US continue to rise at rates unseen in decades, jumping to 7% in December compared to the same month last year – the seventh consecutive month in which inflation has topped 5%. The news represents a blow to the Biden administration and the Federal Reserve, which until recently have characterized soaring prices as a “transitory” phenomenon brought about by supply chain issues triggered by the pandemic. On Wednesday, the labor department said the consumer price index (CPI) – which measures what consumers pay for a wide range of goods – rose 0.5% last month compared with November and 7% compared with December 2020. Price increases in housing and used cars and trucks were the largest contributors to the inflation rate, with 0.4% and 3.5% increases in price compared with November, respectively. Food prices also continued to increase, though the 0.5% jump in prices is not as high as increases seen in previous months. Disruptions to the global supply chain caused by the pandemic are still causing shortages and driving up the price of goods, from cars to meat and furniture. In November the average price of a used vehicle in the US was $29,011 – 39% more than just 12 months earlier. The Federal Reserve is now preparing to raise interest rates to curb inflation and has indicated that it may raise rates three times in 2022, perhaps beginning as early as March. The Fed has stopped calling inflation “transitory” and on Tuesday, the Fed chair, Jerome Powell, told Congress that it was time for the central bank to move away from emergency pandemic measures. “What we have now is a mismatch between demand and supply. We have a very strong demand in areas where supply is constrained,” Powell said. “If we see inflation persisting at high levels longer than expected [and] we have to raise interest rates more over time, we will.” At a White House press briefing on Tuesday, press secretary Jen Psaki told reporters that the administration was expecting elevated figures on Wednesday and that it expects month-over-month inflation to be “moderate” in coming months, though forecasters are expecting inflation to head toward more typical figures by the end of the year. Psaki said the historic price increases emphasize the need for Congress to pass Biden’s climate and social safety net bill, which has hit an impasse. “We continue to press for steps in working with Congress to … lower costs for the American people,” Psaki said. “That’s why we want to get Build Back Better done.”Gordon Brown has written to the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, calling on her to help convene a donor conference to raise $4.5bn (£3.3bn) for Afghanistan as he warned that more than 23 million people were at risk of starvation if aid did not materialise. The former prime minister said: “We are witnessing a shameful but also self-defeating failure to prevent famine”, adding that the UK should urgently take a lead in resuming the delivery of aid dramatically halted after the Taliban takeover. Cash was available, said Brown in an article for the Guardian, but donor countries needed confidence they would not be hit by existing international sanctions, which he also argued could be relaxed if the Taliban made genuine progress on the rights of women and girls. On Tuesday, UN agencies launched a call for $4.5bn in aid for 2022, its biggest ever international appeal. The US responded with a donation of $308m, to be channelled through independent humanitarian organisations. But Brown said that was not enough. “The 35-country, American-led coalition that ruled Afghanistan for 20 years under the banner of helping the Afghan people has still put up only a quarter of the money that would allow UN humanitarians to stop children dying this winter.” Britain had planned to cut its Afghan aid spending in 2021, in line with wider cuts to the aid budget, but lifted its commitment to £286m in August, taking the headline total close to the £290m delivered in 2019. Wealthy countries in the Middle East were ready to commit, he added. “The Gulf states – Saudi Arabia, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates – have the money and have made offers to provide assistance, but they fear an American backlash. Realistically it will require America to break the logjam and end the cycle of starvation and death.” Brown said he had written to Truss and to the European Commission’s president, Ursula von der Leyen, to ask them to host an international donor conference “in January or at the latest in February” to break the impasse. Afghanistan’s previously aid-dependent economy has been “in freefall”, according to the UN, falling by about 40% since US and Nato forces withdrew last summer. International assistance halted almost overnight once the Taliban took over, while US economic sanctions aimed at the group have further isolated the country. “The devastation the world was warned about months ago is no longer a distant prospect,” Brown wrote. The UN’s humanitarian coordinator Martin Griffiths, Brown wrote, “forecasts that if we do not act, 97% of Afghans will soon be living below the poverty line”. About 90% of the country’s clinics “do not have the funds to keep themselves open” while the Covid crisis continues, the former prime minister said. Only 11% of Afghanistan’s population of approximately 40 million have been vaccinated. “Aid workers now find children huddled together under threadbare blankets in temporary camps and hovels or lying wrapped in their mothers’ burqas outside hospitals waiting for treatment that is now simply not available,” Brown added.An Iranian woman who worked for the British Council has been freed from detention in Evin prison and returned to the UK after being acquitted of spying charges. Aras Amiri’s lawyers had mounted an appeal to the Iranian supreme court that led to her release. She is now at an undisclosed address in the UK. The 34-year-old, who worked as an artistic affairs officer for the British Council, was visiting relatives in Tehran in 2018 when she was detained. In May 2019 she was sentenced to 10 years in prison on spying charges after she said she refused to become an informant for Iran’s intelligence service. Three months later she lost an appeal. “We have always refuted [sic] the original charges made against Aras,” the British Council said on Wednesday. “We are very proud of her work in our London office as an arts programme officer supporting a greater understanding and appreciation of Iranian culture in the UK. This was important work, which reflects the value of cross-border cultural collaboration. Aras’s wellbeing remains our priority. We ask that her privacy is respected as she rebuilds her life in the UK following a long and difficult period.” In 2019 Amiri wrote to the then-chief justice and now president-elect, Ebrahim Raisi, asking him to conduct an investigation into the false charges against her. She said the reason she had been imprisoned was her refusal to spy for the Iranian intelligence services. “Following my release on bail … the case investigators kept contacting me,” she wrote. “During our third meeting, I turned down their explicit invitation for cooperation and told them I could only work in my specific field, not any other kind of work. “In light of the unlawful actions in the processing of my case and the insults against myself and my family, I am writing to request Your Excellency to carry out an investigation,” Amiri wrote. The letter was translated by the Centre for Human Rights in Iran. A number of British-Iranian nationals have been jailed in Iran on similar charges, including Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, who was sentenced to an additional year in prison in April 2021, shortly before finishing her five-year sentence. During Amiri’s imprisonment she shared a cell with many dual nationals. Talks about the future of the Iran nuclear deal, seen as critical to wider European-Iranian relations, are continuing in Vienna, and some relatives of those still detained are hoping that Amiri’s release is a sign of a slow thaw over the issue of detainees.Jürgen Klopp has claimed he has no concerns over Mohamed Salah’s contract stand-off with Liverpool because both parties see his long-term future at Anfield and have held “good conversations” over a new deal. Liverpool’s leading goalscorer has entered the final 18 months of his contract and, in an interview with the latest edition of British GQ, reiterated that a successful outcome to protracted talks over an extension rests with the club’s owner, Fenway Sports Group. Negotiations between FSG and Salah’s representative, Ramy Abbas Issa, started before this season but, despite the absence of an agreement on what would be the most lucrative deal in the club’s history, Klopp remains confident Salah will stay. “There was nothing in it that would be unexpected,” the Liverpool manager said of the GQ interview. “We know, I know, that Mo wants to stay. We want him to stay. That’s the point where we are. These things take time. I can’t change that, sorry! But I think it is all in a good place. “I am very positive about it. I’m pretty sure the fans are not as nervous as you [the media] are. They know the club, know the people here who are dealing with things, so there are, I think, enough reasons for being pretty positive. As long as it’s not done, we cannot say anything about it. ‘Good conversations’ – that’s what I could say.” Salah has said repeatedly that he wishes to prolong his career at Anfield. With Liverpool wanting the same thing, Klopp was asked, why the delay? “These things take time,” he replied. “There are so many things you have to do, and by the way there is a third party: the agent is there as well. But there’s nothing to worry about – it’s a normal process. Mo has a contact here this season and next season. Nobody has to worry, it’s just the situation. All fine, not done, but we had talks. He’s a world-class player, unbelievable player, did a lot of great stuff for Liverpool. Of course we want to keep him, and let’s see how it will work out.” Salah turns 30 in June and his age has been cited as a possible reason for FSG’s reluctance to meet the player’s demands. But Klopp, who has been involved in the discussions, has championed the Egypt international’s ability to emulate Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo in sustaining world-class levels into his mid-30s. “I think so,” he said. “It’s his character, his determination, the way he trains, his attitude, work rate. It’s incredible. First in, last out, doing the right stuff. You can do some not-so-good things when you spend so long in the gym and the training ground, but he knows his body and he knows what to do. He listens to the experts here and tries to improve all the time. He worked so hard to be in the situation he is in now and he will not waste it by doing less. I am as convinced as you can be.”A decade ago food banks in the Trussell Trust network provided 60,000 emergency food parcels a year in the UK – in 2020-21 food banks in its network handed out 2.5m. The figures show not only how much the charity’s network of food banks has stepped in to fill the gaps in support provided by social security, but also how its national network of food banks have become a fixed feature of welfare support. Today there is a real danger that food aid supplied by organisations such as the Trussell Trust will become the accepted norm. And that, according to the charity, is simply wrong. “We will continue to provide compassion, and be there as long as we are needed, but it’s not right to provide that level of mass distribution of food aid in the fifth richest country in the world,” says Emma Revie, chief executive of the Trussell Trust. “We have to advocate for change.” The Trussell Trust’s advocacy and campaigning work has grown as its food bank staff and volunteers have continued to witness more and more people in poverty without enough money to feed themselves and their families. “We can’t keep quiet when we hear stories about people coming to the food bank day after day and knowing that something could be changed to prevent that happening,” says Revie. “We have got to advocate for what we are seeing on behalf of, and with, the people coming to our food banks and to call for the changes that we know can happen.” The Trussell Trust’s vision, which is at the heart of its campaigning, is to have a UK where food banks no longer exist, as outlined in its strategic plan. And it is an ambition shared by the majority of the British public. In 2019 a Trussell Trust poll created with YouGov showed that nine in 10 Britons thought people should be able to afford to buy enough food. Seven in 10 surveyed also agreed that food banks should not exist in a modern society, while 51% went a step further and said they were an “embarrassment” to the country. But in order to achieve its vision the charity has to spread its campaigning net wide – looking at what drives people into destitution in the first place. And, crucially, it has to get the message out that income, rather than lack of food, is the root cause of need for food banks. With 1,300 food bank centres across the country in its network, the charity is ideally placed to gather evidence to identify what is behind that need and what needs to change. “We have the data on the number of people who come to food banks and why they come,” says Revie. “Once you know what is driving food bank use you have a responsibility to share that information with the people who can do something about it.” The Trussell Trust counts the hundreds of millions of pounds from the UK government for local councils to tackle hardship among its recent campaign achievements. The Trussell Trust has also been raising awareness about the inadequacy of the social security system and, as part of its Keep the Lifeline campaign, it highlighted that about 900,000 people were very likely to turn to a food bank because of the UK government’s decision to abolish the temporary universal credit (UC) uplift of £20 a week, introduced at the start of the Covid pandemic in April 2020. The campaign follows the #5weekstoolong campaign, which calls for an end to the five-week wait before a claimant can receive their first UC payment. The charity is continuing to monitor the impact of the £20 cut and fight for its reinstatement. “We are committed to continue to tell the stories of those people who have been so badly hit by the cut,” says Jo Cooke, director of public engagement at the Trussell Trust. “I would struggle to call [the changes to the taper] a success in terms of our campaign, as there are still people who will be in need. It’s a concession, but all of these things are important even if small moves,” she says. “Some families will now get to keep some of their earnings – it’s going to make a permanent difference.” The charity believes it was also instrumental in the decision of the Scottish government to develop a strategy to end the need for food banks – a commitment that followed the recent Holyrood elections. “We hosted two hustings in Glasgow during the election campaign and challenged each of the parties to commit to putting in place a plan to end food banks within the first 12 months of the new parliament,” says Revie. “Each party made that pledge and the government has come through on that pledge and is working on a plan.” The trust also puts its name to broader campaigns that highlight the link between the need for food banks and income such as A menu for Change and Lift the Ban – a coalition of 250 organisations spearheaded by Refugee Action, which calls for people seeking asylum in the UK to have the right to work while they wait for a decision on their status. “We aren’t experts in everything and there are a broad spectrum of organisations that want to work together to create coalitions or alliances where we can pool our resources and work collaboratively to get things happening,” says Cooke. Although Revie is worried that the UK is on the brink of “normalising” food aid, she is optimistic that the Trussell Trust’s campaigning and advocacy work, harnessed with the power of the public, can bring an end to food banks in the UK. “We have tremendous power as members of our society if we come together and speak with one voice about what it is we want for ourselves, for our families and for our communities,” she says. “We can bring about change, we just have to believe things can change. Policies are made by people and policies can be done and be changed and made anew – we just have to ask for it.”Few people have got through the past 20 months or so without having to make sacrifices. Horizons have narrowed and savings have shrunk. But for low-income households simply trying to keep food on the table, and with no reserves to draw on, the effects of the pandemic have been felt much more keenly. To blame the pandemic for this situation, however, is to misunderstand the systemic pressures that trap people in the cycle of poverty. The number of people experiencing destitution in the UK had already risen by 54% between 2017 and 2019. Rich country, poor people Shouldn’t an affluent country such as the UK – the world’s fifth-richest, according to the World Bank – have fewer people scrabbling around for the essentials? In terms of GDP per capita, when compared with neighbouring France, the UK is almost £1,000 better off per person – and yet the poverty rates of these two countries are quite different: according to the World Bank 18.6% for the UK’s population (in 2017), versus 13.6% of the French population (in 2018). Wealth only tells part of the story; how that wealth is distributed is key. Centre for Health Economics at the University of York Sadly, successive UK governments have been wearing their heartlessness on their sleeves since the days of austerity, when then-chancellor George Osborne chose to seek to balance the country’s books, rather than help individuals and families in poverty. The cuts announced in his June 2010 budget nibbled away at an already stretched-thin society, and have been linked to at least 50,000 unnecessary deaths over the term of the first Cameron government. The Trussell Trust Food for families And so it fell to charities and organisations working outside government to pick up the slack. In 2011-12, food banks in the Trussell Trust’s network distributed almost 130,000 food parcels; by 2020 that had increased to more than 2.5m food parcels being distributed via 1,300 food banks in its network. The biggest year-on-year increases as a percentage were between 2012 and 2014 – when the accumulative squeeze of austerity was biting. However, the absolute increase in parcels from 2019-20 to 2020-21 is the largest ever increase and is notable for the Trussell Trust network being far more stable (and so not so driven by increases in the size and scale of the network). As Margaret Sena, CEO of Cambridge City Food Bank points out, not all food parcels are created equal: “We have standard boxes, we have family boxes, and then we have bonus boxes, for particularly large families.” It’s worth noting that when a household of four goes away from a food bank, the Trussell Trust reports that as four food parcels. Not all of those parcels go to people stuck in a long-term cycle of poverty. A third of people referred to food banks in early 2020 had only recently found themselves in difficulty. Impact on families In mid-2020, 84% of people referred to food banks in the Trussell Trust network were people aged 25-54, versus 77% in early 2020. This increase points to a group of income earners whose working hours or employment status took a hit during the pandemic, as well as the likelihood of them being parents dealing with school and nursery closures. The Trussell Trust, State of Hunger report Although only one in seven families in the general population have three or more children, nearly two in five (39%) of people referred to food banks have larger families, up from 36% in 2018. The imposition of a “two-child limit” on universal credit and child tax credit in 2017, which stripped those families of at least £53 a week – or £2,780 a year, including the tax credits – may well bear some of the blame for this increase. For context, the amount mothers in Germany receive for each subsequent child grows with the size of family: they get €219 (£186) for the first and second child, €225 for the third, and €250 for the fourth and all further children (until they’re 18) – on top of being paid at 65% of their wage for more than a year of maternity leave and paying nothing for nurseries. The Trussell Trust, State of Hunger report Crutches and cuts The government introduced a £20 boost to universal credit in April 2020 for everyone claiming the benefit. In early 2020, 95% of people referred to food banks in the Trussell Trust network met the definition of being destitute. This didn’t stop at least one MP saying many of those in receipt of the extra £20 “don’t really need it” even as he defended MPs with second jobs for being “people who have families [to take care of].” Positive changes that have come in since to the universal credit taper rate, “give something back to people”, says Emma Revie, chief executive of the Trussell Trust, “but don’t cover the remainder who find themselves unable to work at the moment, for many, many reasons”. Mental health: the other pandemic Certainly, one of the more extreme trends witnessed as a result of Covid was the growth in households that used food banks reporting mental health problems, up from an already high 51% in early 2020 to 72% in mid-2020. The Trussell Trust, State of Hunger report Despite being a wealthy country, the reality of living in the UK is, for many, grim and getting grimmer. If the true measure of a society is how it treats those in need, the UK must be languishing well towards the bottom of the leaderboard. The system seems hell bent on propelling more towards destitution, rather than supporting struggling people to feed themselves, make ends meet and inch their way out of poverty.A Manhattan federal court judge ruled on Wednesday that a lawsuit brought by the longtime Prince Andrew accuser Virginia Giuffre can move forward. Giuffre has long said the late financier and sex offender Jeffrey Epstein and his then girlfriend Ghislaine Maxwell, herself recently convicted of sex trafficking, forced her into sex with Prince Andrew when she was 17. Giuffre filed a civil suit against Andrew on 9 August last year, using a New York state law that provides a window for survivors of childhood sexual abuse to sue, even if the alleged crimes took place outside the statute of limitations. Prince Andrew vehemently denies the allegations. His lawyers tried to get Giuffre’s lawsuit dismissed on grounds including a $500,000 settlement with Epstein in 2009; an argument that the law under which Giuffre sued was unconstitutional; and the contention that Giuffre’s claims were too vague. Here is what to expect next. An appeal is on the table Andrew could file for a motion of reconsideration or he could take his appeal straight to the second circuit court of appeals. In that instance, a panel of judges would hear the case. If that didn’t go in Andrew’s favor, he could ask the full second circuit to hear the case or he could immediately ask the US supreme court to hear it. The supreme court would decide if it did. Any appeal would delay proceedings. Evidence will be exchanged On 4 January, Kaplan ordered that discovery – “the formal process of exchanging information between the parties about the witnesses and evidence they’ll present at trial” – would continue. “Discovery enables the parties to know before the trial begins what evidence may be presented,” the American Bar Association explains. “It’s designed to prevent ‘trial by ambush’, where one side doesn’t learn of the other side’s evidence or witnesses until the trial, when there’s no time to obtain answering evidence.” Discovery includes depositions and interviews under oath. Both sides could also be subject to subpoenas requiring them to turn over records or documents. A settlement is possible Both sides could agree to a settlement that would bring proceedings to a close. Deadlines should be taken with a grain of salt On 25 October, Kaplan issued a scheduling order. Expert witnesses must be disclosed by 13 May. Rebuttal witnesses must be disclosed a month later. The order also states that discovery must be complete by 14 July. Both sides have to file a joint pretrial proposal by 28 July. This will include whether either side wants a trial by jury and if so, questions for potential jurors. This in no way means the case will progress according to those deadlines. Mitchell Garabedian has represented victims of sexual abuse for decades, settling more than 2,000 clergy abuse cases. He said: “If the parties decide not to settle … there will be intense litigation in which depositions will take place of Prince Andrew and Virginia Giuffre” as well as witnesses. “The deadlines are a guideline. Usually in these cases, one deposition leads to another unexpected deposition and so on, for both parties. If all parties are acting in good faith, and working diligently, and there’s a reasonable need for an extension of deadlines, judges usually grant those extensions.” Litigation will be extensive Prince Andrew, Garabedian said, “is going to try to show that the allegations are not true, and in order to do so, he is going to use standard discovery tools – such as depositions, production of documents, investigations, speaking to collateral sources. “Ms Giuffre will be doing the same. In addition, she will have to reveal the history of her entire life, since she’s claiming emotional distress. In other words, they’ll be looking at all of her records – involving education, hospitalization, therapy, employment, criminal or lack of criminal records, many many records – and they’ll be speaking to sources who might testify in Prince Andrew’s favor, but who’ve known Ms Giuffre.” Other victims could testify Giuffre has been accused of luring at least one victim into Epstein’s orbit. Carolyn, who testified at Maxwell’s trial, said Giuffre brought her to his Palm Beach home. Garabedian said there’s “no doubt” other victims could be deposed in Giuffre’s case either to speak about Giuffre or to speak to “pattern and practice”. “It’s up to the judge if he or she is going to allow that testimony,” Garabedian said, adding that “there will be a lot of filings” involving depositions and possible trial testimony. Lawyers will fight over whether depositions should be permitted, and whether witnesses should be allowed to testify. As for Prince Andrew’s testimony… “I think it would be a serious mistake for Prince Andrew not to testify – he’s a party and if he doesn’t testify it’s an elephant in a room,” Garabedian said. “If he choses just not to testify, then a jury’s going to be wondering why he hasn’t.” If Prince Andrew were called to testify but didn’t show up, his deposition could be used in lieu of live testimony. Could this lawsuit spur criminal proceedings? Garabedian said prosecutors are “very interested” in seeing evidence in civil cases. However, when asked if there was a strong nexus between the Giuffre civil proceedings and any criminal investigation, a longtime defense attorney, Julie Rendelman, said: “I think they’re completely separate. I believe that [Maxwell] is the final piece in terms of criminal charges involving Epstein.” Rendelman pointed out that prosecutors have been investigating Epstein and adjacent persons for some time. “I’m pretty confident prosecutors spent this time evaluating every piece of evidence to see if there is anything else,” Rendelman said. “I think they realized the strongest case is Ghislaine, and that’s what they went for.” Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlPret a Manger is increasing pay for the second time in four months as labour shortages force up wages across the hospitality and retail industries. The coffee shop chain said it was investing more than £9.2m in raising hourly pay from a minimum of £9.40 to £9.80, with more than 6,900 of its 8,500 staff earning at least £10 an hour. That comes after pay was put up 5% to £9.40 an hour in September. Workers will also be able to earn an additional £1.25 an hour, based on a weekly mystery shopper assessment, up from £1. Pret, which has 550 outlets around the world, said the changes were the biggest increase in pay and benefits in its 36-year history and were the result of its successful transformation strategy since 2020 and “the stronger position the business is now in”. The company said in-store sales were “recovering strongly” last year and, although they had fallen since new government guidance to work from home because of the Omicron variant of Covid-19, new areas of business were doing well. The group’s subscription service, launched in September, is now used more than 1m times a week in the UK and home deliveries are also on the rise. Pano Christou, the chief executive of Pret, said: “We’ve said all along that as our business recovered, we wanted to invest back into our people. Today, as we move into a new phase of our transformation strategy, I’m really pleased we’re in a position to do exactly that.” The boost for workers comes only five months after Pret workers threatened to go on strike after being told the company would cease paying for break times, meaning that someone on an eight-hour shift, including a legally required half-hour break, would receive a pay cut of just over 6% a shift compared with pre-pandemic levels. Pret initially also planned to permanently halve weekly mystery shopper bonuses to 50p an hour but relented after the Guardian revealed the move, prompting a public outcry. The increase is the latest in a string of retail and hospitality pay rises. In September, the rival chain Costa gave its workers a 5% pay rise to £9.36 an hour while Itsu, the Asian-inspired fast food chain, increased minimum hourly pay by 11% to a minimum of £10.40 an hour. Last week, Sainsbury’s said it would increase hourly pay by more than 5% to £10 an hour for its lowest paid shop workers. Aldi will increase minimum hourly rates for shop workers to £10.57 an hour from £9.55 nationally from February, a near 11% rise, and £11.32 in Greater London from £11.07. Next has said it will have to put up the price of its clothing by as much as 6% this autumn as the fashion and homewares retailer expects average wages to rise by more than 5% this year.Schools going virtual, airlines canceling flights, pharmacies and testing centers closing temporarily, shelves emptying in grocery stores because of transportation delays, blood donations dropping to crisis levels for the first time ever and the country’s hospitals are becoming stretched. This is the US in the grip of the Omicron variant. Omicron may cause milder symptoms in some people, but its effects are ricocheting throughout America and creating some of the greatest challenges of the Covid-19 pandemic. “We have supply shortages, we have transportation shortages, that are a result of people being out because of Covid, and especially Omicron being so infectious. And that is obviously limiting the workforce, and limiting the workforce is creating some of the havoc that we’re all experiencing,” said Ezekiel Emanuel, vice-provost at the University of Pennsylvania. Joe Biden has vowed to keep businesses and schools open, but some experts wonder if that’s possible given the nature of Omicron and the lack of adequate measures to combat it. “The economy cannot stay open and schools cannot stay open when so many people are getting sick,” said Margaret Thornton, an educational researcher at Princeton School of Public and International Affairs. “We must take action to slow the spread in order to keep schools running, to keep businesses running,” she said – but much of that action has been slow to happen. In order to control Omicron and future surges, officials need to rely on tried-and-true tactics, from testing to high-quality masks and better ventilation, say some health experts. “We now have tools such as N95 masks, vaccines, treatments and rapid diagnostics to help prevent infection and reduce severity of illness,” said Rick Bright, CEO of the Pandemic Prevention Institute at the Rockefeller Foundation and a former official for the US Department of Health. “However, we need to do more to make them affordable and available to everyone, with clear guidance on when and how to use them most effectively.” Facing an astronomical rise in cases and hospitalizations, health systems have been slammed. Omicron comes on the heels of a devastating Delta wave in the fall and existing staff and supply shortages, with little opportunity to recover. The seven-day average of infections in the US is now running at more than 750,000 cases, far higher than during Delta’s peak. “It was back-to-back,” said Jorge Moreno, assistant professor of medicine at the Yale School of Medicine. “It’s affecting every section of healthcare.” Health workers have spoken out on social media about being asked to volunteer to restock supplies and answer phones, or to volunteer in housekeeping, food service and transportation. One resident physician was reportedly asked to work as a scrub tech – a job they never trained for, and were not paid for. Meanwhile, nurses in New York are stretched so thin, there are parts of facilities where no one is scheduled to monitor patients. Hospitals in some parts of the country are allowing staff to continue working with positive cases without isolating at all. There was an outbreak among patients in a Rhode Island hospital shortly after Covid-positive workers were asked to return, although a hospital spokesperson said there was no connection. “We can have an empty bed, but if there’s not a nurse to manage it or even a doctor to manage it, there’s no way to manage the patient. So we’re really in a crunch,” Moreno said. “We’re bursting right now at the seams” – and since hospitalizations lag by a week or two behind cases, the worst is still to come, he said. Hospitals across the nation may already be more full than official numbers suggest. In Maryland, hospitals are 87% full, according to official reports – but in reality they are closer to or exceeding 100% capacity, according to an analysis. There are also fewer hospitals now than when the pandemic began, particularly in rural areas. In 2020, 19 rural hospitals closed – the most in one year since 2005, when data first began being collected. Omicron is also responsible for staff shortages in nursing homes. That leads to facilities limiting the number of new patient admissions – and a backup in hospitals among patients who could transition to a lower level of care. Childcare facilities are also facing rising cases and staff shortages. Daycares were already strained, with some centers losing up to 90% of workers as of December. According to Cindy Lehnhoff, director of the National Childcare Association, “catastrophic” shortages have hit about 80% of centers across the country, leading to closures and long wait lists. Schools have also struggled to remain in-person. “It’s chaos. It’s complete chaos,” Thornton said. In Philadelphia, for example, 98 schools have now gone virtual, she said. “There truly are just not enough grownups who are well enough to be in the building.” Leaders have “gotten the reasoning backwards” on keeping schools open, she said. “This administration has said they prioritize schools because of the economy, in order to get parents back to work. And I think that’s just a really backward approach. We need to prioritize schools because they’re important to kids.” In schools, there are proven ways to reduce the spread of any variant. The measures just need to be taken, Thornton said. These measures include well-run remote options for those who want them in order to reduce classroom sizes and reduce exposure risks. Regular testing, where families opt in instead of opting out, would make a huge difference, as well as providing guidance on what to do if you test positive. Making sure that all students have high-quality masks is also essential, Thornton said. “Keeping schools open and the economy running is very important and a real challenge with so much of society getting sick over the next few weeks,” Bright said. “I believe we can do so safely. However, we need to follow the science, use the tools at our disposal and use the tools we have appropriately. “The reality is that Covid-19 is not going away anytime soon. We need to move from crisis to control,” he said. Bright and Emanuel both outlined steps the administration could take to reach its goals, including measures such as expanding testing, vaccines and medication, and rebuilding trust in public health. “We are going to have a rocky next two or three weeks,” Emanuel said. But if measures can be put in place, it would have an enormous effect. And whatever measures are put in place now will help address future surges, Bright said. “I believe the next variant is already lurking among us now, which makes it all the more critical that we get ahead and stop it before it has the chance to spread like Omicron did.” • This article was amended on 24 January 2022. An earlier version indicated that in Rhode Island a policy of allowing hospital staff who test positive to continue working without isolating had led to an outbreak among patients. The hospital in question has said there was no connection between the asymptomatic Covid-positive workers and the Covid outbreak in patients.I think it’s vaguely important to revisit the fact that last week, Romford’s Convervative MP, Andrew Rosindell, took up actual time in parliament – I am loth to describe this time as “precious” or anything, because come on, but it does feel like time spent talking out loud in the House of Commons has some sort of rudimentary value – to ask whether British broadcasters should be playing the national anthem more. “I know the minister will agree that the singing of the national anthem is something that provides great sense of unity and pride in our nation,” Rosindell said, “so in this year of the Queen’s platinum jubilee, will the minister take steps to encourage public broadcasters to play the national anthem and ensure the BBC restores it at the end of the day’s programming before it switches to News 24?” It does make you wonder what people get into the MP-ing gig for, doesn’t it? Clearly, it’s to just get up in front of people and briefly make the most embarrassing suggestion in the world for that day. So it is worth me taking up some of my completely unprecious time to answer the question. Should we play the national anthem more? No. Should the BBC in particular do it more, because they used to do it all the time up until 1997? No. If you want to hear the national anthem so much, just play it on YouTube or something. That’s what I do whenever I want to hear the stupid songs that mean a lot to me, like Friendly Fires – Paris (Aeroplane Remix). I do not submit the entire country to having to listen to it at midnight. I just play it on YouTube and then shut up. It is a system that works flawlessly. My proclivity for near-eight-minute re-workings of songs that were popular for about two months in 2008 is not the issue, though. The issue is that over the past two years of the pandemic – and sorry to bring that whole thing into it, but it does feel related – the Conservative party has been making strange, creeping, weird, clunking gestures of patriotism, assuming we all want to come along for the ride. Patriotism has never been cool, but in the hands of the current ruling party it has veered towards something particularly un-chic. This patriotism has been ambient – Matt Hancock’s Damien Hirst artwork of the Queen, ever-increasing background union flags with every MP’s appearance on morning TV – but it’s been overt, too. Who can forget the Joy Morrissey MP x British Monarchists Society collab to offer a free portrait of the Queen to every household or office that applied for one? “I think this is a wonderful, patriotic and unifying campaign for our country,” she said at the time, a justification similar to Rosindell’s. I agree it’s hard to be proud of this country after 11-plus years of Conservative rule and we could do with something to bring us together about it, but I’m not sure the answer is a lot of visual and sonic reminders that we are not actually a democracy. Who is patriotism for? If England are doing well at an international tournament I can just about muster up an atom of national pride, but other than that the idea of “Great Britain” rarely moves me. I have a fondness for my country but I wouldn’t ever go so far as to call it a “love” – to love someone you have to respect them. If you’re into RAF flyovers, the Duchess of Cambridge’s birthday portraits, the 2012 Olympics, “Brits doing well at the Oscars”, drone renderings of Captain Tom and sitting on Henman Hill: sure, have a portrait of the Queen in your house, go nuts. But for me, being proud about what country you happen by dumb luck to be born in seems like a waste of spiritual and mental resources. But it’s where this all ends that worries me. I think we should be cautious of too many organised attempts to make us more proud of our country: it feels like a slippery slope that ends with us all having to take Nigel Farage seriously again. If there were a news story about a lawmaker in another country urging the national broadcaster to play its anthem every night, then we would all make overtures about authoritarianism and mind control and be forced to sit through a really long-seeming Spitting Image sketch about North Korea. But because it’s Britain, it lands somewhere between silly and strange, a distracting but thin veil pulled over something harder. What are we supposed to be so proud about? We can’t pass laws banning forms of protest and being vile to refugees with one hand while saluting a portrait of the Queen with the other. Give us a country to be proud of, Andrew Rosindell. Then maybe you won’t have to force us to listen to the special patriotism song in a bid to make us more patriotic. Joel Golby is a writer for the Guardian and Vice and the author of Brilliant, Brilliant, Brilliant Brilliant BrilliantThe Czech Republic’s coalition government is on a collision course with the country’s populist president after it vowed to end controversial security arrangements at Prague’s historic castle, established supposedly to prevent terror attacks. Vít Rakušan, the interior minister, said he would ask police and security services to review measures in place at the 70,000 sq metre complex, which is the country’s most visited tourist attraction and also the official residence of the Czech president, Miloš Zeman. Writing on Twitter, Rakušan, a member of the liberal Mayors and Independents party (Stan), decried the metal detectors and armed officers guarding the castle’s four entrances as a “war fortification” that marred its status as a revered emblem of national identity. “Prague castle is a symbol of Czech statehood,” he tweeted. “It belongs to all of us. And we are not really all terrorists, as we may now feel when we visit it. I have asked the relevant institutions to review all the security measures that have created a war fortification around the castle.” Rakušan told Czech journalists the police would seek the opinions of all relevant bodies. “They will assess and comment on the necessity of the existing measures and possibly work on a new security regime,” he added. “I believe an assessment of the current massive measures is in order.” The stringent regime – requiring visitors to empty their pockets and put their possessions on a conveyor belt – was fiercely criticised when it was introduced in 2016 after Islamist attacks in Paris and Brussels. The checks caused long queues at the castle gates, with guides complaining that they increased the time and cost of organised tours. Critics insisted the castle’s status as public property rendered such measures inappropriate, while doubting the credibility of an Islamist threat in a country with a small Muslim population. Some claimed the steps were prompted less by fear of terrorism than anger over a stunt carried out in 2015 by anti-Zeman activists, who managed to access the castle roof and fly a pair of large red boxer shorts in protest at the president’s vocal support for authoritarian regimes in Russia and China. Zeman’s office said the security measures had been implemented on police advice. While there was no immediate response on Rakušan’s comments, Zeman is likely to resist any change to the arrangements. His office accused two MPs from the interior minister’s party of “spreading misinformation” last month when they wrote an open letter to him calling for the security regimen to be lifted. Zeman, whose term ends in 2023, has spent little time at the castle recently. He was admitted to Prague’s central military hospital with an undisclosed illness the day after a parliamentary election last October and spent 46 days there before being taken to the official presidential countryside retreat in central Bohemia, where he has been recuperating. The last official occupant of the castle to be attacked was Reinhard Heydrich, who was head of the Nazi occupation administration running Bohemia and Moravia during the second world war. He was ambushed by British-trained Czechoslovak resistance fighters in 1942 and later died of his injuries. Heydrich did not live in the castle because he feared it was an easy target but was travelling there in an open-topped car when he was attacked. The castle is thought to date back to 870 when its first walled building was constructed. It was later the seat of ancient Bohemian kings and the Holy Roman emperor. Adolf Hitler spent a night there after Nazi Germany invaded Czechoslovakia in March 1939.At the beginning of lockdown, so I wouldn’t be alone all day, I went to hang out with my husband at his art studio. I started playing with clay again, something I hadn’t done much since leaving art school decades before. I was in the studio when Grayson started his Art Club with Channel 4 and thought I’d make things and chip in. Many people contacted the show to share their artwork. Often, like me, they’d not picked up a brush for a long time, or this was the first time they’d attempted art. We heard so many stories about how people benefited from making things and the confidence they gained by getting better at it, I couldn’t help but be inspired to keep pushing myself as well. I’m pleased to report that I haven’t stopped making art since the cameras turned off and, even after lockdown eased, I’ve carried on. This summer a friend needed some abstract modern art to make her therapy centre seem a bit less clinical. How hard can it be, I thought, to get a canvas and chuck a load of paint at it? Turns out it is very hard indeed. Arranging shapes and colours so they somehow look right took me several months before I had six canvasses I thought might not be too terrible. Now the therapy centre has its canvasses, but I can’t stop. How to arrange paint and form so it looks right has become something of an obsession. You could call it a hobby if you like, but that word isn’t quite serious enough for me. “Between work and sleep comes the time we call our own. What do we do with it?” asks Laurie Lee at the beginning of Humphrey Jennings’s 1939 film, Spare Time. This 15-minute film shows a montage of, among other activities, amateur dramatics, walking whippets, keeping pigeons, working on the allotment, playing in brass bands, singing in choirs, playing a fair bit of piano, putting on pageants, and going dancing. I wanted to know how people now spend that time between work and sleep and what they get from it, so I put a question out on Twitter to find out. Here is a random selection of replies: @wuthering_alice: “My knitting is very important to me – it kept me steady during a recent anxiety episode ... I also have a bit of a thing for growing pumpkins. I marvel that something so big comes from a tiny seed.” @saraheley: “Learned Polish ... it woke up my brain from rather a long fog. It improved my memory. It made me realise how much humans love to connect ...” @TobyMalcolm: “I spend most of my evenings in the world of virtual aviation flying all over the world in my flight simulator ... My cats love it too.” @agnesvirtually: “Playing the violin’s my cerebral and spiritual practice. I feel sight reading does me better than crosswords ...” @Andromeda: “I started learning piano five years ago as a distraction from a scheduled heart op. Since then I’ve played every day. It’s a calm place in my head.” @Helenus_: “Got a lifelong passion for archaeology and now I’m older I’m getting even more obsessed. Enriches your life wherever you go ...” @katywayne: “Horse riding: the best therapy... The only time I think about nothing else in my life except the horse and my surroundings.” @tuppenybunch: “My passion is running a local litter-picking group. I love meeting new people and cleaning up the community.” The variety of different activities we do is huge. We collect everything from Viennese glass to found shopping lists, we educate ourselves about things as diverse as front crawl or Chinese calligraphy. We knit, we fish, we fellwalk, we still do amateur dramatics and we practise and get better at it. It’s good for us to get better at something and learn new things. It makes us feel more in tune with our bodies, more engaged with our minds and more connected with our world. And I was warmed and moved by what everyone who replied to me got from their passions, obsessions, pastimes and, yes, hobbies. And I think probably the most important thing we get from these things we love doing but, do not have to do, is purpose and meaning. It’s harder to get depressed when you feel you have those two things in your life. Sometimes we make the mistake of believing we must be good at something to do it, luckily that was not the attitude of the community choir I joined. I didn’t make great improvements in my singing, but I loved being part of a joint effort and I made some good friends. I expect Observer readers are familiar with the concept of “The Comfort Zone”. There are some things we feel confident about, some we are hesitant about trying. Far outside our comfort zones are goals we might find attractive but don’t dare to approach. Maybe 2022 is when we dare? Not all in one leap, but in increments by doing the thing we are merely hesitant about as a stepping stone. When you do something in one area, say, learning to ride a bicycle competently, the surprising thing is that it invariably improves overall confidence in other areas, too. Perhaps after learning to ride a bike we might try a unicycle, then hang-gliding? Or learning Arabic, or whatever it is that appeals. We tend to think stress is bad, but there is such a thing as good stress. This creates positive stimulation, pushing us to learn new things and to be creative, but not so overwhelming that it tips us into panic. Learning things causes us to form new neural connections and the more of these we have is probably for the better. If a part of your brain were to, God forbid, die off, the more neural connections you have, the sooner other parts of the brain could link up to go around the damaged part. So let’s get learning, make neural connections and gain new satisfaction from pastimes, skills, interests and erudition. Do something new, or build on something you’ve already got. As Lee narrated at the end of the Jennings film: “Spare time is a time when we have a chance to do what we like, a chance to be most ourselves.”Well, the Mali players return a good half an hour after the match first ended. Tunisia’s players refuse to come back on, however, as the match is officially ended for a second time. Confusing scenes and surely a story that will rumble on. 90 min: The ref blows for full-time, with 89 minutes and 47 seconds gone, according to the clock on the TV screen. Tunisia’s manager and backroom staff stream on to the pitch to demand an explanation, pointing angrily at their watches. This has been a bizarre conclusion to the match. The ref and his assistants are surrounded by stewards for their protection and then ushered off the pitch. He’ll have some explaining to do later: his time-keeping seemed very odd and his red card decision excessively harsh. The penalty decisions, mind you, were reasonable: Mali scored from the spot and Tunisia missed, and that’s why the three points go to Mali. 88 min: The ref is advised to review his red card decision on the pitchside screen. He takes a look ... and concludes that he was right. No reprieve for El Bilal Touré. Mali must protect their lead with 10 men and who knows how long left. 87 min: RED CARD! Another curious decision from the ref. El Bilal Touré is shown a straight red card for catching Bronn a teeny bit late, on the foot, near half-way. It was barely worth a yellow but the Zambian official decided to send him straight off. 86 min: What’s going on? Tunisian staff look bewildered as the referee appears to blow for full-time even though several minutes remain. No one quite nows what’s going on ... and then the ref signals for play to continue. What was that whistle for? 85 min: Tunisia desperately hunt for an equaliser. They’ve got plenty of of men forward but still their crossing and passing around the box is awry. 83 min: El Bilal cuts in from the right and slides the ball into the path of F Coulibaly ... who had strayed offside. 81 min: Mali substitutions: L Coulibaly and El Bilal on, A Haidara and Djenepo off. Khazri slammed it to the keeper’s right around mid-height. Mounkoro goes the right way and slaps the ball wide with both hands before being engulfed by grateful teammates! 75 min: Penalty to Tunisia! The ref is instructed to go over and have a gander at the pitchside screen. He does so ... and then points to the spot! 74 min: Khazri’s jabbed cros from the right hits the outstretched hand of Djenepo in the box. Tunisia howl for a penalty .... and VAR is having a look.... 73 min: Mali substitutions: Doumbia and F Coulibaly on for Malouda Traoré and ... I’ll let you know. 72 min: Tunisia raid down the right and have five players in the box waiting for Mathlouthi’s cross. It’s slightly too long but Khazri manages to hook it back from beyond the far post. Mali clear. 71 min: Better from Mali. Now they’re playing the game in opposing territory, showing impressive poise as they calmly push Tunisia back. 68 min: Tunisia have definitely improved, quickening their play and sending more players forward. But I’m not sure that alone explains how they have been able to have so much of the play since then: Mali have brought some of it on themselves by growing too cautious. 66 min: Tunisia substitution: Ben Slimane on, Laidouni off. 64 min: Bronn opens fire from 40 yards. It’s a fierce wobbly one so Mounkoro decides not to risk catching it and instead punches it wide. 60 min: Bissouma receives the ball wide on the left and holds on to it until Djenepo offers the overlap option. Bissouma slips the ball to the winger, who flies past Mathlouthi before falling in the box. But the ref judges - correctly - that the defenders stretched out a leg and tipped the ball away before the fall. 59 min: Mali substitution: on comes Yves Bissouma, in place of Nos Traoré 55 min: From about six yards to the left of the D and just two yards outside the box, Khazri curls the freekick over the five-man wall. Mounkoko gets two hands on it and pushes it over the bar. Tunisia take the resultant corner short and then drift it towards the back post, from where it’s headed back into the danger zone for Sacko ... who nods just wide from seven yards! That was by far Tunisia’s best chance of the game. They’re reacted well to falling behind. This contest is hotting up! 54 min: Sliti clipped at the edge of the box as he tries to wriggle through. No doubt Khazri will fancy this freekick ... 51 min: Khazri, no stranger to the spectacular, tries to catch the keeper by surprise from about 35 yards. Not quite accurate enough. 50 min: Another penalty!? No, as the ref waves away Malian appeals after Malouda Traore seems to be brought down after chopping past one defender and on to his right foot. With Mathlouthi putting pressure on him from behind and the keeper rushing towards him, the attacker went down, but the ref was unmoved. 48 min: Nearly half the goals in the tournament so far (4 of 10) have come from penalties. Tunisia will be mighty peeved at how that one came about. They failed to clear a looping corner and then Skhiri turned his back on Kouyaté’s wayward shot from edge of the box, allowing it to hit his arm. The striker sends the debutant keeper the wrong way! 47 min: Penalty to Mali after Skhiri inadvertently blocked Kouyaté’s shot with his arm! 46 min: Before kickoff the main worry of Tunisia fans was that their keeper, Beechir Ben Saïd, may prove to be their weak link. But Mali haven’t even tested him yet. Ibrahim Mounkoro in the Malian goal has been equally redundant. It will be interesting, sort of, to see whether these teams will remain as impotent in the second half. There have only been six goals from open play in nine and half matches at this tournament so far: it doesn’t really look like one is going to come here because neither team has looked sharp around the box. At least Mali have got into decent positions thanks to strong and clever play in midfield but they’ve rarely stretched Tunisia’s wily defence. Tunisia, meanwhile, did not worry Mali’s defenders until stoppage time in the first period. 45+1 min: Khazri - barely seen for a while - conjurers an opening up front, nipping the ball into Mejbri and darting into the box to receive the lay-back. Haidara makes a n excellent block, turning away Khzari’s shot from 16 yards. Mali got away with one there: Mejbri didn’t seem to realise that he could have turned and taken a shot from even closer himself. 44 min: Malouda Traoré slaloms between two defenders wide on the left but then runs straight into the third and concedes a freekick. That kind of sums up Mali so far: they’ve done a lot of good stuff until they reach the final third, where it all tends to peter out. 40 min: Massadio Haidara decides to have a whack from long range - and it’s a fine effort, whizzing just wide of the post from over 20 yards. 37 min: Good move by Mali. Koné did well when the ball came to him just outside the D, where he held off three defenders before shoving it wide to Djenepo on the left. The Southampton winger clipped a delicate pass towards the far post, where Malouda Traoré narrowly failed to connect, under pressure from Maaloul. 36 min: An absolutely dreadful delivery from Khazri, lofting a freekick from the left way over the bar when, for once, he had players awaiting a cross in the box. 33 min: Bronn brings down Djenepo, conceding a freekick on the right wing. But Djenepo then gets a yellow card for reasons unclear. Anyway, Nos Traore sends over the freekick, which Tunisia again clear well. 31 min: Talbi does well to hold off Koné after stepping in front of him to guide the ball back towards the keeper, who wellies clear. 29 min: A drinks break, which is only right when the temperature is 34 degrees and humidity is 65%. 27 min: Moments after that last entry, Tunisia finally infiltrate the Malian box! Helped by a favourable deflection, it must be said, but Mathlouthi then delivered a useful cross from the byline that Haidara had to put behind for a corner. Which is cleared at the near post. 25 min: Mali continue to have the upperhand but still do not look like penetrating from open play. Tunisia, meanwhile, have yet to get even close to the Malian box. 22 min: Another booking, this time for Mathlouthi for clattering into Massadio Haidara in midfield, catching him mid-way up the shin. 20 min: Maaloul gets a chance to romp down the left for the first time. But his cross comes to nought. 18 min: The first yellow card of the game goes to Hamari Traoré, rather harshly. 17 min: Tunisia are finding it increasingly difficult to contain their vibrant opponents: they’re conceding lots of fouls. They clear the most recent freekick - an outswinger from the left by Amadou Haidara - but Mali will surely make these setpieces count if Tunisia keep giving them away. 15 min: The threat from Mali is growing; they’re starting to lord it in midfield and are pushing Tunisia back. 13 min: Kouyaté meets an outswinging corner on the run near the penalty spot but he can’t keep his header down. It sails a yard over the bar. 10 min: Mali have only played in spurts so far but there’s a sense that if they get into a groove they could really trouble Tunisia. 8 min: Noss Traoré curls in a corner from the right that Tunisia head away. 6 min: Mejbri has seen plenty of the ball in the early stages: it’s clear his teammates have a lot of confidence in him. Operating at the right-hand side of midfield, he is polished when in possession and it’s already clear that his interaction with Khazri is Tunisia’s most obvious source of creativity. 4 min: After early Malian pressure, Tunisia try to impose their patient passing game. But Mali are well organised and dynamic, refusing to let them play their way through. 2 min: Koné fires off the first shot, latching on to a long crossfield ball, holding off two defenders and hitting the bouncing ball goalward from the left-hand side of the box. It’s deflected wide for a corner. 1 min: Tunisia v Mali is go! Before enjoying the action, let us put on a record that Mali’s jersey is absolutely majestic, with a glorious yellow eagle spreading its wings across the chest. The swanky stadium - nestling at the foot of beautiful mountains and offering a sumptuous coastal view - is sparsely populated, with just a smattering of fans, who mostly seem to be supporting Mali. They may not be numerous but the spectators are making plenty of noise and seems to be enjoying themselves. Hurrah! It is worth noting that this match is taking place amid a huge security operation in Limbé, which is the only part of Anglophone Cameroon to host matches in this tournament. Thousands of people have been killed in the ongoing conflict in Cameroon, and some separatist fighters have threatened to launch attacks to disrupt this tournament and further discredit the central regime. This could be presented as a clash of generations: Mali’s exciting young team - who may well have the talent to make the country champions of Africa for the first time - against the relatively gnarled players of Tunisia (who’ve been African champions once, the smallest country in population terms to claim that honour). But Tunisia have some youthful talent too, most obviously Hannibal Mejbri, the 18-year-old who starts in midfield today on the back of a very impressive display at December’s Arab Cup (where Tunisia finished runners-up). But check out the strength of Mali’s midfield: even with enforced absentees (Yves Bissouma is only fit enough for a place on the bench), they boast players who could light up this tournament, such as Moussa Djenepo, Amadou Haidara and Diadie Samassekou. And in Ibrahima Koné, who plays his club football in Norway, they’ve found a striker who could give them the sharpness they’ve sometimes lacked. On that score, Tunisia will be counting on Naim Sliti, the buccaneering left-back Ali Maaloul and the ever-trusty Wahbi Khazri. This could be fun. Tunisia: Ben Saïd; Mathlouthi, Ifa, Talbi, Maaloul; Mejbri, Bronn, Skhiri, Laidouni; Sliti, Khazri Subs: Subs: Ben Mustapha, Rekik, Haddadi, Khaoui, Touzghar, Jaziri, Abdi, Ben Romdhane, Dahmen, Chaaleli, Rafia, Ben Slimane. Mali: Mounkoro; H Traoré, Sacko, Kouyaté, M Haidara; A Haidara, Samassékou; AM Traoré, AN Traoré, Djenepo; Koné Subs: C Traoré, Doumbia, K Coulibaly, L Coulibaly, Sissako, Fofana, Diarra, Bissouma, Diawara, Dieng, Camara, Touré. Referee: J Sikazwe (Zam) Hello and welcome to the first day of action in Group F, which may prove to be the most evenly contested group in an Africa Cup of Nations that is up for grabs. Tunisia and Mali each have cases for being considered among the contenders for outright glory so it will be interesting to see how they start when they face each other today. There haven’t been many goals in the tournament so far but these sides can be expected to attack with style.I want to apologise. I know that millions of people across this country have made extraordinary sacrifices over the last 18 months. “I know the anguish they have been through - unable to mourn their relatives, unable to live their lives as they want or to do the things they love. For the second time in recent weeks, the prime minister has been forced to do the thing that no politician – and certainly no prime minister – ever wants to do: say sorry. Last December, he did exactly the same thing in an attempt to draw the sting from the disclosure of a video, in which his senior aide, Allegra Stratton was filmed joking with other officials about a party in the Downing Street media centre. This time, the allegations are more serious, and the jeopardy facing Johnson greater. It showed on his ashen face as he began delivering his statement to a packed and silent House of Commons. “I know the rage they feel with me and with the government I lead when they think in Downing Street itself the rules are not being properly followed by the people who make the rules. And though I cannot anticipate the conclusions of the current inquiry, I have learned enough to know there were things we simply did not get right and I must take responsibility. Johnson’s critics – in his own party and on the opposition benches - have certainly contributed to, and reflected, the rage Johnson described. But they are unlikely to believe his claim that he has now “learned enough to know” that mistakes were made. In recent days it has become clear that the 20 May party in 2020 raised alarm bells for some No 10 staff at the time. They were worried then about the dissonance between what the government was asking people to do, and how people in Whitehall were conducting themselves. And though he said he didn’t want to anticipate the conclusions of the current inquiry by the senior civil servant Sue Gray, that’s exactly what he was doing in the hope, perhaps, an apology now will help to dampen the criticism coming his way. “No 10 is a big department with a garden as an extension of the office which has been in constant use because of the role of fresh air in stopping the virus. “When I went into that garden just after six on May 20 2020, to thank groups of staff before going back into my office 25 minutes later to continue working, I believed implicitly that this was a work event. “With hindsight I should have sent everyone back inside. I should have found some other way to thank them. “I should have recognised that even if it could be said technically to fall within the guidance, there are millions and millions of people who simply would not see it that way, people who have suffered terribly, people who were forbidden from meeting loved ones at all inside or outside, and to them and to this house I offer my heartfelt apologies. This was the key part of the statement – Johnson’s admission that he had been at the 20 May gathering, and his explanation of what he thought he was going on. To howls of derision from opposition MPs, Johnson said he had only been in the garden for 25 minutes, and that he believed “implicitly that this was a work event”. Given the invitation to the gathering made explicit reference to it being a chance for a socially distanced drink, and that the more than 100 people who were asked to attend were told to “bring your own booze”, it is hard to reconcile Johnson’s benign description with what was actually happening in his private garden. Adam Wagner, a lawyer who specialises in lockdown laws, said Johnson’s statement had been carefully constructed - possibly with the help of a lawyer - to argue he believed he was entering a work event when he walked into the garden. In a Twitter post, Wagner said the prime minister has “probably been advised that the only possible personal liability would be as an accessory to others’ criminal offences (he wasn’t outside of his home so not subject to the restriction on movement regulation). So has to say he ‘implicitly’ didn’t believe it broke rules.” Certainly, many questions about what the prime minister knew of the event beforehand remain. Did he know his principal private secretary had invited people into his back garden? Did he really think the 30-40 people who went that evening were at a work meeting? And why didn’t he stop it? Did he have a drink at the event? If it was a work event, how often do No 10 staff drink at work events? If he did not know about the event in advance, why did he arrive at 6pm, the exact time at which it began?The New York court ruling that the civil sex assault case against the Duke of York will proceed is a devastating blow for Prince Andrew and the royal family after more than a decade of allegation and innuendo. Aside from any appeal Prince Andrew may be able to mount against Wednesday’s ruling, he faces the ignominious prospect of having to give evidence in a sex assault lawsuit and face cross-examination on aspects of his private life to clear his name. Win or lose, it is an unprecedented chapter in the royal family’s modern history. One option to avoid this uncomfortable scenario would be to reach a settlement, though such is the momentum of this case worldwide it seems unlikely this could satisfactorily rehabilitate his reputation. Since Andrew was photographed in 2010 in New York’s Central Park with the sex offender and wealthy financier Jeffrey Epstein, the duke’s public image has been tarnished by association. When, in 2011, the photograph of Andrew with his arm around the waist of the then 17-year-old Virginia Roberts appeared, it further damned him in the court of public opinion. But it was in 2015, that Roberts, now Giuffre, first alleged in legal papers she was forced to have sex with the prince – in Epstein’s New York mansion, on his private island in the US Virgin Islands, and at Maxwell’s London home. Since then, all Andrew’s attempts to fight the allegations – which he vehemently denies – while trying to avoid a courtroom showdown, have failed. His 2019 Newsnight interview, a high-stakes ploy, was widely derided as a car crash, and served to worsen his public standing. It resulted in the Queen making the firm and speedy decision that her second son must step away from royal duties, and from his Pitch@Palace entrepreneurial initiative. Aside from any appeal on Judge Lewis Kaplan’s ruling, Andrew now faces the “discovery” phase, which involves the taking of depositions. “That will involve witnesses on both sides being interviewed by the opposing legal team in the presence of their own legal team and either in the presence of a court reporter to take a verbatim transcript or with the interview being videotaped ‘for the court record’”, said Nick Goldstone, the head of dispute resolution at Ince. “It would be possible to have Prince Andrew deposed [interviewed] in the UK, so he would not need to travel to New York for his deposition.” “If the case progresses all the way through to a trial, I think the prince would be under enormous pressure to appear in person if he is going to give evidence in his defence. He may, of course, decline to appear, and I am certain that he cannot be compelled to appear. I think it is unlikely that he would be allowed to appear at a trial via a remote video link, and in any event, from a presentational perspective, that would not look good.” Another option, unattractive as it may be to Andrew, would be to stop the whole process by reaching a settlement with Giuffre. “If he can’t get it struck out, he has a choice of fronting it up at trial and facing the consequences of a verdict, which may go in his favour or may not. Or settle the case on the best terms available and getting certainty by resolving the case without having to appear, ending this process, unsatisfactorily maybe, but bringing the court process to an end,” Goldstone said. “I do think this story has now got so much momentum that it is a difficult case to settle with him having any future public life,” he added. Since the Newsnight interview, which backfired so spectacularly, Buckingham Palace has sought to put space between the institution of the monarchy and Andrew’s legal travails. Questions about the case are routinely referred to Andrew’s legal representatives, with the Queen’s aides refusing to comment on them. Andrew may have no current role in public life, and possibly never again will have, though he is said to harbour hopes his reputation can be rehabilitated. But he is still a member of the royal family, and as such his presence at family events continues. When the Duke of Edinburgh died, and members of the family paid tribute in television interviews, Andrew, with the Queen’s permission, was given a prominent role in addressing the media. He visited her at Balmoral in the summer, and several times has been photographed driving from his Windsor home to Windsor Castle to see his mother. But the Queen is 96 in April. Prince Charles and Prince William, the two next in line to the throne, will be very much taking the temperature of the nation’s mood reflected in Andrew’s plummeting standing in the polls, and both are understood to have concerns that he can ever play a public role again – even if he does succeed in clearing his name. “The Duke of York’s reputation is so badly tarnished that if the case went to trial and he won, his rehabilitation would be minimal,” said Joe Little, the managing editor of Majesty magazine. “The only official evidence of the Queen’s support for her second son is her agreeing to him stepping back from his royal role in late 2019 as the crisis intensified. However, as Andrew’s mother she continues to see him on a regular basis at Windsor Castle, so the personal bond is clearly still in place,” he added. “The Queen, Charles and William, mindful of the damage being done to the institution of monarchy, may have to take decisive action before the situation goes from bad to worse. “Official retirement as a working royal, perhaps, and the relinquishing of military appointments and patronages.”Donald Trump hung up on a national US radio network halfway through a scheduled interview on Tuesday, after the former president was confronted about his election lies. Trump, who has continued to falsely claim he won the 2020 presidential election instead of Joe Biden, was heard becoming increasingly irritated through the interview with National Public Radio before abruptly signing off. The ending meant NPR, which had been promised a 15-minute interview, had to make do with just nine minutes, much of it consisting of a vexed Trump talking over host Steve Inskeep. The segment, which aired on Wednesday, ended with Inskeep asking Trump if Republicans must repeat Trump’s increasingly unhinged allegations of election fraud in order to win his endorsement. “They are going to do whatever they want to do – whatever they have to do, they’re going to do,” Trump said. Never one to remain on topic, Trump added: “But the ones that are smart – the ones that know, you take a look at. Again, you take a look at how Kari Lake is doing, running for [Arizona] governor. She’s very big on this issue. She’s leading by a lot. “People have no idea how big this issue is, and they don’t want it to happen again. It shouldn’t be allowed to happen, and they don’t want it to happen again.” Inskeep attempted to move the conversation on, but Trump further added: “And the only way it’s not going to happen again is you have to solve the problem of the presidential rigged election of 2020.” Inskeep again tried to interject, only for Trump to sign himself off. “So Steve, thank you very much. I appreciate it.” It left Inskeep, who said he had been attempting to interview Trump for six years, and who had begun asking a further question, hanging on the line, before the NPR host accepted: “He’s gone. OK.” As is his wont, Trump had used the interview to repeat a slew of lies and conspiracy theories about the last presidential election. But with Trump used to friendly conversations with rightwing organizations such as Fox News, it appears he was upset at receiving pushback from NPR, which receives some of its funding from the federal government and is one of the most trusted news organizations in the US. Interviewers, at least those from conservative outlets, have previously struggled to get Trump off the phone rather than keep him on it. In April 2018, Trump called in to Fox News for an interview, and spent 30 minutes railing against Robert Mueller’s investigation into allegations of collusion between the Trump 2016 election campaign and Russia and subsequent obstruction, and other topics, until Brian Kilmeade had to gently edge Trump off the phone. “We could talk to you all day, but it looks like you have a million things to do,” Kilmeade said. “He got the president off the phone like an annoying relative,” Stephen Colbert quipped.Germany has reported a record number of daily coronavirus cases as the Omicron variant increases its spread. The Robert Koch Institute, the country’s national disease control agency, said on Wednesday it had registered 80,430 new cases, where the previous record had been just over 65,000 in mid-November. It said 384 people had died in the previous 24 hours, bringing the death toll from coronavirus in Europe’s most populous country to about 115,000. As health officials and policy makers seek ways to keep this latest wave under control, given the infectiousness of the Omicron variant which is dominating in parts of the country, they remain cautiously optimistic that the relatively low hospitalisation rate and tightening of protection measures will contribute to managing the virus over the coming weeks. Concern is focused on ensuring the most vulnerable are vaccinated, and that all adults have access to a third booster shot, as well as on keeping up vital facilities such as hospitals and rubbish collection amid a rise in sickness levels across the workforce. A vaccine mandate – so-called Impfpflicht – is being hotly discussed across the political parties. A Bundestag debate on the subject is scheduled for two weeks’ time, and a law could be in place by March, leading MPs have said. Among suggested variations are a regulation that would be limited to a year, or one that would target only those over the age of 50. The country’s president, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, said due to differing opinions on the issue, and the fact that many who had previously rejected the idea of an obligatory vaccine were now in favour of it, a “thorough debate” was necessary. He told a group of citizens at a discussion event that people who claimed Germany was controlled by a “coronavirus dictatorship” were “showing contempt for democracy and its constitutional institutions”. He added: “This is simply vicious nonsense.” While leading government figures such as the chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and the health minister, Karl Lauterbach, have made public their support for a mandate, the government has said a vote on the issue would not be government-led, in order to ensure as wide a consensus as possible. With a growth in the number and regularity of protests across the country against coronavirus protection measures in recent weeks, as well as death threats faced by politicians, there is an acute awareness of the need to keep the majority of the public onboard. Most Germans have said in polls that they are in favour of a vaccine mandate. As of Tuesday, 72.2% of all Germans had been double-jabbed, and 51.4% of adults had received the recommended booster jab. The government’s goal is for 80% of the population to have been vaccinated by the end of this month. Scholz has said he would later aim for 90%. Lauterbach announced on Wednesday that the country had enough stocks to give every German three more jabs, having procured an extra 5m doses from fellow EU partner Romania, which has been unable to administer them. Some vaccine sceptics have said they might be persuaded to be vaccinated once Novavax, a vaccine referred to as a “dead” vaccine because it contains the spike proteins that cover the virus’s surface, becomes available, possibly later this month. The hope is that this will help to boost vaccine take-up. Stricter measures were introduced on Tuesday across Germany, particularly in restaurants and hotels. Referred to as 2G+, they require people to show proof they have been double-vaccinated, or have recovered within the last six months, and have either received a booster shot or have an official negative test result. These rules have been extended to the Bundestag, requiring MPs who are not vaccinated and have no medical exemption, to sit in the public gallery above the plenary hall, as long as they have an official negative test result. In addition they must now wear medical FFP2 masks. Thinner, typically blue medical masks widely used until now are no longer allowed. The rules will be in place until 28 February. Both the far-right populist AfD and members of the far-left Die Linke have threatened to take legal steps against the move. Alice Weidel, the leader of the AfD parliamentary group, who was unvaccinated but has recovered from coronavirus, accused the government of “shrinking MPs’ mandates”. She received unlikely support from Sahra Wagenknecht of Die Linke, who told Redaktionsnetzwerk Deutschland in an interview: “To lock unvaccinated MPs out of the plenary hall rather than requiring everyone to take a tests, is epidemiologically nonsensical and quite clearly unconstitutional, owing to the lack of protection vaccines give against infection and transmission.” The video platform YouTube has meanwhile confirmed reports that it had blocked the anti-coronavirus measures lobby group #allesaufdentisch (lay it on the table), key supporters of which include leading figures from the German cultural world, from uploading videos for several days after it was accused of spreading falsehoods about the virus. One of the videos posted by the group falsely claimed that the coronavirus vaccine had led to 13,000 deaths, and compared the virus to a light cold. A YouTube spokesman confirmed to Spiegel that the video had “contravened our medical misinformation policy”. With increasing numbers of Germans working from home once again, the labour minister, Hubertus Heil, announced on Wednesday that in future employers would be obliged by law to allow employees to work from home as long as this was compatible with their jobs.If, like me, you spent the first week of the year excitedly hoovering up every last “Best upcoming shows of 2022” list online, I’m afraid I have some bad news. Not one list mentioned GenZeroes, and GenZeroes has the potential to be the most important television series ever made. Or, you know, it might be a steaming bag of turds that is watched by literally zero people on Earth. But, hey, it’s always nice to be positive. Because, just as the television industry is starting to adjust to the popularity of non-linear, streaming viewing habits, GenZeroes represents the next incredible frontier of home entertainment. That’s right, GenZeroes is an NFT (non-fungible token) show. Now, true, the success of GenZeroes seems to be slightly hamstrung by the fact that nobody really seems to know what an NFT is. According to a report in Deadline this week, to watch an episode of GenZeroes, viewers will have to purchase an NFT through a specific website and, depending on the level of NFT purchased, receive access to a range of benefits or even ownership of the show itself. Which, as barriers to entry go, is just a little bit higher than “turn on the television”. Still, direct payment for television programmes is nothing new. Louis CK tried something vaguely similar when he offered new episodes of Horace and Pete to his email subscribers for $5 a pop. The system didn’t take off for a number of reasons, among them that the show was weird and meandering, that CK repeatedly griped about how much money he lost making it, and that he was quickly banished from the mainstream due to a flood of sexual impropriety allegations. Either way, with Horace and Pete you only needed to know your credit card number. For GenZeroes, you basically have to learn an entirely new financial system. That might be worth it if GenZeroes has an unmissable premise and acres of buzz. But no. It’s a show called GenZeroes. It’s a sci-fi set 200 years after an alien invasion of Earth. It’s written by the people who made that Van Helsing show you never saw, and stars Aleks Paunovic, whose top hit on IMDb is his role as Karate Dad in the 2012 film This Means War. In all fairness, GenZeroes might be incredible. But when Netflix started to make original programming, it hired one of the world’s best directors and an Oscar-winning actor to remake the BBC’s beloved political drama House of Cards. It felt unmissable. This, meanwhile, feels eminently missable. It sounds like a B-grade Quibi show. But who knows. There’s always a danger, when you write about emergent technology, of getting stuck on the wrong side of history. People wrote television off at first, and talking movies, and the internet. Even if GenZeroes is more an experiment than anything else, even if it’s just a weather balloon to test a new distribution model, there’s a chance that 20 years from now we’ll all be consuming television that we’ve bought with NFTs. There is certainly momentum building behind the idea. Last year Ashton Kutcher launched Stoner Cats, an animated NFT comedy about some pot-smoking felines that featured the voice talents of Jane Fonda, Chris Rock and Ethereum co-founder Vitalik Buterin. Was Stoner Cats any good? Sadly, the only way to watch it was to purchase an NFT token that cost 0.35 ethereum coins which – since that equates in real world terms to $1,130 – does seem a little steep for a five-minute cartoon about some cats. Which is a polite way of saying that I will die a violent fiery death before I ever find out. GenZeroes is a little more affordable than Stoner Cats – if I’m getting this right, you can buy an access NFT for about $100, but that’s still roughly the equivalent of a year’s Netflix subscription, which is a hell of a punt for a show where every character looks like a Björk album cover. Very few people are willing or able to drop that sort of money on a television series, which makes me doubt the model’s viability. But maybe that’s not the point. People don’t buy NFTs so that they can enjoy well-crafted content. They buy it so they can eventually get incredibly rich. Perhaps that’s the true fate of GenZeroes: nobody will watch it, but somewhere down the line it’ll make three crypto bros even wealthier. Count me out.He is a superstar artist in the US, revered for powerful civil war scenes and dramatic coastal storms, but Winslow Homer is barely known in the UK. Even less well known is the importance of an English seaside village in making him the truly great painter he became. The National Gallery will this year aim to correct that with the first in-depth exhibition of Homer’s art staged in the UK. It has announced details of a major show telling the story of someone who is a household name in the US. “Every American is brought up knowing their Winslow Homer imagery,” said Christopher Riopelle, the National Gallery’s curator of post-1800 paintings. The exhibition will tell the story of his two years in Cullercoats, a fishing village on the coast between Whitley Bay and Tynemouth. Homer made his name as an embedded artist-reporter with the union army during the American civil war, providing imagery for the monthly press. He used these images in powerful paintings that, said Riopelle, “established him as someone who was really talking about America in the modern world. He was somehow telling Americans the truth about America.” Precisely why Homer decided in 1881, in his mid-40s, to move to Cullercoats will never be fully known. One story is that he met someone on the boat from the US to Liverpool who told him there was this place on the North Sea that had become something of an artists’ colony and he should take a look. “I’m not sure that’s entirely believable,” said Riopelle. “He was looking for imagery of heroism in modern life and I think someone told him there were these life-saving crews up there on the North Sea.” He followed his nose and found the heroism he was seeking. If there was an emergency at sea during the night Homer was out watching emergency crews go out, observing women on the beach beaten by the wind and the rain. Homer made many small sketches of what he saw, mostly in watercolour. “The fascinating thing about Cullercoats,” said Riopelle, “is that it doesn’t die when he leaves. Once back in America it is imagery he keeps going back to.” Critics quickly noticed that Homer’s style had changed. Riopelle said you could see Cullercoats in a great picture, The Life Line from 1884. “Cullercoats showed him how he could find allegory in modern life,” said Riopelle. The exhibition will include important pictures Homer made in Cullercoats, or those emerging directly from his time there. They include The Gale (1883), showing a single woman on the shore wrapped in shawls as the wind blows around her. When it was originally shown at the Royal Academy it contained much more detail, including a ship. Later “he took out all those anecdotal details and just reduced it to the woman on the shore in the gale who was, you know … coping. He wanted to get to the essence of things.” Another Cullercoats work is Inside the Bar, an 1883 watercolour being lent by the Metropolitan Museum in New York, a co-organiser of the exhibition. Highlights of the London show will include Sharpshooter (1863), coming from the Portland Museum in Maine and painted during the civil war, and the probable star of the show, The Gulf Stream, being loaned by the Met. Today, no Homer work exists in any British collection. The National Gallery tried to acquire a Cullercoats sketch some years ago but was outbid. “We were soundly beaten because of course Homer is a giant in America,” said Riopelle. Homer, who liked being seen as a taciturn Yankee, has had acres written about him, a lot of it speculation. “When you’re writing about him it’s absolutely impossible because he never said a damn thing,” said Riopelle. “There’s no paper trail, no letters, nothing.” • Winslow Homer: Force of Nature is at the National Gallery from 10 September-8 January.UK households have suffered the sharpest fall in the amount of cash they have available to spend for almost eight years, as high inflation and rising energy bills are driving a worsening cost of living crisis and putting households under pressure. We’d like to hear how people in the UK are managing financially in this climate – whether certain goods have become unaffordable recently, whether rising prices are affecting your consumer behaviour and what you are doing to cope with the cost of living rising so dramatically. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.British skiers could soon be able to return to French slopes after an announcement that France is due to lift its blanket ban on non-essential travel from the UK. The French government’s official spokesman, Gabriel Attal, said after a weekly cabinet meeting on Wednesday that Paris would ease travel restrictions from the UK to France in the next few days. “I confirm that a further easing of the restrictions with the UK will be announced in the coming days,” Gabriel Attal told reporters. “Work is continuing. I hope that the announcement can be made by the end of the week.” France dramatically tightened restrictions on travel from and to Britain on 18 December in an attempt to curb the spread of the highly transmissible Omicron variant, effectively banning all non-essential journeys by requiring vaccinated and unvaccinated travellers to show a “compelling reason” for travel. The rule, which effectively limited entry from the UK to France and EU nationals and British citizens resident in France, was later eased to allow people in “for the pursuit of an economic activity requiring an on-site presence that cannot be postponed.” The rules also require all arrivals from the UK to present a negative PCR or antigen test taken within the previous 24 hours, rather than 48 hours, and to quarantine in France for seven days – reduced to 48 hours if they can produce a new negative test. On December 30, the French government suspended one of the new rules to allow British nationals who were legally resident in other EU countries to transit through France to reach their homes by road and rail. Border officials would “show tolerance” in order to allow people to return home after the Christmas and New Year period, the interior ministry said, without specifying when the rule would be reimposed. On Wednesday, Attal said he had said at the time that the new rules were introduced that “if we continued to see the same situation, that is the Omicron variant becoming dominant in France, of course we would continue to ease the restrictions.” New daily coronavirus infections in France have since set successive records, with the country on Tuesday reporting a new high of nearly 370,000 infections and a seven-day average high of more than 283,000, with Omicron accounting for 87% of all cases nationwide. The tight travel restrictions were also imposed during what analysts see as a breakdown of trust between the British and French governments in the wake of Brexit over a host of issues from migrants to fishing. They were a blow to the French tourism industry over the Christmas period, in particular to Alpine ski resorts, which are very popular with UK tourists. Charles Owen, managing director of Seasonal Businesses in Travel, an industry organisation representing UK travel businesses that mainly operate ski holidays, said the news could lead to a surge in bookings. “This is very welcome news, not only for the thousands of UK holidaymakers and people visiting friends and family in France, but also for the thousands of UK ski-tour operators that have been in an effective shutdown for 22 months,” he said. “Snow conditions in the Alps are near perfect and we expect demand for holidays to be very high over the next few weeks,” he added.A German court is expected to issue a verdict against a former Syrian intelligence official accused of overseeing the murder of 58 people and the torture of thousands of others, in a landmark case expected to declare the actions of the Assad regime over the last decade a crime against humanity for the first time. The verdict against Anwar Raslan, a former colonel loyal to the regime who later defected and fled Syria, is both a highly symbolic moment for the Syrian opposition in exile and a potential risk for those seeking to bring more war criminals to justice in the future, some of whom say a harsh sentence could discourage other defectors from talking openly to authorities. Raslan, 58, is charged with crimes against humanity, rape, aggravated sexual assault and murder at Branch 251, an intelligence unit with its own prison also known as “al-Khatib” after the eponymous neighbourhood in Damascus, where he allegedly oversaw the torture of at least 4,000 people as a commanding officer between 29 April 2011 and 7 September 2012. The former officer is being tried under the legal principle of universal jurisdiction, which allows the prosecution of crimes in one country even if they happened elsewhere. If the court finds Raslan to be guilty, as the main perpetrator rather than just an aide to these crimes, he could face a life sentence on Thursday, with no chance of early release until he has served 15 years. Over 107 trial days at a regional court in the south-western German town of Koblenz, the judge heard statements from almost 50 witnesses who had survived the Branch 251 facility, several of whom appeared as co-plaintiffs. They described how suspects rounded up by the regime were beaten by guards with fists, sticks, cables, and metal pipes, and held in tightly packed cells whose ventilation shafts were intermittently closed to induce panic. “It was always the same cycle,” said the musician Wassim Mukdad when he appeared in front of the Koblenz court in August 2020. “I said something, I was beaten, I said something, I was beaten and so on and so on … They knew exactly where to beat me to cause maximum pain.” Another witness, a former funeral service worker in Damascus, recalled being enlisted by Syrian intelligence to drive its victims to mass graves outside the city – on average four trips a week, each time carrying up to 700 corpses. According to the Syrian Network for Human Rights, a UK-based independent monitoring group, at least 130,000 people have been detained or forcibly disappeared by Bashar al-Assad’s regime since March 2021. Raslan’s defence lawyers have tried to dismiss some of the evidence, arguing that none of the witnesses were directly tortured by the accused himself. The former intelligence official said in court that he had stopped identifying with the Syrian state after 2011, and that as a Sunni from the Houla region he was not trusted by Assad’s mostly Alawite generals. After defecting, he fled to Jordan in 2012 and in 2014 was granted asylum on humanitarian grounds in Germany, where he said he did not try to cover up his past. During the trial, Raslan claimed that after arriving in Germany he lived in fear of retributions from the Syrian regime and contacted Berlin police in February 2015 because he was convinced he was being followed. The police officer who questioned him at the time told the Koblenz court that while Raslan’s fear of retribution was real, she had not considered him to be under real threat in Germany. Germany’s federal criminal police started investigating Raslan in 2017, after he described his role in Syria’s security apparatus in detail during an interview with Stuttgart police, supposedly to aid their investigations into another officer. He was arrested in February 2019.Channel 5 has said it expects its profits for last year to be the biggest since the broadcaster launched almost a quarter of a century ago, fuelled by a TV advertising boom off the back of lockdown hits such as All Creatures Great and Small and Our Yorkshire Farm. The public service broadcaster, which is controlled by MTV-owner ViacomCBS, said when its 2021 results were officially reported it was likely to deliver a record operating profit. This means Channel 5 is banking on having made in excess of £60m last year, given the broadcaster’s previous most lucrative year was 2016 when it reported £58.3m in operating profits, according to filings at Companies House. The broadcaster, whose previous owners have included the German media group RTL and Richard Desmond’s Northern &amp; Shell, has managed to report annual profits in only nine of the 24 years since it was founded in 1997. Channel 5 revealed the 2021 forecast in financial filings that showed a £7m operating loss for 2020, as revenues fell 16% to £294m compared with 2019. The company said the challenging conditions at the height of the pandemic in 2020 gave way to a record year for the total UK TV ad market last year, with revenues up 23% to £4.6bn, ahead of 2019 levels. The strong performance of a string of shows in 2020 such as Our Yorkshire Farm, Channel 5’s highest rated factual programme, and the revival of All Creatures Great and Small, its best-performing programme since 2016, as well as dramas such as The Deceived pushed its share of all UK TV audiences to the highest level since 2014. The strong viewing performance in 2020, which included a 17% increase in primetime viewing and its biggest ABC1 audience since 2008, paved the way for record deals with advertisers as the UK TV market bounced back strongly last year.And Just Like That did not have the smoothest of landings. The Sex and the City sequel found itself draped in controversy from the moment its return was announced. There would be no Samantha Jones, with the core group reduced to a trio, after Kim Cattrall did not return to the franchise. (Was she invited? Did she decline? I look forward to an inevitable Ryan Murphy dramatisation of events – Feud: Cosmos and Cupcakes.) The films had been middling, then terrible, then a third thankfully ditched before it got too far. Could a series that was built on being so brassy and brash survive in the tetchy 2020s? Then it finally arrived, and the drama rolled on. The big twist, or the Big twist, at the end of episode one was briefly a moment, controversial largely for the fact that instead of weeping and hugging her still-conscious husband as he had a heart attack, Carrie might have considered calling an ambulance instead. To think that the reputation of Peloton was the main topic of conversation. Shortly after it aired, allegations of sexual assault were made against Chris Noth by multiple women. He issued a denial, but his co-stars published a message of support for his accusers, and a rumoured cameo at the end of the season was reportedly scrapped. Critics of the show itself were not kind, and the first two episodes were certainly unsteady. It seemed clunky, grasping at what it felt was the zeitgeist with all the grace of a drunken goat. A couple of its storylines proved fuel for the dreaded culture wars, which some viewers managed to interpret as the writers’ hatred for its three leading women. It introduced a non-binary queer character, Che (Sara Ramirez), and Carrie, Miranda and Charlotte, now in their 50s, struggled to navigate this terribly modern world, as I struggled to navigate the idea that a podcast could represent the height of baffling modernity. Subtlety was not its strong point. Carrie seemed never to have heard of Diwali. The less said about kitchen sex, the better. Don’t make me relive “Rambo”. But the truth is that I am hedging my bets, acknowledging that I see its flaws and can understand many, though not all, of the criticisms. I note that these criticisms are rarely aimed at the first two episodes, however, and are about scenes that happen in episodes three, four and five (Miranda’s cheating, Carrie’s dodgy hip). So, I got to thinking, are the people who claim to hate this, watching it anyway? I suspect the answer is yes. Obviously, its return has been bumpy. (Miranda’s an alcoholic! Oh no she isn’t! Oh yes she is!) Yet every week, I wait for the day a new episode appears, then I stop what I’m doing to watch it, as soon as time and decency allow. I have heard others quietly admitting to the same. It is ironic that And Just Like That has struggled with technology – from Carrie’s coy and then freewheeling contributions to the podcast, to her inability to switch off a beeping device in her new apartment – because this show both fits into and resists the digital era. It fits into it because, on the accounts I follow, at least, which I admit are of a certain, camp bias, it is a talking point every week. It seems to have become that much-coveted thing, water-cooler television. And it resists it, because there is something free and old-fashioned about the way in which it feels so thrown together and blase. Some viewers have interpreted its tone as tiptoeing around the “issues”, whatever they may be, but the characters’ occasional blundering about identity, for example, seems pretty loose and open to me. To enjoy the series – and I realised, three or four episodes in, that I really am enjoying it – requires holding two contradictory notions in mind. One is that it can be incredibly clumsy and has many moments that seem ill-judged. The other is that it is pleasurable and very entertaining, and still has many of its charms, if not quite the same ones that it had in its heyday. One recent episode saw Carrie contemplating having a few cosmetic tweaks to her face, which turned into a thoughtful exploration of the value of lived experience. I wouldn’t have seen it coming after the first two episodes, but dare I whisper that And Just Like That has started to settle into its own skin.Succession, The Power of the Dog, Ted Lasso and House of Gucci were out in front with the announcement of this year’s Screen Actors Guild nominations. The awards, voted on by members of the guild, honour both film and TV and are often seen as an indicator of who will go on to win Oscars. Jane Campion’s acclaimed Netflix drama The Power of the Dog picked up three nominations for Benedict Cumberbatch as lead actor and Kirsten Dunst and Kodi-Smit McPhee in supporting roles. Cumberbatch, whose role as a closeted rancher has won him the finest reviews of his career, will face off against Will Smith for King Richard, Denzel Washington for The Tragedy of Macbeth, Andrew Garfield for Tick, Tick … Boom! and Javier Bardem for Being the Ricardos. For lead actress, Lady Gaga’s performance in the fact-based drama House of Gucci is up against Olivia Colman for The Lost Daughter, Nicole Kidman in Being the Ricardos, Jennifer Hudson in Respect and Jessica Chastain in The Eyes of Tammy Faye. Spencer’s Kristen Stewart, who many had expected would be a major player, was a notable omission. Dunst’s beleaguered mother sits alongside Cate Blanchett’s Nightmare Alley femme fatale, Ruth Negga in Passing, Ariana DeBose in West Side Story and Catriona Balfe in Kenneth Branagh’s autobiographical Belfast. In the supporting actor category, Smit-McPhee is challenged by Bradley Cooper in Licorice Pizza, Ben Affleck in The Tender Bar, Troy Kotsur in Coda and Jared Leto’s divisive performance in House of Gucci. Ridley Scott’s drama about the assassination of a Gucci family member was also nominated for best ensemble alongside the casts of King Richard, Coda, Don’t Look Up and Belfast. On the television side, the third season of HBO’s drama Succession picked up nominations for Brian Cox, Kieran Culkin and Jeremy Strong in the category of best actor in a drama series, Sarah Snook for best actress and the cast as a whole for best drama ensemble. The ensemble category also features the casts of The Handmaid’s Tale, Yellowstone, The Morning Show and Squid Game, making history as the first ever foreign language TV nominee. The actor in a drama series category also features The Morning Show’s Billy Crudup and Squid Game’s Lee Jung-jae while the actress category also features The Morning Show’s Reese Witherspoon and Jennifer Aniston, Elisabeth Moss for The Handmaid’s Tale and Squid Game’s Jung Ho-yeon. Comedy nominees were led by Ted Lasso picking up nods for Brett Goldstein and Jason Sudeikis as actor and Juno Temple and Hannah Waddington as actress. The hit Apple show was also nominated for best comedy ensemble alongside freshman shows Hacks and Only Murders in the Building, The Great and The Kominsky Method. Jean Smart was nominated for best comedy actress for her role in Hacks, facing off against Elle Fanning in The Great, Sandra Oh in The Chair and the aforementioned Ted Lasso nominees. Smart was also nominated for best actress in a limited series for Mare of Easttown where she will be challenged by co-star Kate Winslet, The White Lotus’s Jennifer Coolidge, Maid’s Margaret Qualley and Cynthia Erivo for Genius: Aretha. Goldstein and Sudeikis are up against Steve Martin and Martin Short for Only Murders in the Building and Michael Douglas for The Kominsky Method. The category for best actor in a limited series features Ewan McGregor for Halston, Oscar Isaac for Scenes from a Marriage, Evan Peters for Mare of Easttown and Murray Bartlett for The White Lotus. The nominations arrive after last weekend’s Golden Globes which saw lead actor wins for Will Smith, Nicole Kidman, Andrew Garfield and Rachel Zegler. This year’s Oscar nominations will be announced on 8 February.The Downing Street media briefing immediately following prime minister’s questions was dominated by queries about a social event in the No 10 garden in May 2020, and what Boris Johnson knew about it. There were, however, remarkably few answers. Below is a list of questions not answered on Wednesday by Johnson’s official spokesperson and his press secretary. Did Johnson know about the event in advance? Beyond saying Johnson did not see and was not sent an email organising the event sent by the senior official Martin Reynolds, no answer: “He did not see the email, and as he said, he believed the events in question were within the rules.” When did Johnson first learn a social event was taking place in his own garden? “All I will say is to repeat what he [Johnson] said: ‘It was my view implicitly that this was a work event.’” How did he first learn about the event? “As I said, he did not see the email. Beyond that, he set out a clear account of this in his statement.” Did the PM notice that guests had drinks and food? “On those specific allegations and speculation, those matters will rightly remain for the independent review to look at and determine.” Was his then fiancee, Carrie Johnson, there? “I don’t plan to add anything on this. This is a matter for the independent review to determine.” Were any other ministers there, for example Dominic Raab? “Again, I’m afraid this is going to be fairly repetitive, but matters around the guidance, the nature of the gatherings, attendance, settings and purpose rightly remain a matter for the independent review.” To the PM’s press secretary – were you there? “Again, matters around guidance, the nature of the gatherings, attendance, are a matter for the independent review.” Did Johnson have a drink there? “Again, I’m afraid the details around the nature of the event are a matter for the independent review. You would not expect me to pre-empt any of the findings.” How frequently does he drink at work? “I wouldn’t comment on that one.” Did the PM, as the invitation suggested, bring a bottle? “Same answer. That gets into matters around the nature of the gathering, and guidance.” How did the PM thank staff, as he said he did in his Commons statement? “Again, on all of the matters around those specific details, that will be for the independent review to determine.” Why does the PM believe the event might not have breached rules? “I’m going to have to just refer you to what he said.” When did the PM realise attending the event was unwise? “Again, he’s obviously not pre-empting the findings. He said in his statement that while he cannot anticipate the conclusions of the inquiry, he has learned enough to know that there were things we simply did not get right.” Does the PM stand by earlier statements that he has abided by Covid rules? “Again, he’s not pre-empting the findings of the report. All of these matters remain a matter for the independent review to determine.” Will he accept any recommendations from Sue Gray, the senior civil servant leading the inquiry? “I don’t know exactly what format Sue Gray will set out in the review. But it has our backing.” Can No 10 say when the review will be done? “I’m afraid not. As we’ve said numerous times, it’s an independent process.” Has the PM been interviewed by Gray or her team? “We wouldn’t get into the details of an independent inquiry. But as we’ve said before, the inquiry, and Sue Gray, has access to all individuals that are required to be spoken to.” Has Carrie Johnson been interviewed? “I would refer to the terms of reference. But the inquiry has access to all information and relevant individuals.” Is the PM about to resign, or could he after the report is published? “He is not, but beyond that it is a hypothetical question.” Why is answering basic factual questions pre-empting the report? “He [Johnson] has set out his understanding going into the event. We cannot pre-empt the findings of that review.”In San Francisco, the night before the annual Pride parade is reserved for the Dyke March, a celebration of lesbian life throughout the city. It was like our Christmas – the biggest night of the year – and half of us would be so hungover we wouldn’t make it to Pride the next day. I remember getting a call from an editor at On Our Backs, a lesbian magazine run by women that billed itself as offering “entertainment for the adventurous lesbian”. It was a bedrock of the lesbian community – one of the few ways to communicate with one another, and to celebrate sex and educate each other about it at a time when Aids had brought so much devastation to queer communities. The editor wanted me to shoot a kiss-in, but the tone of her voice sounded almost guilty – like she couldn’t quite bring herself to ask me to work on the biggest party night of the year. But to me, it was the most fun I could imagine. Lesbians from all over the country, many of whom I knew, had gathered in the park, mingling and chatting to whoever came along – gay, straight, whatever gender. But when the Dyke March began, the crowds cleared and the Dykes on Bikes took the lead, with the rest of us forming a column behind. I’ve always found something beautiful about that moment: people stepping aside to give lesbians their space, to celebrate and applaud them. Many of the women would march shirtless as a gesture of their freedom. It was a time for lesbians to assert themselves in the public sphere, a moment of safety and joy. The rules of the Dyke March were pretty much “anything goes as long as it’s fun”. Women were celebrating being half naked, feeling safe and supported by everyone. There were no protesters because there were simply too many queer people in San Francisco. It was a moment of wild abandon, marching through the streets, climbing bus stops, on top of cars, hanging out of windows. This shot was taken on 18th Street in the Castro, one of the centres of queer life in San Francisco. Anyone who had an apartment on the march route would take full advantage of their windows. Every year, the inhabitants of houses would lean out of the windows, often with signs, screaming for the crowd and the crowd would scream back. More than 20 years later, this image still hits me in my gut: I feel the power in it. It encapsulates a kind of joy that, at the time, was absolutely necessary. It was a way of celebrating sex in the face of the death wrought by Aids, and in opposition to voices on the right who blamed us for the epidemic. We couldn’t marry and job security was still uneven across the US for queer people. We still felt like outlaws. In the 1980s, there was a lot of discussion among feminists about the importance of sex. Some took a strident line – that photographing sex was offensive, even violent. While we owe everything to lesbian feminists of that era – they paved the way in so many respects – our generation wanted something different. We were pro kink, pro sex, and pro pornography. Sex meant a lot to us; we weren’t just going to let it go. It was a kind of political hedonism. There have been few times in history where women run the camera, the press and the ecosystem of publishing. But the world we created in San Francisco felt like a beautiful laboratory. It wasn’t separatist by any means – we didn’t seclude ourselves from men and non-lesbians – but we were making work for each other. I think that’s evident in these images. Publishing my work from that time in book form has been a dream of mine. I photographed that period so intensively: it told such a story of that community, and I didn’t want it to get lost. Photographs can get destroyed, ruined or lost, and the relative scarcity of lesbian publications means that, often, this work is absent from our collective archives. I’m so glad this survived. I have immense respect for the women who let me photograph them. It was a real political statement. But there was a feeling that it was also essential to let other gay women know that they were not alone. There’s always this stereotype of the lesbian as angry. Often, we had reason to be. But sometimes, we were too busy having a great time. Phyllis Christopher’s CV Born: Buffalo, New York, 1963 Trained: State University of New York at Buffalo. Influences: Diane Arbus, Robert Mapplethorpe, Honey Lee Cottrell, Jessica Tanzer, Chloe Atkins, Leon Mostovoy, Mark Chester and Jill Posener. High point: “Getting my book, Dark Room: San Francisco Sex and Protest, 1988-2003 published this year.” Low point: “Making the switch from working in a darkroom to the digital world. I missed the magic and chemistry of revelation under the red lights.” Top tip: “Follow your bliss – your heart always knows the answer.” • An exhibition of Phyllis Christopher’s work is at the Baltic, Gateshead, until 20 March. Dark Room: San Francisco Sex and Protest, 1988-2003 is out now (£24).QUESTIONS, QUESTIONS, QUESTIONS Watching a faux contrite Boris Johnson take a pummelling from Keir Starmer at prime minister’s questions over the illegal lockdown garden party he attended by mistake because he thought the 40 other people getting leathered in his back garden were all hard at work, The Fiver was reminded of last week’s Caffeine Cup semi-final first leg between Chelsea and Tottenham. In a match where they landed one blow after another and quite clearly had their opponents on the ropes, Chelsea came up a little short when it came to finishing them off, leaving Antonio Conte’s side with a faint glimmer of hope they might yet wriggle out of the very real mess in which they currently find themselves. While the prime minister is relying on the inquiry he hopes will get him off on some sort of nonsensical technicality, Tottenham have Wednesday’s second leg at Stamford Bridge in which to try to turn things around. It is a game they go into needing to overturn a two-goal deficit if they are to make the final of a competition they last won in 2008. To do so they will have to up their game considerably from last week’s dismal showing in which they were outclassed to such an extent their players could have been forgiven for not realising they were at an actual work event. “For sure, when you play against this type of team, it’s hard,” blabbed Antonio Conte. “At the same time, despite our problems with injuries, we have to try to give everything.” He will be hoping the players he selects give a better account of themselves than those who were pretty feeble in victory over Morecambe in the FA Cup on Sunday, a game in which the dismal showing of several fringe players sent him scuttling off to his boss to gesticulate furiously in the traditional Conte style as he demanded several new January recruits. Missing several key players through knack and illness, the leader of Tottenham’s opposition Thomas Tuchel, who held “clear the air talks” with his disaffected striker Romelu Lukaku before last week’s first leg, insisted he will not be trying to alter the style of play of Chelsea’s £89m summer acquisition, who has been conspicuously out of sorts since his return to Stamford Bridge from Inter. “Once he adapts to the physical style of the league there is no doubt he will have a huge impact,” said Tuchel. “We will not reinvent his style or reinvent the player. He can simply be Romelu and then we are all fine and then he will score because this is what he always does.” And in the unlikely event that he doesn’t? Well, Chelsea could always stage an internal inquiry to find that despite all available evidence to the contrary he is in fact still banging them in. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join Barry Glendenning at 7.45pm GMT for minute-by-minute updates on Tottenham 1-1 Chelsea (agg: 1-3) in the second leg of their Milk Cup semi-final. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I don’t really care about the next World Cup, which is not a real World Cup for me. It’s only about money and the way they treated the people who built the stadiums, it’s horrible” – Eric Cantona goes in two-footed on the Human Rights World Cup. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get your ears around the latest Football Weekly podcast here. FIVER LETTERS “So why does Jonathan Dobson get special treatment (Tuesday’s letters)? The other 1,057 of us have to bin The Fiver ourselves” – Justin Kavanagh. “Reading yesterday’s bit (or possibly bob) on Kazuyoshi Miura, I found myself wondering if there has ever been a less inspiring name for a football club than Suzuka Point Getters (鈴鹿ポイントゲッターズ, Suzuka Pointo Getta-zu), normalising the jargon so beloved of losing football managers about being disappointed not to come away with a point?” – Dan Croft. “Are Spurs the new Arsenal? Are Arsenal the new West Ham? Are West Ham the new Manchester United?” – Krishna Moorthy. “In the last few months, and not for lack of trying. I’ve failed to find my way into the letters section. Recently, however, I’ve spared myself the disappointment: there hasn’t been anything to write about, which I take it explains your Rollover day of a few issues back. The football world I take it is unchanging, so I’m asking myself if The Fiver hasn’t secretly launched a new Stop Football campaign designed to asphyxiate the sport by way of slow strangulation boredom. It could be that I should start watching the games again rather than awaiting their evisceration in The Fiver” – Hanford Woods. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Dan Croft. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Mali beat Tunisia 1-0 at Afcon amid chaos and confusion as the referee blew up early, meaning the match had to be resumed 20 minutes later –with only Mali returning to the pitch – so that it could end again. Greater Manchester Police have begun an investigation after bullets and threatening letters were reportedly sent to Oldham owner Abdallah Lemsagam and his brother. Mo Salah’s contract talks are going just fine, according to Jürgen Klopp. “I am very positive about it. I’m pretty sure the fans are not as nervous as you [the media] are,’ he nothing-to-see-here-ed. “The know the club, know the people here who are dealing with things.” Lucas Digne is just a cough for the doctor away from joining Aston Villa from Everton for £25m. Mikel Arteta reckons Arsenal are still big enough to attract the world’s best. “Any time I have spoken to any player, they were so willing to come,” he roared. “That’s one of our biggest powers, our capacity to get the attention of people to come and join our club.” His dad may also be bigger than your dad. Veljko Paunović reckons Reading “let down a lot of people” in their 7-0 shellacking by Fulham but he’s ready to start swinging to get his side back on track. “I am a professional, I am a fighter and I’m ready to fight,” he roared. Meanwhile, if you haven’t seen Andy Carroll’s two disallowed goals, here be gold. Ralph Hasenhüttl was grateful Southampton saved their “best performance at home since 2017” for the first match under new owner Dragan Solak as they walloped Brentford 4-1. Jermain Defoe, 78, has left his role as player/coach at the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers. And Leah Williamson has signed a new contract with ailing WSL title challengers Arsenal. “It’s a dream come true,’’ she cheered STILL WANT MORE? Are Barcelona really back, as their chief suit roared last week, or just using short-term fixes for long-term problems? Sid Lowe assesses the state of things at the Camp Nou. Manchester United’s Ella Toone gets her chat on with Suzanne Wrack about her ‘amazing and overwhelming’ 2021. Elsewhere in the WSL, Arsenal have hit the wall. Suzanne Wrack sifts through what’s gone wrong. Attack or defence? What should a new manager prioritise to keep a team up, asks Chris Evans. This week’s Knowledge mulls over the longest gaps between players’ appearances for one club, high-scoring aggregate draws and Portsmouth’s infamous 2013 calendar. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! CHAOS!Farce engulfed the Africa Cup of Nations on Wednesday as the Group F tie between Tunisia and Mali was ended prematurely by the referee – twice. The Zambian official Janny Sikazwe caused bewilderment, and furious protests from Tunisian players and staff, by appearing to whistle for full time in the 86th minute. He then ordered play to resume, only to trigger further anger by bringing proceedings to a conclusion after 89 minutes and 47 seconds, with Mali leading 1-0. As staff from Tunisia rushed towards the referee and pointed angrily at their watches, Sikazwe and his assistants were escorted off the pitch by stewards. Frantic negotiations followed in the stadium in Limbé, with efforts made to restart the match from the 89th minute, 40 minutes after the controversy began. As Tunisia refused to return to the pitch, Mali – who had come out again – were declared the winners thanks to the penalty scored by Ibrahima Koné on 48 minutes. Wahbi Khazri had missed a chance to equalise from the spot when Ibrahim Mounkoro saved his penalty. The fact that there were two penalties in the second half – as well as two incidents reviewed on the pitchside monitor, one red card (rather harshly for Mali’s El Bilal Touré), five substitutions and a drinks break – made the referee’s decision to blow early all the more bizarre. According to media reports in Tunisia, the country’s football association has filed an official complaint about the refereeing performance along with a request for the match to be replayed. “The players were taking ice baths for 35 minutes before they were called back out again,” Tunisia’s coach, Mondher Kebaier, said. “I’ve been coaching for a long time [and] never seen anything like it. “Even the fourth official was preparing to lift the board [to show how many minutes of injury time] and then the whistle was blown … The referee’s decision is inexplicable; I can’t understand how he reached it. We’ll see what comes of it.”Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, has said there is “a real risk for a new armed conflict in Europe” after talks between alliance members and Russia ended with no signs of progress towards defusing the crisis over Ukraine. The Russian deputy foreign minister, Alexander Grushko, emerged from the four hours of talks renewing Moscow’s threat that it would take military steps if political measures were not enough to “neutralise the threats” it says it faces. His remarks came only days after his fellow Russian diplomat, Sergei Ryabkov, had assured reporters Russia had no intention of invading Ukraine. Grushko said he had told Nato representatives that “further sliding of the situation could lead to the most unpredictable and most severe consequences for European security”. The Russian deputy defence minister, Alexander Fomin, was quoted as saying that relations with Nato were at a “critically low level,” while a foreign ministry official told reporters that there was “no positive agenda at all.” The US delegation leader, the deputy secretary of state, Wendy Sherman, said she had heard nothing in Brussels that differed from the Kremlin position laid out at bilateral talks in Geneva, demanding a guaranteed end to Nato expansion and a withdrawal of alliance troops in formerly Soviet bloc countries that joined the alliance after 1997. Those proposals remained unacceptable to the US and all Nato allies, Sherman said. She also pointed out that there were still more than 100,000 Russian troops deployed close to the Ukrainian border, some of which had carried out exercises with live ammunition in recent days. “We were basically saying to the Russians: some of the things you put on the table are non-starters for us. We are not going to agree that Nato cannot expand any further. We are not going to agree to go back to 1997,” she told reporters. “Together, the United States and our Nato allies made clear we will not slam the door shut on Nato’s open-door policy, a policy that has always been central to the Nato alliance.” Stoltenberg called the day’s meeting a “defining moment for European security”, but said “significant differences” remained. “We had a very serious and direct exchange on the situation in and around Ukraine and the implications for European security,” Stoltenberg said. “Our differences will not be easy to bridge but it is a positive sign that all Nato allies and Russia sat down around the same table and engaged on substantive topics.” But he conceded: “There is a real risk for a new armed conflict in Europe,” and warned that Russia would face “severe consequences” if it used military force. The Nato-Russia Council meeting will be followed on Thursday in Vienna by a third round of talks with Moscow, in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), currently chaired by Poland. After that all sides would have to go back to their capitals for leadership decisions on whether to continue diplomacy. Sherman said there was space for dialogue to address Russian security concerns and “identify solutions that enhance the security of all”. In Geneva the US raised the possibility of reciprocal agreements on missile deployments and military exercises. Sherman said: “Russia most of all will have to decide whether they really are about security, in which case they should engage, or whether this was all a pretext and they may not even know yet.” In an interview with the Guardian, the former Ukrainian defence minister Andriy Zagorodnyuk said a Russian operation against Ukraine now appeared inevitable, once diplomatic talks with the US, Nato and the OSCE concluded this week. “They [the Russians] have created momentum. They want to use that momentum. They need to do something,” said Zagorodnyuk, who served as defence minister in 2019 and 2020. He added: “Moscow’s statements are extremely aggressive to the point of being rude.” He said it was “very unlikely” the Kremlin would carry out a “large-scale invasion” of Ukraine. Although it would be relatively easy for the Russian army to seize territory, occupying soldiers would soon find themselves fighting an unwinnable guerrilla war, he said. “Ninety per cent of the Ukrainians do not want Russia. There would be huge resistance here,” he said. The Ukrainian army would immediately move to “small group tactics”, he said, with regular soldiers working effectively as partisan units. He added: “It will be similar to what the Russians did to Napoleon in 1812. The war would be brutal and long.” Zagorodnyuk predicted the Kremlin was more likely to launch a hybrid war. That might include cyber-raids, attacks on critical infrastructure including power facilities and a massive information campaign. The strategy would be to “coerce Ukraine” into submission, he said. Ukrainian government sources suggest Russia is considering a “staged provocation” inside Ukraine that could then be used to justify a bigger attack. This might include a “violent” incident at the Russian embassy or consulate, which Moscow could then blame on far-right Ukrainian extremists. Meanwhile, Kyiv officials confirmed news reports that the Biden administration quietly authorised an additional $200m (£146m) security assistance to Ukraine in late December. The delivery – first reported by CNN – would include radar systems and marine equipment. No additional weapons have arrived yet, with the decision conveyed only recently to congressional staffers during a classified briefing, according to Politico. The Pentagon last month delivered small arms and ammunition under the terms of a previous $60m aid tranche. Ukraine has asked the US and EU countries to supply it with equipment that could be used by mobile units. These include Javelin anti-tank missiles and portable air defence systems such as Stinger missiles, as well as sniper rifles, drones and counter-battery radars. The Nato-Russia Council meeting, the first since July 2019, was called in response to rising tensions over Ukraine, after the Kremlin stationed more than 100,000 Russian troops and heavy weaponry at the border of its western neighbour. Stoltenberg stressed Nato wanted to continue talks with Russia and had proposed further meetings to discuss greater transparency over military exercises, arms control and reciprocal limits on missiles. The latest gathering followed the inconclusive talks between US and Russian officials in Geneva on Monday, where both sides set out their opposing points of view on Ukraine. Moscow has dismissed western concerns that it is planning an attack, arguing it needs guarantees about security. “The situation has simply reached such a critical point in terms of pan-European security and the national interests of our country … that we cannot delay further and the concerns we have voiced need concrete answers,” said the Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov. Against that backdrop, expectations of a breakthrough from the latest talks were low. Tomáš Valášek, a Slovak MP, who served as his country’s ambassador to Nato between 2013 and 2017, said the Nato-Russia Councils he attended “tended to be mere formalities, but not for lack of trying on the Nato side”. He said: “The Russian side wasn’t prepared to go beyond agreed notes, agreed talking points, so in the end these meetings ended up being very formalistic without breaking any new ground.”Home care providers say critical care services, including nursing and medication needs, are being left to family members as they juggle limited staff numbers due to explosive growth in Covid case numbers. Labor says the federal government’s management of the aged care sector has been “diabolical”, with Covid outbreaks in at least 495 aged care homes nationally and a shortage of rapid antigen tests. Integratedliving Australia, which has more than 20,000 clients in regional, rural and remote areas across the eastern seaboard, said about 8% of its in-home care workforce was either infected or in isolation as a result of Covid exposure – up from 6% the previous week. Most of its clients are on commonwealth home support programs but some have higher needs and utilise home care packages and NDIS programs. As some services are scaled back, family members are being asked to take over critical care duties to allow staff to be prioritised where needed. Integratedliving’s chief operating officer, Indra Arunachalam, said staffing issues were most acute in the Hunter Valley and Central Coast areas of NSW. “This is where we are cancelling some services and some of the strategies we’ve put in there is saying: ‘Although you normally receive two hours worth of services, can we just give you one hour with those services, this time?’” she said. “And we’re having the conversation with clients to delay domestic assistance because we need to divert staff to do the critical issues such as medication support, personal care, nursing, meals and things like that. “In other areas where we have had no staff we’ve basically worked with the client’s family to support the clients with those critical services.” Arunachalam said this meant that in some instances families were taking over nursing tasks and administering medical supplies so that limited staff could be directed to those with greater need. “We are concerned that we cannot sustain this level of effort and resourcing to keep our clients and staff safe,” Arunachalam said. The organisation has been unable to procure enough rapid antigen test kits to assist with staffing issues and – unlike the residential aged care sector – there is no priority access to commonwealth supplies for in-home care providers. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Arunachalam said there needed to be a consistent national approach for the sector and available RATs to help manage the spike in Covid cases. “Given the PCR tests were made available free under Medicare for all Australians, the expectation was that the RATs would follow a similar sort of path,” she said. “It’s really frustrating that there’s been a lack of a consistent national approach that has actually been thought through, and not just for the aged care sector or the health care sector, but in all sectors, when we are all worried in the community.” Paul Sadler, from the peak body Aged and Community Services Australia, said providers were being forced to make difficult decisions as a result of worsening staff shortages. “There’s obviously the impact on the ability to provide the basic care that older people need. So are people able to be showered daily, do you have to reduce that? Are you able to meet their individual needs if you’re down that many staff?” he said. “We have aged care homes, we have home care services who are telling us they’ve lost anywhere between five and 30% of their staff. How you’re meant to maintain quality of care for older people when you have a third or more of your staff knocked out is anybody’s guess.” Federal Labor’s shadow minister for senior Australians, Claire O’Neil, said the aged care sector was already in a crisis before the Omicron wave hit. “Now we’ve got the pandemic and Omicron layered over the top and what providers are telling me is that the situation is genuinely diabolical,” she told ABC radio. “I’ve had providers tell me that they’ve been involved in aged care for 40 years and they’ve never seen a situation as bad as it is today, and other providers saying that they wouldn’t be surprised if providers actually left the sector and stopped providing services altogether. “There is an awareness right now that we’re not providing safe care to these frail and vulnerable people and providers don’t want to be in a position to do that.” On Tuesday, Guardian Australia reported that rapid antigen tests were “virtually impossible” for aged care providers to access, particularly for preventive screening, while the disability sector is also experiencing similar challenges. A spokesperson for the federal health department said the government was working closely with the sector to ensure they had Covid plans in place for all care recipients so they “can continue to receive the high priority services they need”. “The Australian government recognises the hard work of the in-home and community aged care sector throughout the Covid-19 pandemic and their continued efforts to provide necessary services to senior Australians to stay safely in their homes,” the spokesperson said. “We will continue to update guidance to providers to ensure they have access to the latest information so they can provide a safe environment for both care recipients and their staff.” The department said financial support had been provided, including grants to aid mandatory vaccination for the workforce and to cover any increased costs incurred due to a Covid-19 outbreak among staff and care recipients. “The government continues to adjust guidance and consider additional measures as circumstances change.” The spokesperson said rapid antigen tests had been prioritised for residential aged care but the government would continue “to assess the need for additional measures for high-risk groups in light of the current Omicron outbreak”.Michaelia Cash’s department has defended religious schools’ right to sack teachers for their views on sexuality and appeared to confirm safeguards for gay students will be delayed until after the religious discrimination bill. The attorney general’s department’s submission to two inquiries states that changes to the Sex Discrimination Act will wait for a further review 12 months after the bill passes, despite a purported deal with four Liberal MPs to prevent expulsion of gay students at the same time, in exchange for their support of the religious discrimination bill. Cash also personally walked back her reported commitment in December after a backlash from religious groups including the Australian Christian Lobby and Christian Schools Australia which threatened to scupper their support for the bill over the deal. Liberal MPs Katie Allen, Dave Sharma, Angie Bell and Fiona Martin claimed they had won Cash’s agreement to remove section 38(3) from the Sex Discrimination Act, which allows schools to discriminate on sexuality and gender grounds. The department’s submission reiterates that “the religious discrimination bill does not affect the operation of the Sex Discrimination Act”. “In particular, the existing exemptions for religious educational institutions provided in section 38 of that Act are not affected.” The department said religious exemptions will be considered by the Australian Law Reform Commission inquiry, to report back 12 months after the bill passes. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The department noted although the bill does not affect schools ability to discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation it “would allow a religious school to consider a person’s religious beliefs about issues such as sexuality” where it is part of the beliefs of the school. In its submission, the Sydney Anglican church defended an unnamed Christian school against the widely reported claims that teacher Stephanie Lentz had been sacked being gay. The submission, by the Reverend Dr Michael Stead, noted that in Lentz’s own words she was “fired … because of [her] belief that a person can be a Christian and be gay”. Lentz was sacked by a Christian school last year after coming out as gay in 2020. Her dismissal was legal under current exemptions to anti-discrimination laws for religious institutions. Stead argued Lentz was sacked because she was unable to sign the schools statement of belief, as a “celibate gay Christian” might be able to. “Correctly understood, the teacher’s sexuality is not the key issue in this case. “A heterosexual teacher who held the same theological views on sexuality and relationships, and therefore was unable to sign the statement of belief, would also have had his or her employment terminated.” Public Interest Advocacy Centre policy manager, Alastair Lawrie, said the submission demonstrated how religious groups “plan to discriminate against LGBT people, but call it something else”. The Sydney Anglican submission also defended the bill’s controversial statement of belief clause, arguing people should be able to express genuinely held religious beliefs, even if offensive to others including those in the congregation. Examples it cited included: “menstruating women are unclean”, “homosexuality is a sin”, “disability is caused by the devil”, “every child should have a mother and a father who are married”, “god made only men and women” and “HIV is a punishment from God”. Despite support from the Sydney Anglicans and the Australian Catholic Bishops Conference, the bill faces oppositions from state governments – including Liberal governments in Tasmania and New South Wales – over provisions that override state law on hiring practices, and statements of belief. The Victorian government has complained the bill overrides reforms it passed in December, limiting schools’ ability to discriminate against staff to positions where religious belief is an inherent requirement. The Australian Council of Human Rights Authorities, consisting of the commissions that administer discrimination law in every state and territory, warned the bill undermines governments at that level’s ability “to craft anti-discrimination laws and balance rights in a manner appropriate to their jurisdictions”. “It would undermine efforts made at the state and territory level to narrow exceptions that allow religious bodies to discriminate against LGBTIQ people and women in employment.” With a group of three Liberal moderates withholding their support from the bill and the status of the deal with the other four unclear, Labor support will probably be needed to pass the bill before the 2022 election. Labor has reserved its position until the completion of two parliamentary inquiries, both due to report by 4 February. Labor’s shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, has said that people should be protected against discrimination on the ground of religion but “any extension of the federal anti-discrimination framework should not remove protections that already exist in the law to protect Australians from other forms of discrimination”.When covering the economy at the moment, it is best to remember the old joke that if you’re not confused, it is because you’re not paying attention. Things are truly nuts – partly because of the pandemic and partly because we are having to deal with data that is out of date because of the pandemic. Take the latest retail trade figures that came out on Tuesday. They covered November last year – a time when life seemed to at least contain some degree of optimism. It was a time before the Omicron wave, and before we had to put up with wall-to-wall coverage of Novac Djokovic’s spin on why he was out and about after testing positive to Covid, and before it was announced that Gal Gadot is going to star in a remake of To Catch a Thief. Yes, things were a lot better in November. We were back shopping and doing so at a truly insane level. But then nothing about how we have been spending money in the shops has been normal since the pandemic hit. If you think you know what is going on in the economy since March 2020, I present the chart: If the graph does not display please click here In November we spent a record $33.4bn in retail shops. That is 14% more than you would have expected given the five years before the pandemic. Since March 2020, Australians have spent around $30bn more in the shops than would have been expected over that time. The big winners are those selling household goods – ie furniture, electrical goods and hardware. Total spending on such items since March 2020 is some $17bn above the pre-pandemic expectations and, in November alone, our spending on household goods was 32% above what you would have predicted in February 2020: If the graph does not display please click here Not everyone has been a winner, though. Compare the “other” retailing, which includes pharmaceutical, and recreational goods with that spent on eating out. Prior to the pandemic we coincidentally spent the same amount on both categories – since then the paths have greatly diverged: If the graph does not display please click here This matters not just because the graphs look so weird that I don’t even need to really tell you that things are wacky, but because when you see such massive weirdness, you need to realise it flows all the way through the economy – especially with jobs. And so when the latest job vacancy figures came out on Wednesday showing nearly 400,000 vacancies in November last year – 170,000 more than in November 2019 – you could be forgiven for thinking the economy is absolutely booming: If the graph does not display please click here This massive surge in vacancies meant in November there were just 1.6 unemployed per vacancy throughout Australia – a record low: If the graph does not display please click here Even if we include those underemployed, the picture remains seemingly good given the prior to the pandemic there were 8.3 underutilised persons per job vacancy and in November there were just 4.2: If the graph does not display please click here The issue is that the job market is totally unlike it was before the pandemic – for good and ill. One way to show this is what is known as the “Beveridge curve”, which tracks the unemployment rate with the job vacancy rate (vacancies as a percentage of the labour force): Since the pandemic the relationship between the two has shifted drastically away from the 40 years trend from 1980 through to 2019: If the graph does not display please click here In the past, the number of job vacancies we had in November would have been associated with an unemployment rate of somewhere well below 2%. But in November the unemployment rate was 4.6%. The reason is – as we are observing currently with groceries – one of demand and supply. The job vacancy number is the demand for labour, but the labour force number is the amount of supply. And since the pandemic, due to border restrictions our labour force has barely grown: If the graph does not display please click here There are around 365,000 fewer people in the labour force now than would have been expected before the pandemic. Added to that is the inability for people to move easily within Australia to new jobs and you have a case of increased demand for jobs because of the end of lockdowns but a lack of supply because of less immigration and inter-state migration. But we have not just had an increase in job vacancies because of a growth of work, but also because jobs previously held by migrants are now needed to be filled by someone else. In effect we have two prongs of demand while supply is lacking. And all of these figures come before the Omicron wave and the surge in cases and people being unable to work at the same time people are more hesitant to go out in public. So how is the economy going? In reality we don’t really know – nothing is as it usually is, nor as we can expect it to be in the future. Unfortunately, there is enough confusing data around for politicians to tell you they know how strong it is. And voters who are not paying attention might very well believe them. Greg Jericho writes on economics for Guardian AustraliaFour down, one to go. Ashes series have a special quality that can make them feel both endless and over in an instant. The rushed nature of the schedule this time around has exacerbated this. There have been more playing days than non-playing days listed since the series began in Brisbane and that’s before we get to the final match in Hobart, a city making its debut as an Ashes host on Friday. The hecticness is reflected in how many players have fallen by the wayside or are walking wounded into Bellerive Oval. Scott Boland wants to play despite hurting his ribs while falling over in Sydney. Mitchell Starc wants to play despite a four-Test workload. Jonny Bairstow wants to play despite nearly losing a thumb to Pat Cummins. Ben Stokes wants to play despite a side strain that had him grimacing every time he hit the ball out of the SCG. Why wouldn’t they? Boland has 14 wickets in two unexpected Tests at an antediluvian average of 8.64 – the lowest of any man to have taken more than four wickets or bowled more than 51 balls. Starc has only once before made it through a five-Test series and is eyeing another chance with the pink ball that has netted him 52 wickets. Bairstow made a comeback century in Sydney before playing the defining innings in the draw, while Stokes made twin 50s that were essential to England’s escape. Those who will not appear include wicketkeeper Jos Buttler, back to England with a broken finger, and opening bowler Josh Hazlewood, who was supposed to miss one match with a side problem but will miss his fourth. Jhye Richardson may be available in his stead, but there has been muttering about a vague injury of his own since it pushed him out of the team after the second Test in Adelaide. Michael Neser could be the last Australia bowler standing. Throw that all in the pot along with Ollie Pope being a substitute wicketkeeper in Sydney and Sam Billings appearing as a last-minute squad replacement for the spot, driving from the Gold Coast to Sydney, a span that would cover the length of Great Britain, and there is a sense that these teams are stumbling into Hobart with their suitcases bursting open and scatters of illegal fruit rolling across the airport floor. Australia’s selection dilemmas are, at least, the good kind. Performance above expectation has been the norm for this series. Hazlewood has a right to come back as soon as he is fit as Australia’s premier new-ball weapon for years. Richardson has a right to come back after his match-winning five wickets on the tense last day in Adelaide. Boland has a right to keep his spot as the most simple yet effective wicket-hoover imaginable. They cannot all fit alongside a fast-bowling captain and a left-arm devastator. Starc is a quandary machine. He is an athletic bowler who hurls plenty into his action, which can be undermined by even a small drop-off in energy. He said this week that he feels fine and fit, but there is no hiding that throughout his career his output has consistently dropped off in the fourth or fifth Test of a series. But he is also the most prolific bowler in day-night Tests, that stack of wickets coming from nine appearances. Thus he has to play. The smart play would have been to rest him in Sydney, giving him a break before returning with the rosé Kookaburra. But that bird has flown. Then there is the small matter of Usman Khawaja. Australia’s selectors before the series locked themselves into the position that Travis Head was the future and Marcus Harris would be the opening bat all the way through. They cannot now stand by both of those things while also keeping Khawaja in the side. But after the rare feat of twin centuries in his one match of the series, there would be vast public discontent if Khawaja gets left out. Well-meaning plans don’t mean much to spectators who want to see the best players play. Perhaps this contest on its own does not greatly matter. With the pandemic nipping at everyone’s heels, what matters is getting it done. That the teams have made it to the fifth Test in any form is a minor miracle. There are 11 players per side available for Hobart, with a roughly correct proportion being those who bowl and those who bat. Time to finish the rush and take a deep breath once we make it to the end.Anthony Hayes is far from the first film-maker to have realised that the Australian outback provides great scaffolding for sparse dystopias, his tough and tense survival thriller Gold emphasising the vast, screen-buckling nothingness. Led by a grubby-looking and banged-up Zac Efron, continuing a long tradition of actors seeking critical acclaim by messing up their photogenic faces, the film is introduced with the text: “SOME TIME. SOME PLACE. NOT FAR FROM NOW…” This is another way of saying that this South Australia-shot production is set during what the Mad Max director, George Miller, describes as “next Wednesday”: a time in which “all the bad things we read in the news come to pass”. Happy happy joy joy Gold is not, in other words, with its vision of an ecologically ruined world that’s gone to the dogs. Hayes makes it abundantly clear from the unsubtle opening shot – a pair of vultures – that this will be a rather different vision of sand and sun than the 2017 Baywatch remake Efron starred in, torpedo buoy in hand, pectorals glistening. Although Gold is a new addition to a genre I call the “bugger dead, it’s hot” action thriller (which includes the terrific TV series The Tourist), Hayes makes the point that the story is not necessarily based in Australia but the aforementioned “SOME PLACE”. This handily saves Efron from impersonating an Aussie and from the potential embarrassment suffered by those (like Bill Nighy, Quentin Tarantino and Kirby Howell-Baptiste) who have tried to wrap their tongues around a speaking style once described by Winston Churchill as “the most brutal maltreatment that has ever been inflicted on the mother-tongue of the great English-speaking nations”. Hayes, a veteran character actor himself, co-stars as a bloke billed as Man Two, opposite Efron’s Man One. This reflects an intentional lack of humanity in the film’s outlook, with its tendency to view people through a misanthropic lens. The two men are in the outback because Man One has discovered a huge chunk of gold in them thar desert, which leads to an awkward conversation between them thar men, about who should stay and who should go get the excavator. Efron insists on staying with the gold, despite him being an inexperienced stranger in this land, with nary a solar-powered portable fan or six pack of brewskis to make the impending experience more palatable. Gold has elements of a chamber piece, but also long stretches in which a hot and bothered Man One becomes increasingly, well, hot and bothered, fending off various hallucinations. It’s clear early on that Efron is in good hands, with Hayes being a talented director of other actors, as he demonstrated in his 2008 hard-hitting directorial debut Ten Empty. Hayes also clearly trusts Efron, who delivers a strong, gloomy and tetchy performance. It’s smart, rather than exceptional, acting: Efron understands he doesn’t need to say and do too much here; he can internalise emotion and let the atmosphere and intensity of the film wash over him. The cinematographer, Ross Giardina, depicts heat in an interesting way, scaling back the palette to such an extent that many scenes appear virtually colourless. Early on, when Hayes is shown having a cigarette, the smoke he exhales is almost the same colour as the sky: a chalky white more commonly seen in ice and snow. The inference of heat here comes from other places: the barrenness of the land, sweat, the clogging intensity of the drama itself. Gold is a minimalistic production, story and setting wise, with an interesting kind of contextual ambiguity: we know there is a wider world beyond the frame, though we don’t know what it looks like. Sparseness is intriguing, but this film is so damn sparse. With so little going on, for such a long time, the experience becomes gratingly thin. I admired the craft of Gold but left feeling cold – unlike, of course, Efron, who is cooked like an overripe piece of fruit tossed into an incinerator. Gold will screen in select cinemas from 13 January and premieres on 26 January on StanAs Covid case numbers in Australia hit record highs, so too have hospitalisation figures for the virus. Dr Clare Skinner, the president of the Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, says presentations to emergency departments have increased in states affected by the Omicron wave. “We’re seeing people who are [severely] sick from Covid … and then we are seeing people who present because they have tested positive to Covid and they want some assessment and treatment, but their symptoms are less severe than the other group.” “The entire system is under strain – both the hospital system and primary care,” Skinner says. Given the current burden on the healthcare system, what Covid symptoms are manageable at home, and when should you seek urgent medical assistance? When should you go to hospital? There are several guidelines and support services available to help people assess Covid symptoms and whether you can manage the condition from home. These include the coronavirus hotline on 1800 675 398, the federal government’s Health Direct guidelines, and the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners’ home care guide. “From my perspective, the worrying symptoms are things like severe difficulty breathing, chest pain, dizziness and not able to maintain fluid input,” Skinner says. “So if you’ve got severe vomiting and diarrhoea and you’re not able to get fluids in, or you’re not passing urine as often as you normally would, then they are reasons to seek hospital-level care.” Other red flags include worsening shortness of breath, blue lips or face, fainting or collapse, or a blood oxygen level of 92% or less as measured on a pulse oximeter, a device that indirectly measures oxygen saturation when worn over a finger. “If people do have life-threatening or urgent symptoms, I implore them to seek care either through the emergency department or their GP. No one’s going to be judgmental with them about wasting our time,” Skinner says. “We will all do our best to provide the care they need.” What are mild or moderate Covid symptoms? Common Covid symptoms include fever, cough, headache, fatigue, loss of taste or smell, chills, runny nose, and mild shortness of breath. Most people who are vaccinated will have mild to moderate symptoms if infected with Omicron, and won’t need to book an appointment with their GP, says Dr Karen Price, president of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners. “However, people who are high risk should contact their GP,” Price says. This includes people who are unvaccinated, aged over 65, pregnant, immunocompromised or Indigenous. How to manage Covid at home People who are managing their symptoms at home should consider buying a thermometer and have paracetamol or ibuprofen on hand – though pregnant women should avoid ibuprofen, Price says. “Some people self-managing at home may find it useful to record their symptoms daily, which can help show if a person’s condition is worsening.” “Now is a good time to prepare a Covid-safe plan should you or a household member get Covid and be isolating for a period of time. This would include having ready access to the guidelines as well as isolation needs, food, fluids, pets and medications. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “An oximeter may be useful for people self-managing at home, but particularly for people who have risk factors for more severe disease, in collaboration with their medical team,” Price says. “For many with mild illness this will not be necessary.” Skinner agrees: “Not everybody is going to need an oxygen saturation monitor. It’s for people who are at higher risk of deterioration with their Covid infection.” People at high risk might be given a pulse oximeter by their GP, or can buy them online or at a pharmacy – but they should be approved by the Therapeutic Goods Administration. Studies have also shown the devices may overestimate oxygen saturation readings in people with darker colour, with inaccuracies worse at lower oxygen levels. “It’s best not to rely on smartphones or smartwatches that have a pulse oximeter function, as they are not accurate,” Price adds. A useful guide for how someone’s respiratory function is tracking is whether they are breathless at rest, Skinner says. “When you have a viral infection, it’s usual to feel a little bit breathless when you do activities. But if you’re feeling unusually breathless doing activities, you’re breathless when you’re sitting still, or so breathless you can’t speak in sentences – they’re all signs that you need to seek medical care.” Finally, Skinner encourages people with confirmed Covid to check their local health department website. “There’s a lot of misinformation circulating on social media,” she says. “Please find good sources of information.”Hash Tayeh has been back behind the counter at the burger chain he founded, Burgertory, for the first time in three years as he struggles to keep the business going in the face of the Omicron wave. He has been doing night shifts at his outlet on Chapel Street in Melbourne, a fashionable shopping and entertainment strip which local traders say has been overwhelmed by Covid-related staff shortages. The pandemic taught him to “just never get too comfortable and always be humble,” he said. “So I was helping them take orders, take out the rubbish, mop the floors, do the dishes – wherever they needed me.” Two hundred and sixty of Burgertory’s 400 staff have had Covid. In addition to working in the Chapel Street restaurant, he cut five hours a day from its opening hours. He also closed four other Burgertory outlets due to lack of staff, although he was able to reopen one of them on Wednesday. Staff shortages have ravaged Australian business, smashing apart the supply chains that supermarkets rely on to keep food on the shelves, cutting the supply of chicken, grounding planes, and crushing tourism and hospitality businesses on the east coast. Consumer confidence has plunged as casual workers are stripped of shifts while sick or isolating, and an unofficial lockdown is in place with restaurants and bars reporting fewer customers than usual as people try to dodge the virus. On Chapel Street, 35% of people employed by 2,200 businesses either have or have had Covid, local business group Chapel Street Precinct estimated. “We’re keeping our head above water but we’re not making a profit at the moment,” Tayeh said. “There’s no state support, there’s no federal support – it’s really hard at the moment.” Chrissie Maus, the general manager of Chapel Street Precinct, is herself in isolation, recovering from Covid. She said businesses urgently need financial support. “This is a code red for retail right now.” Her group was in contact with the Victorian minister for small business, Jaala Pulford, on Wednesday afternoon to ask for a return to a weekly business cost assistance payment that Melburnians were eligible for during the city’s sixth lockdown late last year. The group has also written to the federal treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, asking the Morrison government to stump up half the money needed. She said opening up was a “double edged sword” and businesses in the area were better off during the lockdowns when they were getting some financial support, even if it was minimal. “Right now, where we’re open and pretending everything’s fine, we get no support.” Maus recognised that there was a crisis in healthcare staffing, but said the situation was even worse in retail and hospitality. “Melbourne is absolutely standing up and screaming, ‘please, please help us like you have for the last 22 months.’” Businesses also need a supply of rapid antigen tests, which are in short supply. State and federal governments have ordered tens of millions, but the bulk are yet to arrive. “How can we have a solution that includes RAT tests when none of us can find them?” she said. Tayeh said he had a supply of rapid tests thanks to a pharmacist friend. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He said closing the stores had provoked a backlash from customers but people “need to understand that we’re entering a new phase of the pandemic”. “And the only thing that’s going to help is kindness and patience, to actually understand that we’re all doing our best out there and … this will blow over in the way we’ve seen all over the world.”Empty supermarket shelves, businesses temporarily closed, holiday plans thrown into turmoil. You could be forgiven for thinking you’d accidentally landed back in the first few months of 2020, so what is going on? What is the national situation? Australia’s food supply is at risk, businesses are having trouble staying open due to staff shortages and workers are losing income as the highly contagious Omicron variant of Covid-19 rips through the community. There are already shortages of some types of chicken, and fresh fruit and vegetables could be left to rot on farms if supply chains can’t be quickly shored up. Meanwhile, music festivals have been cancelled and businesses and unions say there’s an unofficial lockdown happening on the east coast as people shun retail and hospitality businesses in an effort to avoid catching Covid. Is this caused by the urea shortage? No. The shortage of adBlue, which is made from urea and used to reduce emissions from diesel engines, is not helping. But the main cause of the crisis is the fact that Omicron is extremely contagious – there were at least 630,000 new cases in the past week, almost double the number the week before. And the true number will be higher again because testing has fallen and NSW is yet to start reporting the results of rapid antigen tests, as Victoria does. The shortage of rapid antigen tests has also been a factor, businesses and unions say. They saw the surge in case numbers once Australia opened up coming and in October asked the federal government to make rapid antigen tests free for small and medium sized businesses to test their staff. Many employees – up to half in some businesses – have been unable to go to work because they are either sick with Covid or isolating because they are a close contact, waiting for a test, or waiting for a test result. The staff shortages have caused chaos as they ripple through the long supply chains that get the food we eat from the farm to the supermarket. There is more to this than a shortage of truck drivers, although that is one of the key choke points. For example, some types of chicken are in short supply because there have been staffing shortages in the boning rooms that chop up carcasses into thighs, breasts and the like. On the other hand, fruit and vegetables are currently most vulnerable to delays in distribution centres that mean quick-to-spoil leafy greens could become harder to find. Not all businesses are equally affected by the crisis. Those fortunate enough to have rigid testing protocols or a workforce that stays on one site appear to have faced less disruption. But others, including retailers, say they are getting smashed and need urgent financial support from state and federal governments. Some say the situation is worse than during lockdown, when they at least had jobkeeper or disaster payments to keep the lights on. The crisis comes on top of an existing shortage of staff that saw job vacancies surge as lockdowns ended in the September to November period last year. Job openings jumped 18.5% from the previous three months to 396,100, or almost three-quarters higher than February 2020, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said on Wednesday. Adding to Australia’s woes, the global logistics crisis has not gone away. Problems getting goods from overseas ports and into shops will persist well into this year, Oxford Economics said on Tuesday. With more staff off because of Covid, increased port operating hours may not be enough to clear out congestion, the UK-based forecasting group said. It said truck drivers were also in short supply – a problem that needs higher wages and better conditions to fix – and “warehouses are bursting at the seams across many countries” due to a surge in online shopping. When will it end? No one knows. But there are more challenges ahead. Epidemiologists say the peak of the Omicron wave in NSW, which is currently Australia’s Covid hotspot, won’t be behind us until the middle of February. At the same time, construction workers will return to sites at the start of February after their regular summer break – something that the secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Sally McManus, predicts will put pressure on the supply chains of the industries that feed into building. Schools return after Australia Day, opening up another potential transmission vector from children to parents, although studies on Delta have suggested transmission rates in these settings may be low. There’s also the looming prospect of an industrial dispute on the docks, with the Maritime Union of Australia and Patricks Stevedores on a collision course over the company’s threat to cancel an enterprise agreement governing working conditions – something the union says would “see Australian supply chains grind to a halt and the flow of vital household goods evaporate in an instant”. What’s being done? So far, states have loosened isolation rules for people who are close contacts and work in key industries such as food manufacturing and distribution. This buys some time, but comes at the cost of potentially increasing case numbers further down the track. More measures could be announced after a meeting of national cabinet tomorrow – the Morrison government is considering relaxing isolation rules for transport and logistics, and looking to allow international students to work more than 40 hours a fortnight. Morrison has also urged patience – something that is in as short supply as workers in the business sector, which is desperate for assistance now. But so far there appears to be little appetite from state and federal governments to return to handing out cash to people and businesses. What should be done? Businesses say they need money and rapid antigen tests, right now. “We need support, help and a solution which needs to start with assisting on cashflow for businesses,” Chrissie Maus, the managing director of Melbourne retail association Chapel Street Precinct, told Guardian Australia on Wednesday. Unions support the call for free rapid tests for businesses but say keeping them going shouldn’t come at the expense of the health and safety of workers. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “What we’re seeing is employers trying to pressure people to come into work even when they’re sick, when they’re positive,” McManus told Guardian Australia. She said people were concerned that if they said no they would lose their shifts. “There’s not the national leadership that’s saying every day in the press conferences that workers are not to come to work if they’re sick and employers, you need to support workers, including if they’re casual considering paying them while they’re off,” she said. “You know, it’s a free-for-all out there and we’re seeing the very worst come out in some employers.”I used to live in Manly in Sydney and was on holidays at Byron Bay with my husband, Merv, when he said “I’m not going home”. So I went home on my own, packed up and we bought a place up in the hills at Federal [in the Byron Bay hinterland] for $235,000. I sold that after he died 22 years ago and I came into town to be closer to the beach. Merv was a big smoker but when he died after an 18-month battle with bone cancer they found disease everywhere except in his lungs. He would have said “I told you so”. Men always have the last say. He died in the winter and it was raining. He would have been very happy about that because he loved having rainwater in the tanks. The first time I went to the beach, about a month after Merv died, it was pretty good. I was with his brother and we scattered some of Merv’s ashes in the water. His brother said “bon voyage” but the ashes kept washing in to the beach again. It was clear Merv didn’t want to go. We had a bit of a giggle about that. That was the day I started seeing the birds in the sky. When Merv was in hospital he used to watch the kites flying outside his window. That day a big kite eyeballed me all the way along the beach. It was amazing. I was married for more than 60 years, and there’s not a day that goes by that I don’t think of him. He’s my anchor. He was a sailor and he keeps me bound to the earth and he’s not ready for me just yet. He always said he’d come back as a sea eagle and I always look up when I’m at the beach. They are so often above me and I think “There he is, he’s there”. I used to be called Lorraine. When my mother died she left me some money and said I needed to go to Africa. The day I was due to leave, I got out of the shower and there was a feather on the floor. I put it in my wallet and still have it. After Merv died I started writing poetry and would sign it “Lone Feather”. The kids around town started to call me Feather. Whenever I went down to the beach there were always feathers. I’ve still got heaps of feathers in the house, they are everywhere. I’ve always loved the beach, because I didn’t have to wear many clothes. I used to go topless and was still going topless two years ago but the place – the Goddess pool – where I used to sit is no longer there, so I’ll leave going topless up to the young people. I used to get my middle finger painted at the salon and I’d just give people the finger if they stared at me. I don’t have to give them the finger any more. I’ve got a few health problems - turning 80 seems to be the magic number when things go wrong. I had to give up riding my bike to the beach but I have friends who take me and we sit there for a few hours. We lost a lot of the beach with the erosion. I absolutely miss it when I don’t go, but I still get to the beach most days.Amid a flurry of data breaches, password leaks and Malware text scams last year, many of us have become more aware of the need to secure our digital information. Unfortunately, coming up with endless unique passwords for all our banking, shopping, working, schooling and subscribing accounts is tedious, memorising those passwords is near impossible, and relying on the classic “123456” password won’t cut it. Enter the password manager, the trusty vault of codes long forgotten, helping us access and secure our digital lives. Password managers store a user’s login information in a master database. It automates the process of entering a site, supporting that user to create more complex passwords virtually invulnerable to password-linked scam attacks. The only password you will have to remember is your master password – the key to your master database. Set up is simple. It starts with registering for an online account, which includes deciding on that master password. After sign up, add the password manager extension to your browser, and install the password manager’s app on to all devices. On each device, sign in with that master password, and you’re set. Most password managers will give you the option to import saved passwords from your browser. Otherwise, continue using your device as usual. When you go to log in to a new site, you’ll be prompted to save that username and password in the manager. Though most web browsers like Chrome offer an inbuilt password manager that does many of the things third-party applications do, security experts still suggest using a dedicated password manager. If you’re looking for a free password manager with an easy-to-use interface, Bitwarden has been declared “the best choice” by Wired. A semi-automated password fill-in tool that supports switching between multiple accounts, Bitwarden makes login across several usernames on the same device efficient. Bitwarden is available across Android, Windows, Linux, iOS, MacOS, and most web browser extensions, and offers the option to be installed on a self-hosted server. For a password manager with more features, 1Password, at $3 a month, also notifies a user if their password is weak, and cross checks their password against the Have I Been Pwned site to warn of any potential login breaches. 1Password also offers authentication, similar to that of Google Authenticator, adding encryption security with a secret key. A password manager will replace the Post-it note on your desk that holds each scribbled variation of the same login you use across the internet. It will also help replace the logins themselves, with passwords a little stronger than your pet’s name. • This article was amended on 19 January 2022 to clarify the features of Google’s inbuilt password manager for Chrome.My 27-year-old son is the father of a two-year-old girl. He and his girlfriend broke up shortly after the baby was born. They had been living with his girlfriend’s family and she had agreed to move in with my son and his father after three months. When she changed her mind he felt betrayed and the relationship deteriorated. I had concerns about their plan to have a baby from the beginning but we were only informed once she was pregnant. My issue is that my son has not paid child support to date. He says he will start paying once his ex-girlfriend allows him unsupervised visitation with his daughter. He perceives his ex-girlfriend as controlling and vengeful. I feel she is bitter about how things ended, but she is a good mother and protective of her child. My son has recently expressed an interest in another girl, and mentioned that he might have a baby with her. I am very upset at his irresponsible attitude towards parenting, so I said that I would not speak to him again if he impregnated another woman without at least a minimum of commitment in terms of living independently and financial support. I am wondering what I should do if this situation should arise? Eleanor says: Let me start with an observation: it looks to me like a shared structure echoes through a lot of the interactions here, in which one person tries to get another to do something by using a threat or an “or else”. Your son wants his ex to change the rules about visiting his daughter, so he uses child support to try to make her. His ex wants him to be or do something different, so she holds off time with their daughter until then. And now, desperately concerned about the future, you really hope your son will make a different decision – and that the prospect of losing contact with you will make him. Unfortunately though, it’s almost impossible to crowbar other people into doing what we think they should. The problem with or-elseing in loving relationships is it tends to leave only two possible outcomes. Either the person does what we want them to, or they don’t. If they do, it can be hard afterwards for either of you to forget they only did it over a barrel you built – it’s hard for them to feel trusted, and for you to feel trusting. And if they don’t do what you wanted, you’re left having to follow through on a punishment that’s often as painful for you as it is for them. It would be so much better if we could guarantee that simply stating the ultimatum would shake some reason into them, snapping them into genuine, felt agreement. But it’s not often that someone who’s already making alarming decisions becomes more rational when they feel attacked. Often, the “or else” just adds rancour and hierarchy to an already bitter disagreement. You do have grounds to be concerned here. And if those grounds were purely about you, I’d say it was your prerogative to cut your son out. But if he does have another child – indeed, even with the first – things won’t get better for that little child with one less responsible adult around. I wonder if you could make progress instead by trying to help your son feel like someone who could provide financial security and independence, instead of just someone who should. Sometimes the parts of our lives we mess up in are the ones where we never thought we could do well: “I’m just like this.” It takes real energy and self possession to break irresponsible habits – I wonder if hearing “you are up to this task” might fuel him more than “you aren’t and you should be”. Helping people make better choices is often more about kindling their imagination than force-altering their behaviour; they need to be able to picture a different life in enough detail to chase after it. So maybe, whether he has this child or not, your goal could be to stoke that imagination. Wouldn’t it feel better to be self sufficient? Isn’t he tired of not being trusted? He has the character and ability to change! (For instance: “I really know you can be the bigger man and put [daughter] above this fight with [ex]”.) Ultimatums leave bootprints on relationships that it’s very hard to dust off. You might find, for everyone here, that real change is more likely when you invite the other person to be the one insisting that things should be better. This question has been edited for clarity. *** Ask us a question Do you have a conflict, crossroads or dilemma you need help with? Eleanor Gordon-Smith will help you think through life’s questions and puzzles, big and small. Questions can be anonymous. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service hereTraditional owners accuse the New South Wales government of refusing to engage on the protection of sacred sites on the Liverpool Plains after land owned by Chinese mining company Shenhua was sold back to local farmers. The Gomeroi are backed by the former independent MP for New England Tony Windsor, who said both the farmers and the government had a duty to work with them, given the Shenhua coalmine would not have been stopped without the Gomeroi’s campaign to save heritage sites. Dolly Talbott, a representative of the Gomeroi traditional custodians, said when the government bought back the land from Shenhua, it had the opportunity “to do the right thing” and engage in consultation with the traditional custodians to make sure the sites were protected for perpetuity but had failed to do so. The Gomeroi want access to what they say are sacred sites, as well as formal protection of the sites for perpetuity whether they are on public land or private land. Windsor called on governments and farmers to work with the Gomeroi people. “They should have what they asked for because the land would never have been returned to anybody had it not been for them. The alternative was a hole in the ground,” Windsor said. Talbott said when the former deputy premier John Barilaro announced the NSW government would buying land back from Shenhua, he told elders “that our sacred places were safe”. However, she said the government had not contacted the Gomeroi people since the day of the announcement. Susie Lyle, the chair of the Caroona Coal Action Group, said that the Indigenous had been entirely excluded from government surveying. “To me it’s an enormous bungle,” Lyle said. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter Talbott said it made no difference that Barilaro had since retired from politics. “The fact is he made that promise as a Coalition minister. It was up to the Coalition government to make sure that that they followed through on their promises,” Talbott said. “They’ve put us in the middle with farmers, having to rely on the good faith of those farmers to do the right thing when they could have sat down with us when they bought the land back.” She added: “The farmers now have the opportunity to help to protect those sites, but they shouldn’t have been put in that position either. The government should have had some balls and done something about it themselves.” Windsor believes local farmers should offer their services to be part of any delegations to help the Gomeroi in any determination. “Essentially, just support what the Gomeroi want. I think it’s as simple as that,” he said. Windsor believes the matter needs to be treated with urgency, given the experience of Juukan Gorge. “History says if things don’t happen reasonably quickly, they never happen, particularly with Aboriginal issues.” Approximately 6,000 hectares of land formerly earmarked for the coalmine was not put on the open market and instead purchased by the state government. A spokesperson for the deputy premier told Guardian Australia that “vital surveying work on the project has been completed and the land transfer to Local Land Services will be finalised shortly. Further information will be available when the land transfer is complete.” Talbott said the land services had indicated they would allow the Gomeroi to survey the land with them in the future. However, her understanding was sacred grinding groove sites were not within the footprint of the government-owned land, but the private property of the new owners. Tim Duddy, a farmer in the Liverpool Plains region whose property neighbours the former coalmine land, said the lack of consultation was an “absolute disgrace”. “I’m absolutely sure that the community generally is acutely aware that the traditional owners should be given access to those lands. I think that the farming community generally would see it as a huge injustice that is not occurring,” Duddy said. He said the whole of the north-west region has Indigenous relics and sites, but the difference in the land in question is the heritage has been well documented. “It is understood what their significance is. It’s already had all the work done so to then suggest that traditional owners should be denied access to them or denied a say in their future is outrageous.” Talbott said the heritage laws regarding Aboriginal culture have had lots of discussion over the years and yet “still we sit here today and we’re still talking about the protection of Aboriginal heritage. Nothing’s changed. “As Aboriginal people once again in this country we’re just factored out. “Reconciliation is just a farce as far as I’m concerned,” she said. “It’s sad for kids. What does it say to our kids? That they don’t matter. Over and over the actions of these governments tell our children that they’re worthless – that they don’t matter in this country – that’s what their actions do every day by making the decisions that they make,” Talbott said. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityName: Malepolish. Age: Old. Yeah, how old? About 5,500 years – old enough? We’re talking about nail polish, right? Specifically men painting their nails. Babylonian warriors were doing it around 3500BC. “Warriors adorned their nails with ground minerals as part of a pre-battle ritual designed to intimidate their enemies,” according to a 2018 paper from the University of Rochester Medical Center in New York state. “I’m not fighting him, he’s got red nails!” Yeah, that’s the idea. There’s evidence men in ancient Egyptian were also into it, as well as some in ancient China. All right, Mary Beard, can we get this a bit closer to the present? OK. Nail painting became more of a thing for women for a millennium or two, but in the 1970s and 80s male musicians started to put the man back into the manicure. Iggy Pop, Lou Reed, David Bowie, Freddie Mercury, Prince … … Nirvana? We’re getting into the 90s, but yes: the polish flowed through grunge, with Kurt Cobain rocking shocking red claws. This century, rappers started to reach for the little bottles with the little brushes – Lil Yachty, Gunna, Tyler, the Creator, to name three. Sounds like four to me. Wake up, Grandma. Tyler, the Creator is one person. Anyway, to the point: he’s part of this interesting phenomenon of celebrity male nail polish. His fashion label, Golf le Fleur, now offers three shades of nail polish that break down gender norms. Tyler, the Creator created! OK, I think we’ve done that one. And it’s not just him. Machine Gun Kelly has a new line, UN/DN Laqr. AJ McLean, the Backstreet Boy, has launched the beauty brand Ava Dean. On this side of the Atlantic, Harry Styles’s beauty range, Pleasing, features nail polish, as you’ll have seen on Instagram. Of course. Just remind the readers. “I started Pleasing to collaborate with people who inspire me, and to explore ideas that go beyond music,” he posted. “I hope you love it as much as I do. It’s for you, it’s just the beginning. H.” I love it, H, I do. How much? £50. But that’s for the full set: four collectible bottles, four different colours. Red? No red. The nearest is Granny’s Pink Pearls, which is pink, unsurprisingly. The others are called Perfect Pearl, Pearly Tops and Inky Pearl. H encourages you to mix, too, so the world is your oyster, just to drag out the “pearly” thing further still. Do say: “When it’s time to meet him-up-there, I want to be wearing Pearly Gates by Harry Styles.” Don’t say: “But you’re not actually the creator, are you, Tyler?”After three hours and 13 minutes of scurrying from one end of the court to another in order to blunt one of the most devastating shot-makers in the game, Andy Murray survived to reach the quarter-finals of the Sydney International by defeating Nikoloz Basilashvili, 6-7 (4), 7-6 (3), 6-3 in a tense, quality battle that ended after midnight. Despite the tremendous fight required to see out the match, that it took so long was primarily down to Murray’s own timidity when looking to consolidate a lead. Murray served for the first set at 5-3 and then 5-4 in the second, but each time Murray was dragged back into two tie-breaks, which he and the second seed split between them. The turbulence was also just a feature of Basilashvili’s presence in the match and his ability to catch fire in short bursts and practically render the opponent, no matter their status, a spectator in their own match. But only for short periods. “He’s hitting the ball consistently bigger than anyone on the tour, he was just taking huge cuts at everything,” said Murray of the world No 23. “I was having to do a lot of defending, a lot of running. My legs stood up well at the end. I served really well in the last set.” Murray will now face David Goffin in the quarter-finals. The Belgian is a former world No 7 who had spent a long time inside the top 15 until recently – he is now ranked 45th – but Murray has a perfect 6-0 record against him. “He had a tough year last year. He had a surgery, I think, on his elbow, missed a lot of tennis. He was around 15 in the world for a number of years when the injury came.”It will also tell a lot about the state of Murray’s body and hip as he is scheduled to compete in the day on Thursday rather than resting. He is looking to reach his first ATP semi-final since 2018. Earlier in the week, he spoke of how important it is for him to start making instant strides forward and finding good results, and he has already put himself in position to take further steps forward. Meanwhile, Dan Evans continued his spotless start to the season as he defeated Pedro Martínez 6-2, 6-3 to reach the quarter-finals in Sydney. Evans has now won six matches in a row, including an unbeaten spell at the ATP Cup in the opening week of the season. In Australian Open qualifying, Britain’s Harriet Dart, the 11th seed, reached the final round with a 3-6, 6-2, 6-2 win over Alycia Parks.Yellowstone, a violent drama about familial legacy and the tides of changes in the mountains of Montana, is the most-watched show on cable in the US, though depending on where you live, you might not know it. The Paramount Network drama starring Kevin Costner as the stony, scheming owner of the largest contiguous ranch in the US drew over 11 million people for its fourth season finale earlier this month without streaming, ratings not seen since the heyday of such 2010s staples as Game of Thrones or The Walking Dead, which were both broadly popular and critically feted. (The HBO fantasy epic’s sixth season, for example, averaged 10.61 million first-week viewers including streaming; AMC’s zombie apocalypse staple peaked in its fifth season from 2014-2015 with an average of 14.4 million viewers per episode). Yet despite batting in the same league as Thrones and The Walking Dead without a clear streaming outlet (full seasons were licensed to NBC’s Peacock, while new episodes land on CBS’s nascent streaming network Paramount+), Yellowstone doesn’t court the critical attention or media scrutiny as its ratings predecessors. Co-creator Taylor Sheridan (who also serves as head writer and occasional director) has drawn accolades for gritty neo-westerns such as Sicario, Hell or High Water and Wind River, but Yellowstone, which premiered in 2018, has been ignored by awards shows. (It received its first major nomination, a 2022 Screen Actors Guild nod for best ensemble in a drama, on Wednesday.) Culture websites such as Vulture and the Ringer publish episode-by-episode recaps, but there’s not nearly the essays, media Twitter chatter or substantive analyses of, say, HBO’s Succession, the buzzy and bruising portrait of a media conglomerate family which parallels Yellowstone’s thematic frame – mega-wealth, squabbling siblings, a family guarding its assets – and offers a stark contrast to its lack of critical attention. Streaming was supposed to be the great equalizer, for either access to content (see: global megahits like Netflix’s Squid Game, the South Korean dystopian drama which reached a whopping 111m households worldwide in late 2021) or its segmentation into competitive platforms warring for their niche and slice of IP. Yellowstone presents a fascinating rebuke to these trends: a word-of-mouth hit in the heartland, for lack of a better term for the loose but distinct geographical segmentation in the US, and a phenomenon of cultural silos between urban-skewing consumers of premium cable and ex-urban (smaller cities surrounded by agricultural land, suburbs, small towns, rural communities) consumers of basic cable. Paramount is building a popular universe around the success of Yellowstone – the prequel 1883, starring the country super couple Tim McGraw and Faith Hill as well as Sam Elliott, scored the biggest debut for a cable show since 2015 in December – and a good portion of the country hasn’t noticed. It’s difficult not to compare Yellowstone and Succession, both on a superficial level and as an indicator of cultural bubbles. Though tonally opposite – Succession is serrated, cynical and lyrically profane, Yellowstone elegaic, melodramatic and prone to philosophical musings – both depict ultra-wealthy scions scrambling to protect their assets (a media conglomerate akin to Rupert Murdoch’s News Corp; a ranch the size of Rhode Island) from threats outside the family (other companies; property developers and Native American tribes seeking restitution). Both traffic in arcane business disputes (hostile takeovers and shareholder meetings, land and water use rights). Both patriarchs prefer to travel via helicopter, while the offspring (three sons and one daughter, the hardest of them all) compete for attention and approval. Both have established lush visual motifs to communicate elevated ambitions – for Succession, airy and impersonal luxury suggest the utter soullessness of mega-wealth; for Yellowstone, wide-shots of mountainous country and unsparing depictions of ranch work argue one’s land is the soul worth fighting for. But for all the cultural fixation, Succession only pulls a fraction of Yellowstone’s audience. The Emmy-winning drama drew its largest audience to date, 1.7 million viewers across all platforms (including HBO Max), for its third season finale in December, largely concentrated in major cities where it has grown as a word-of-mouth hit (and meme generator) for the online; 73% of its audience for the recent finale were located in so-called A markets such as New York, Los Angeles and Chicago. Yellowstone, by contrast, has ballooned in popularity outside of the major markets, which account for 28% of its fourth season viewers, according to the Wall Street Journal. The season premiere in November 2021, for example, drew 14.7 million viewers without streaming, and performed particularly well in smaller cities whose agricultural foundations resonate with the show’s bread-and-butter sequences of ranching and focus on property disputes – Abilene, Texas; Boise, Idaho; Cedar Rapids, Iowa; Lexington, Kentucky; and Topeka, Kansas, not to mention the area around Bozeman, Montana, where the show is largely set. Part of this divide comes down to the mechanics of delivery – basic cable, which contains the Paramount Network, reached peak market saturation in 2010 with 105m households; as of 2021, it’s down to approximately 82.9 million, and skews older. HBO and HBO Max, a premium cable network and streaming service, had in contrast 45.2 million US subscribers last year. Part is due to savvy marketing pushes by Paramount’s parent company, ViacomCBS, which has pushed the show in smaller markets. And part comes down to theme: more than anything else, Yellowstone is preoccupied with property ownership – most conflicts stem from Costner’s John Dutton and his family striving to keep the ranch in their name – an idealization of the American dream of homeownership that resonates with audiences outside cities of mobile renters, and in places where possession of physical assets dictates local power. In other words, Yellowstone is the show of what historian Patrick Wyman has called the American Gentry – the class of land and business-owning local elites in smaller markets across the country, whose politics tend to skew conservative and whose influence tends to go under-covered in comparison to flashy oligarchs, billionaires and those whose wealth isn’t tied to a specific place. As inherited wealth in the US tends to go, this class is disproportionately white, as is Yellowstone’s audience; the show consistently scores among TV’s least diverse viewership in the US (in February 2021, for example, Yellowstone drove the lowest proportion of non-white viewership of all shows, with 23%, according to TV analytics firm Samba). Yellowstone’s conservative ethos has led some commentators to champion it as a rebuke of liberal media – the former View host Meghan McCain, for example, attributed its success to being “not woke”, and several outlets have labeled it “prestige TV for conservatives”. Which is true, to an extent; Yellowstone is conservative in the lower-case sense, as in its main preoccupation is a sense of a way of life (that being white ranch owners) under threat by progress, outsiders and a changing culture. “I don’t know if it’s a uniquely American fear or just a human fear: the fear that a way of life is ending,” Sheridan told the New York Times in late December 2021. “It’s what drives our politics right now. I think it’s a massive theme, this fear of losing someone that you love or a place that you love. That’s pretty universal.” Sheridan is on to something. It is an over-simplification to dismiss Yellowstone as “red-state Succession” but the show’s aspirational wealth and fantasy of victimhood (and genuinely entertaining romance, insults and conversational chess) has clearly resonated outside the bounds of critical buzz concentrated in liberal-leaning cities. Depending on your social circle, this is either self-evident or surprising – a fact that, like the show drawing millions of Americans to live television a week, demands serious scrutiny.The Royal Navy will fail without reform, the outgoing deputy of the service has said in a farewell message to personnel and civil servants in which he bemoaned what he said was as an inadequate status quo. V-Adm Nick Hine posted a candidly worded letter on Twitter in which he said change had to happen, and that he had sometimes despaired at the type of thinking around him. His time in the role corresponded with a period in which – as the Commons defence committee said in a report last month – spending on the navy and the wider military had been capped despite it facing changing threats and taking on additional responsibilities. “Please understand that the need for and, the value of change, is not a fantasy – if we don’t transform we will fail and we will lose. It is that simple,” he wrote, adding that he was also addressing “pedants and naysayers”. Those who had known him for a long time would know that his “big bugbear” was that “our great navy has lost its ambition”, he wrote. “I have despaired at times that collectively we had become self-censoring, risk-averse and lacking in curiosity, confidence and critical thinking skills. “We have these qualities but have allowed a rose-tinted view of tradition and a spurious belief that you can avoid risk by sticking to a failing status quo to avoid driving transformation.” The defence committee report identified a series a challenges the navy faces, including delays to crucial procurement programmes as a result of budget cuts, an increasing reliance on allies and successive governments prioritising of ships’ defensive rather than offensive capabilities. “When ships do get to sea they act like porcupines – well defended herbivores with limited offensive capabilities. This is a result of decisions by successive governments to limit budgets and prioritise defensive capabilities,” it said. “These significant challenges have not prevented the Navy delivering significant successes, most notably the commissioning of the two aircraft carriers and the 2021 carrier strike group deployment to the Indo-Pacific. However, they do raise concerns about the Navy’s ability to deliver the crucial transformations it has planned.” Boris Johnson selected the head of the navy as the next chief of Britain’s armed forces for the first time in 20 years in October, a choice intended to reinforce the UK’s post-Brexit switch in focus to the Indo-Pacific region. Downing Street also published an integrated review of defence and foreign policy earlier last year, a key feature of which was to call for a significant British re-engagement in the Indo-Pacific, which had been abandoned in the late 1960s. Sea power is seen to be at the heart of competing with China, which has the world’s largest navy. The UK signed a three-country pact with the US last month to supply long-range nuclear-powered submarines for Australia. A navy spokesperson, said: “Threats to the UK and our allies multiply every day and so it is critical the Royal Navy continues to transform to ensure that personnel and valuable resources are placed where they are needed most. “The government has made the biggest investment in the armed forces since the cold war. We will continue to modernise, ensuring we are ready to meet the future challenges.Drink- and drug-spiking has reached “epidemic” levels in the UK and is now so common it can happen to anyone, campaigners have told a new parliamentary inquiry into the problem. The home affairs select committee was told that up to 15% of women and 7% of men have been spiked with alcohol or drugs. Hannah Stratton, a 51-year-old from Cornwall, told the committee that she was “violently ill” when her drink was drugged at a “quiet bar” in Newquay. She also revealed that her two daughters had suffered the same fate, and told MPs: “Now the conversation seems to be not, ‘Has anybody been drugged this weekend?’ It’s, ‘Who has been drugged this weekend?’ It’s so commonplace.” When Stratton blogged about her experience, she said she was contacted by 100 people who said the same had happened to them, the committee heard. Helena Conibear, the chief executive of the Alcohol Education Trust (AET), said its survey of 747 people found that 94 (12.6%) had been spiked, with a prevalence of 15% among females and 7% among males. “Shockingly, only 8% of those who’d been spiked reported it to the police or to a medic,” she said. She pointed out that a separate survey of 23,000 students from 19 universities showed that 11% of them had been spiked. Conibear told the committee: “We need more research into what is driving what is truly an epidemic. If one in 10 people are experiencing spiking, we really have to do something about it.” She said: “Our message is it can be any drink, in pretty much any location and it can happen to any person.” She added that 35% of incidents occurred at private parties. “What is very frightening about that is that spiking is taking place, or being permitted by, a wider friendship group.” Conibear and Dawn Dines, the founder of the Stamp Out Spiking campaign, urged MPs to recommend making spiking a specific criminal offence. Conibear said: “The reason why spiking is so prevalent is because the perpetrators know that there are no ramifications at the moment.” The MPs were told that data released by 23 police forces under freedom of information laws showed there were 1,466 reports of spiking incidents last year, up from 722 in the year before. Conibear said: “There were just nine charges in 2019, eight in 2020, and one that we’re aware of in 2021.” The Conservative MP James Daly asked the witnesses if they thought spiking was the “most widespread criminal repeated act at this moment in time in this country”. Both Conibear and Dines said it was. Zara Owen, a 20-year-old student at Nottingham University, told the committee how she was injected with drugs while at a nightclub last year. “I woke up with a really sharp, agonising pain in my leg, which left me limping. The fact that someone has injected a narcotic into my body without me being aware is terrifying.” The former children’s minister Tim Loughton praised Owen for speaking about the problem. He said: “When I was at school, this is what happened to Bulgarian secret agents or in James Bond movies.” Alexi Skitinis told MPs he had “severe” kidney problems after having his drink spiked at a club in Las Vegas. Skitinis, from south Wales, said: “Three days later I ended up in hospital. Obviously, it was a very scary time. I want to make people aware of this. I know the majority of people who are spiked are females, but anyone can be spiked at any time. I didn’t touch alcohol for nearly two years after.” He said he didn’t report it. He said: “It would have been brushed under the carpet.”During the first wave of the pandemic, hospital workers had a great deal to say about the horrendous choices they were being forced to make on oversubscribed, underequipped wards. Why should one person deserve a ventilator more than another? How would you make that call, at speed? There was the life-or-death nature of the decisions. The pressure was unbearable. Almost two years later, with Covid-19 still putting a strain on health services across the world, the rest of us are perhaps experiencing a more diffuse form of “decision fatigue”. While the choices themselves may not be as obviously acute, they are nonetheless concerned with mortality. Would you trust a rapid lateral flow test in a situation that really mattered? Is it OK to go to the gym? Which is safer, taxi or public transport? In industrialised nations, the average person makes about 35,000 decisions a day. Happily, most of these will be insignificant enough to be made while barely registering – what to eat, what to wear, what to watch. But factor in a load of new, stressful decisions requiring unfamiliar forms of knowledge, maybe biological or mathematical, and the effects are compounded. According to an article published by the American Medical Association, a person with decision fatigue may experience tiredness and brain fog, and this is likely to become worse over the course of a day. When your brain gets overloaded it starts to look for ways out. You are liable to put off decisions, make them rashly, pretend there isn’t a problem or get stuck painfully wavering. As if that isn’t bad enough, you may also find yourself losing your temper, binge eating or impulse buying; decision fatigue can affect your capacity to self-regulate. It’s hard to feel OK when your mind is overburdened, assessing both the immediate risks and knock-on consequences of a mutating virus. Plus it’s not just the virus that changes, but also the policies to deal with it. The rollout of vaccines and treatments means that the calculations you have to make require constant recalibration. We are increasingly invited to make our own judgments, and these may very well be at odds with the ideas of those around us. What if your teenage kids want to go to an indoor party? Will it cause a row? Who’s to say whose opinion should hold sway in a situation with so many variables? Perhaps your kids’ mental health would be greatly improved by a slightly risky outing. Not to mention your own. Even if you think you know your own mind, you may find yourself coming up against the minds of others, who also have a point. On the bright side, the end may finally be in sight, but we now know from experience that pandemics don’t back down without a fight. Just when you think it’s safe to go back in the water, it isn’t. The problem is that one of the big hazards of decision fatigue is recklessness. If we get it into our heads that the worst is over, we may be tempted to rush back into old habits, and as a consequence place ourselves in high-risk environments. If you think you may be experiencing Covid decision fatigue you’re not alone, and there are things you can do about it. Rather than attempting to ride out the end of the pandemic in a haze of nightclubs and regrettable purchases, a better option may be to rethink your decision-making processes. First, try to make all important decisions in the mornings, before your faculties begin to deteriorate. And second, try to reduce the number of decisions you make. Definitely don’t start thinking about where to go on holiday just yet. Eat the same thing for breakfast every day. Keep the same haircut for a while. Walk the same dog around the same park in the same direction. Don’t create options when one solution works just fine. We live in a society in which an ever increasing number of products and services are sold to us, and we have lost sight of the merits of simplicity. If anything positive can be gleaned from this moment in time, it is that we can choose to have less choice. That way we can spend all day every day contemplating the important decisions, like how best to use our last two LFTs. And with luck, by the time we’ve worked it out, all this will seem like a bad dream. Anouchka Grose is a psychoanalyst and the author of No More Silly Love SongsStephen Colbert Stephen Colbert observed another grim milestone in the two-year saga of grim Covid milestones for the US: on Monday, the US notched a record 1.5m new Covid infections due to the surge of the Omicron variant. “That is terrible,” the Late Show host said, “but kinda sweet that we all gave each other the same thing for Christmas”. The US also saw a record-breaking 145,000 Covid hospitalizations, with experts predicting a peak in the 300,000 range, though the CDC has offered a clarification on that statistic. Its director, Rochelle Walensky, estimated that 40% of the patients hospitalized with Covid are not presenting because of Covid symptoms, but coming in for something else and then having the virus detected. “OK sure, but even if people aren’t coming in for Covid initially, the hospitals are still overflowing,” Colbert noted. “That’s like saying ‘uh, technically, up to 40% of the people who drowned on the Titanic were already wet because they were in the bathtub when the ship went down, so not so bad.’” Meanwhile, America’s resident Covid expert, Dr Anthony Fauci, finally reached the end of his rope with antagonistic Republican lawmakers on Tuesday. During a congressional hearing, the White House’s top immunologist called out the Republican senator Rand Paul of Kentucky for misleading and baseless accusations. “What happens when he gets out and accuses me of things that are completely untrue, is that all of a sudden that kindles the crazies out there, and I have threats upon my life, harassment of my family with obscene phone calls, because people are lying about me,” Fauci said. “That’s just terrible. Dr Fauci should not be getting obscene phone calls from violent crazies,” said Colbert. “He should be getting them from lonely singles who saw his InStyle magazine cover.” Pointing to Paul’s campaign website, in which a donation tab is accompanied by a “Fire Dr Fauci banner,” Fauci also blasted Paul for “making a catastrophic epidemic for your political gain”. “A pretty damning accusation,” Colbert said. “In response, Rand Paul sent out an email: ‘Dr Fauci tried to smear me by saying I’m profiting from the pandemic. Prove him wrong by donating $10, $20, or $100 today!’” Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel lamented pandemic fatigue, which has forced health officials to urge Americans not to catch Covid on purpose. “They have to tell us that? ‘Please don’t intentionally give yourself a deadly disease,’” Kimmel joked. “Here’s the thing: there are only so many doctors, and there are only so many nurses, and there are only so many hospital beds,” he added. “When everyone tries to get something all at the same time, it’s a disaster. Didn’t we learn nothing from the great toilet paper crisis of 2020?” In non-Covid news, the treasury department has predicted a “frustrating” tax season for the overwhelmed IRS, “which is a shame, because it’s normally so homey and warm”, Kimmel deadpanned. “It’s funny, you know, when the IRS is behind on getting their refunds to us, they take all the time they need,” he continued. “When we’re a day late paying them, they’re like ‘and which prison would you like to go to?’” According to the New York Times, the beleaguered department had fewer than 15,000 employees to handle more than 240m calls – that’s 16,000 calls per person – during the 2021 filing season that left over 35m unprocessed returns. “That’s why Trump never pays taxes,” Kimmel joked. “He knows how overworked these people are. It’s called being considerate.”There was a time not long ago when we had plenty of time; now there’s too much to do. Lockdowns dragged on for ever when we were in them but feel shorter as they edge further into the past. I have heard lockdowns described – often by the kind of people who protested they were unnecessary – as a middle-class luxury. This made me feel even worse about how much I was enjoying the whole experience while so many people’s circumstances made it unbearable for them. What I was luxuriating in was time. I had time to sit, time to read, time to cook, iron, doze, exercise, garden and all the other things I can never normally fit in. Once I had done all those things, and added in some new hobbies – darts, language learning, etc – I was at risk of running out of time all over again, ironically. But I wrested back control; I knew I had to because the preciousness of time had become clear to me. Now, though, despite my best efforts at buttressing, the dam has burst; the demands on my time have come flooding through. The watery metaphor is apt, surely, because inundated is the word we often use to describe our workload when it’s overwhelming us. There are so many people to see, jobs to do, places to visit; so much work to prepare for, stuff to write, food to cook. Please don’t think for a minute that I’m doing any of these things well. I’m not. I’m just doing more things worse. Each evening I retire to bed convincing myself, based on no evidence whatsoever, that tomorrow will be the day I finally get everything I need to do done – and done well. I set my alarm to go off ever earlier to give myself a little more, yes, time. Each morning starts promisingly enough with the compiling of a list of jobs. The task at the top of the list is attacked with some gusto and may even be completed. The next few tasks will be started but not finished, as time to get on with subsequent tasks seems to be running out. By midday, entirely new tasks appear on the list; by mid-afternoon several plates are spinning and smashing and being replaced; by late afternoon, the dozens of jobs under way are all unfinished and others haven’t been started at all; by early evening, defeat has to be acknowledged and the white flag is run up the flagpole. Exhausted, I spend a couple of hours expending what little energy I have left on self-flagellation. Then to bed, in preparation for the following day’s brave new dawn. I am told that one solution is to dispense with the mundane stuff and really prioritise. But the mundane stuff is my only refuge. The last couple of days have been typical. I am helping my brother with some building work. He would say “helping” rather than helping. At the same time I have had several pieces to write; hungry mouths to feed; shows to prepare for; and other unforeseen stuff seeping in by text and email. I was tasked to demolish a low wall but, after a couple of hits, got distracted by something, put the lump hammer down, and couldn’t find it again. I was switched to clearing-up duties but lost first one set of gloves then another. Going back into the house to look for some more, in my efforts to remove a wellington boot, I pulled a hamstring. I limped past the ironing board and saw that some needed doing. For the only time all day, dealing with one T-shirt, four handkerchiefs and several tea towels, the prospect of real happiness loomed. But my reverie was interrupted by my brother hammering on the window, enquiring, in industrial language, what on earth I was playing at, which was a fair question. And so, the ironing too remained unfinished. It’s time something changed. Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnistThe head of the International Energy Agency has accused Russia of orchestrating Europe’s deepening energy crisis at a time of heightened geopolitical tensions by withholding up to a third of its gas exports. Fatih Birol, the executive director of the IEA, directly blamed Russia’s behaviour for the record-high energy market prices in Europe this winter that threaten to upend large parts of the European economy and plunge millions into a cost of living crisis. He said the historic low gas storage levels across Europe were largely due to Russia’s state-owned gas company, Gazprom, which has sent about 25% less gas than usual to Europe over recent months despite a surge in demand after 2020’s economic slump. “We believe there are strong elements of tightness in the European gas market due to Russia’s behaviour,” Birol said reporters on Wednesday. “I would note that today’s low Russian gas flows to Europe coincide with heightened geopolitical tensions over Ukraine.” The IEA’s most damning criticism of Russia’s energy policy to date has emerged after the Kremlin downplayed hopes of diplomatic solutions for the ongoing Ukraine crisis on Tuesday, before a meeting in Brussels between Russia and Nato’s 30 member states. This week Russian forces deployed along the Ukraine border conducted a live-fire military exercise involving 3,000 troops and tanks, in a clear rejection of US demands for a de-escalation in the region. At the same time, the world’s biggest supplier of gas has opted to keep a lid on gas exports to Europe where market prices have surpassed the all-time highs set in September to reach a new record last month. Analysts estimate that Europe’s gas prices could fall by half if Russia agreed to increase its exports by 20%. Gazprom has claimed it is meeting all its contracted exports to European companies. “The current storage deficit in the European Union is largely due to Gazprom,” Birol said. “The low levels of storage in company’s EU-based facilities account for half of the EU storage deficit although Gazprom facilities only constitute 10% of the EU’s total storage capacity.” Chris O’Shea, the head of the UK’s largest home energy supplier, British Gas, warned that prices were likely to remain high for at least another two years, based on the current outlook for global energy markets and the UK’s ongoing reliance on fossil fuels. “There’s no reason to think that energy prices will come down any soon — the market suggests that high prices will be here for the next 18 months to two years,” he told the BBC on Wednesday morning. “As we move towards net zero, gas is a big transition fuel, so as you turn off coal-fired power stations in other countries, there’s more demand for gas, but there isn’t an abundance of gas that you can just turn on quickly.” The prediction could prove devastating for UK households, which face a cost of living crisis after a record increase in energy bills this winter due to the global gas crisis. The rising cost of fossil fuels has also led to record pump prices and may stoke rising inflation across the economy in the months ahead. O’Shea said it was “inconceivable” for the government and energy suppliers to fail to take action to protect households from rising energy bills, which could reach an average of £2,000 by April. He repeated the industry’s calls for the government to remove the 5% VAT rate from energy bills, shift green levies into general taxation and defer charges taken via energy bills to cover the cost of a string of recent supplier collapses.A police standoff with an armed man who has barricaded himself in his home with his eight-year-old son has entered its fourth day, forcing local businesses and a school to stay shut and locking down neighbouring households. A 41-year-old man, who police say has weapons, is refusing to leave his ground floor flat in Earlsdon, Coventry, where he has been holed up with his son since the early hours of Sunday. Armed police are stationed outside the property as negotiators try to convince the man to leave safely. Speaking outside the police cordon on Wednesday afternoon, Supt Ronan Tyrer, of West Midlands police, said the force was sympathetic to frustrations among residents, but reassured them officers were “working incredibly hard to bring this sensitive policing operation to a safe conclusion”. He said he was unable to comment on how long the standoff could continue, but said “we have negotiators who are speaking to the man inside the property. I don’t think it would be appropriate to comment on what those negotiations are.” Dozens of households are within the police cordon and have been asked to stay at home as much as possible, although they are permitted to come and go with a police escort, and numerous bags of food have been delivered to them. Earlsdon primary school, just a few doors down the street from the address where the standoff is taking place, has been closed since Monday, with pupils taking part in remote learning from home. A number of businesses have also had to close their doors, including a cafe and a butchers. “I think now, on the fourth day, the frustrations are starting to set in,” said Kelly Maré, 41, owner of Make Me Up beauty salon around the corner from the closed-off streets. “How is it going to end? When is it going to end? Something at some point has got to give. But we just hope it ends peacefully.” She said most people thought the presence of the child in the building was the main reason behind why the standoff had been going on for so long. “If the man was just there on his own, maybe it wouldn’t be so drawn out,” she said. “If he is doing it for attention he is definitely getting that. But it’s the wider community who are affected, it’s impacting on businesses and pupils and teachers.” O’Toole’s cafe, which has been shut since Monday, said in a Facebook post that it was “such a stressful situation for all of the small business[es] involved but there is little, actually nothing, we can do but wait and pray for a good outcome”. “I feel for the people stuck in their homes in the cordon. And I feel for the businesses, they’re losing money and they’re not going to get it back,” said 74-year-old Joyce Askew, who lives just outside the cordon. “I think everyone thought it would be sorted by now.” “They’ve got to do what they’ve got to do. He’s obviously in distress and I just feel like you’ve got to be patient and just get on with,” said Rachel, who lives nearby and has a six-year-old daughter at the closed primary school. “But I’m fortunate in that I’m not working so childcare is not too difficult for us. I can understand that for other people it’s frustrating. But what is anyone supposed to do?”A Chinese woman has become an overnight sensation after she posted video diaries documenting her life after being stuck at a blind date’s house. Wang went for dinner on Sunday at her blind date’s residence in the central Chinese city of Zhengzhou, where a recent outbreak of Covid cases sent thousands into quarantine in parts of the city. As she was finishing her meal, the area was put under lockdown. She was unable to leave her date’s house as result, she told the Shanghai-based news outlet the Paper this week, saying she had gone to the city for a week-long trip to meet potential suitors from the southern province of Guangdong. Wang quickly shared the bizarre experience with friends on social media. “I’m getting old now, my family introduced me to 10 matches … The fifth date wanted to show off his cooking skills and invited me over to his house for dinner,” said Wang in one of the videos. She also posted short videos documenting her daily life in lockdown on WeChat, which show her date cooking meals for her, doing household chores, and working on his laptop while she sleeps, according to clips published by local Chinese media. “Besides the fact he’s as mute as a wooden mannequin, everything else [about him] is pretty good,” Wang told the Paper on Tuesday. “Despite his food being mediocre, he’s still willing to cook, which I think is great.” Although Wang did not seem to complain about the experience, the prolonged lockdown has not caused romance to bloom. Wang’s experience is not unique. Last month a man found himself under lockdown while moving his luggage in Xi’an in the north-western Shaanxi province. He had to borrow a duvet from neighbours. What was unexpected for Wang, however, is that her video diaries became an online sensation on China’s social media platform, Weibo. A related hashtag has been viewed more than 5m times across China. But Wang’s fame also led to embarrassment for her date. She has now taken down some of the videos. “Friends have been calling him and I think this has definitely affected his life, so I have taken them down for now,” she said in a video posted on Tuesday. “Thanks everyone for your attention … I hope the outbreak ends soon and that my single sisters also find a relationship soon.” Additional reporting by Agence France-PresseDowning Street’s May 2020 bring-your-own-booze party has reignited the despair about Boris Johnson’s leadership that the remaining Conservative optimists hoped might disappear over the winter break. Now, though, the blaze has revived with a vengeance. Johnson’s apology to the Commons does not solve this in any way. The apology merely confirms what was already clear: an astonishingly insensitive breach was committed at the height of the first lockdown. This dereliction did not just feature Johnson as a participant: it was marked by his very character. His apology, with its continued pretence about a work event within the regulations, lacks either moral worth or political credibility. Conservative MPs are well aware their leader is a dodgy chancer. Some of them actively admire this. Others are happy to profit from it. Many loathe it while quietly despising themselves for permitting it. But the style works only while it succeeds. Most Tories had put Johnson on probation after his spectacularly disastrous December. The fresh explosion this week means they are now looking more urgently than before at the alternatives. Tory MPs find themselves on the threshold of a leadership change. Sue Gray’s report will be important in shaping the timing of the outcome, but her findings could be a lose-lose for Johnson either way. If Gray blames the prime minister, he will struggle not to be brought down directly. If she lets him off in some way, his authority will not suddenly be restored. Tory MPs hold all the cards. All of which explains why the party is moving towards its third leadership election in six years. The Johnson experiment seems to have almost run its course. It is a remarkable turn of events that Tory party members – demographically so deeply unrepresentative of modern Britain – should again be asked to choose the prime minister. Johnson was the first PM ever chosen in this way, and it has been a terrible precedent. Much should now be written about the candidates already quietly vying for the leadership. There they were, in a row beside Johnson along the frontbench as he tried to eat humble pie at prime minister’s questions: Liz Truss, Dominic Raab, Priti Patel, Sajid Javid and Michael Gove. All of them harbour hopes of climbing to the top of the greasy pole when Johnson falls, as fall he surely must now. Yet the key figure is the man who, rather conspicuously, wasn’t there at all: Rishi Sunak is the one to beat in this contest. Although he came just behind Truss in a recent ConservativeHome poll of party members, he was ahead of her in this week’s Sky/YouGov survey of members. Crucially, according to the Observer/Opinium poll over Christmas, he would do far better for the Tories in a general election than either Johnson or Truss. That finding will play massively in his favour among MPs. It needs saying that the ascent of Sunak would be remarkable. He would be the first person of Asian heritage, and the first person of colour, to become prime minister and to lead a major British political party. That would be another sign, if one were needed, of the immense capacity of the Tory party to adapt to social and cultural change. Other parties can only watch in frustrated envy. But there is much more to Sunak’s success, if it happens, than this. On my bookshelves stands a copy of the historian Robert Blake’s biography of the former Conservative leader Andrew Bonar Law. With neat historical symmetry, Bonar Law emerged to become Tory leader 100 years ago – the Tory backbench 1922 Committee owes its name to the machinations that overthrew David Lloyd George and took Bonar Law to Downing Street. But it is the title of Blake’s book that matters. It is called The Unknown Prime Minister. It is a title that will soon have to be used again. Sunak may not have risen without trace, but his ascent has been unusually rapid. He only entered the Commons in 2015, succeeding William Hague as MP for Richmond in North Yorkshire. He has only been a minister since 2018. He then raced up the ministerial ladder after being handpicked by Johnson (with some encouragement from Dominic Cummings) to succeed Javid as chancellor less than two years ago. Although Sunak has been chancellor during the greatest peacetime crisis of the modern era, he is extremely inexperienced. This is something that every Tory MP whom I contacted for this article remarked on. “The honest answer is that we really don’t know if he cuts it,” said one former cabinet minister. Others fear that Sunak, who is exceptionally wealthy, operates within his own bubble and is too close to Dominic Cummings, who is keen to destabilise Johnson. This is particularly important because Sunak’s popularity, which was very high when he was doling out public money to support the economy during the first phases of Covid, seems to be ebbing. The return of inflation, the imminence of the tax rises that he announced in the autumn budget and the expected big hike in energy charges from April are combining to make Sunak a less voter-friendly minister these days. For the most part, Sunak has gone along with Johnson’s willingness to spend. But the borrowing and taxation that have marked his chancellorship are not popular across the party. A significant minority of Tory MPs remain avid disciples of the small state, low taxation and privatisation of Margaret Thatcher’s era. Most of what Sunak has said since entering politics – to say nothing of his own wealth – suggests that he is broadly sympathetic to this approach too. We have probably all been in a position a bit like the one in which the Tory party finds itself. Something goes bang with your car. You get an estimate done at the garage, and the cost of the repairs seems eye-watering. Do you go ahead, throwing good money after bad? Or do you start thinking it would be better to get a more reliable new vehicle? The answer is not to be dazzled by the brochures, and to think before you buy. Johnson’s looming failure may be very much his own doing, but its consequences will be felt right across the Tory party and beyond. The electoral coalition that Johnson created in 2019 may not outlive his fall. Sunak and Truss, the apparent frontrunners to succeed, would struggle to maintain the kind of appeal that Johnson achieved. The Tory party should not deceive itself about Sunak. Electing him would be an act based on hope rather than experience. Given that this is what the party also did in choosing Johnson, it is something of which they should be particularly wary. Martin Kettle is a Guardian associate editor and columnistThis Ashes series was always going to end with some England players facing questions about their international futures, and for one of them the end and the questions have come a little early. Jos Buttler’s injury has spared the selectors a decision about whether to retain him in the team for the final Test in Hobart, but it has forced England to think about who will keep wicket this week and also in the future. There have always been huge expectations on Buttler because of his superb form in white-ball cricket, but precisely 100 innings into his Test career we’ve seen little sign of that form transferring. I remember working with him in Abu Dhabi when England played Pakistan there in 2015. He was struggling a little bit and after he got left out of the third Test we went to the nets and he unloaded quite a lot of things that were on his mind. What it came down to was a lack of trust in and understanding of first-class cricket and an uncertainty about how to play at No 6 or No 7 when perhaps the scoreboard is not dictating your approach. In one-day cricket he might be leading a run chase and knowing he needs six an over or when batting first he might need to take advantage of a powerplay, but Test cricket is not formulaic in the same way. In that net session, I suggested I should throw him a few balls and he should play each ball on its merits. He seemed to not quite understand that concept. It led me to think there is so much premeditation in one-day cricket that some players who come through and excel in that format never adapt to the ebb and flow of Test cricket. Buttler came into the Ashes having stood out at the Twenty20 World Cup and he remains probably one of the top five one-day players in the world. But the contrast between his performances for Eoin Morgan’s white-ball side and those in Australia has been stark, watching him stand deep in the crease, leaden-footed, his weight back, unable to play shots with any authority. When he was reintroduced to the Test side by Ed Smith it was to be an aggressive enforcer with the bat at No 7, to go out and play with no fear, but we have never really seen that. There is a lesson here for selectors and captains: it is not enough to pick a player and say: “I think you can do this role.” The player also needs to believe it. I had been left out of the first Test in Jamaica but before the second match of the series Michael Atherton asked me to bat No 3. At this stage I had played nine Tests with a top score of 64, the confidence I had felt making my debut had slowly ebbed away through repeated failures, and I was very much taken aback that he would ask me to bat in front of Robin Smith and Graeme Hick. Michael would say that he had confidence in me, but the player himself has to believe it. I scored two and five. In my time working with the England side, if you feel a player’s strength is batting aggressively then you would encourage them to play in that fashion regardless of the team’s position in the match – but ultimately the player has to go out and play. This is where role clarity is really important. The one truly successful Buttler Test innings I remember is his 75 at Old Trafford as he and Chris Woakes combined to beat Pakistan in 2020, playing brilliantly on a difficult pitch, but that match had almost become a one-day chase scenario. Wicketkeepers are the heartbeat of a team and they need to be bubbly and give energy to the rest of the side, but in the cricket that I have seen on this tour Buttler has looked stony-faced. Of course some players do this more than others, but if you’re in that role and you don’t bring that energy, you’re struggling for runs and you’re dropping catches, then what exactly are you contributing? As wicketkeeper Buttler averages 29.6, while Jonny Bairstow lost the gloves despite averaging 37.4. It’s hard to quantify someone’s character and presence in a dressing room and Bairstow’s statistics are so superior there must be something beyond individual performance that has kept Buttler in the side, but it is a decision that seems increasingly hard to justify. Of those in line to replace him this week and in the future, Bairstow remains a decent option but has for now been ruled out by a thumb injury. Sam Billings is a player Graham Thorpe and I have always had our eye on because of his orthodox technique and good basics, and may be able to grasp an opportunity if one is given to him. Ollie Pope kept well in Sydney and I believe he has a very bright future so long as he is handled correctly, but it would be strange to see him regularly keeping wicket for England when he does not do so for Surrey, who in Ben Foakes have the player widely regarded as the best wicketkeeper in English cricket. Joe Root talks about a reset of the Test team and if his intention is to pick players with long-form cricket in their DNA, people who would focus their attention completely on the first-class game and who could form the spine of a new-look team, Foakes is precisely that sort of player. Many within the game have been surprised not to see him play for England more often, but perhaps his time is about to come.Customers are expecting a steep rise in what they pay for household energy, following the increase in the regulator’s price cap in October and the failure of several small providers. As the regulator Ofgem decides how to set the price cap for April onwards, some have predicted average bills could soar by as much as £700 a year. We would like to hear what has happened to your energy bills. Have you seen a rise already? Have you been told that one is on its way? If so, by how much? What impact will this have on your household income? We also want to hear if you are coming to the end of a fixed rate tariff and face an increase. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Not since Ronald Reagan was president and Paul Volcker was the hardline chairman of the Federal Reserve has US inflation been as high as 7%, so inevitably the latest jump in the country’s cost of living index will have consequences. The US central bank has historically tended to fear deep recession more than runaway inflation, scarred as it still is by the legacy of the Great Depression. The Fed, however, cannot ignore the risks of a wage-price spiral developing and will be forced to act. In part, that’s because of what’s been happening to core inflation, a measure that strips out volatile elements of the consumer prices index such as fuel and food. This rose sharply in December to an annual rate of 5.5%, making it harder for the Fed to argue inflationary pressures will be fleeting. The price of used cars, clothes and air fares all registered hefty increases. Increases in interest rates are inevitable as a result. Wall Street expects the Fed to start pushing borrowing costs up in March, with four quarter-point jumps this year and a further four in 2023, taking them to just over 2%. This is a long way short of the shock treatment administered by Volcker – official borrowing costs peaked at 20% in 1981 – but it will still be enough to slow the US economy and make life harder for the Democrats in November’s midterm elections. The Fed’s chairman, Jerome Powell, knows there is a risk that an over-aggressive approach to inflation could send Wall Street into a tailspin. He is also aware that many emerging and developing economies, especially those that have borrowed heavily in dollars, are vulnerable to higher US rates. In the words of the Roman emperor Augustus, he would be advised to make haste slowly. Other central banks face the same dilemma as the Fed, under pressure to tackle the rising cost of living but worried about moving too fast. UK inflation will hit 6% in the coming months and the financial markets expect the Bank of England – which has already raised interest rates once – to push up borrowing costs to somewhere close to 1% by the end of the year. Pressure will mount on the European Central Bank to act too. The days of ultra-cheap money are over, at least for now.Well, he’s surely sweating now. One by one, the options are running out for Prince Andrew. He has just lost his latest legal battle after Manhattan federal court judge Lewis Kaplan’s ruling today that the sexual abuse lawsuit against him should proceed to trial, despite his lawyers advancing a variety of technical arguments, including that Virginia Giuffre no longer lives in the US, that she agreed in a 2009 deal not to pursue claims against certain other people, and that the court summons had not been properly served. He now faces a long trial that is likely to cause considerable reputational damage to the royal family in a year when everyone was supposed to be celebrating the Queen’s platinum jubilee. One possibility left to him is settling with Giuffre out of court. After all, this is what happens in the vast majority of civil litigations in the US, particularly after the attrition of a drawn-out court case begins to bite. But such an option could hit the cash-strapped prince hard in the pocket, given reports that he is trying to sell his £17m Swiss chalet to raise funds just to pay for his legal bills; this is after reports from the palace that the Queen would not bail him out financially. Since Giuffre had already received $500,000 in a legal settlement with Epstein, any settlement could run into the millions of dollars (some reports have put it as high as $5m). If that happened, despite palace denials, the Queen would probably have to intercede with help, just as she did when Charles was faced with a multimillion-pound divorce bill from Diana in 1995. Whichever way you look at it, Andrew is now a major liability for the royal family and the palace must wish he would just retire to his Royal Lodge home and lead a life of quiet anonymity. Part of the problem, as we discovered with the sudden departure of Prince Harry from the royal hearth, is that there is no clear process of “de-royalling” a royal. Despite his escape to California, Harry was allowed to keep a few of his royal connections in case he ever had a change of heart. The situation of his Uncle Andrew is obviously much more serious and more difficult to decouple. Today’s ruling represents a victory for Giuffre’s team and, from her point of view, a positive step. But even in the best-case scenario for Andrew, if the legal process went to a full trial and he successfully defended himself, the reputational damage to him and the royal family would still be done. The fact that he had numbered among his friends two people who were convicted sex criminals would tarnish his name for ever. There is no way back for Andrew. Whatever the difficulties, the palace may have to find some way to “de-royal” him – he is for all intents and purposes an ex-royal and faces a lot of sweating in the year to come. David McClure is the author of The Queen’s True WorthQuebec’s announcement that it will impose a healthcare tax on unvaccinated residents has prompted a fierce debate, as the province looks to salvage its crumbing healthcare system amid the latest wave of the coronavirus. The Canadian province’s premier, François Legault, said on Tuesday that those who had chosen to remain unvaccinated would pay a “health contribution”, acknowledging growing friction in the province as the unvaccinated draw on a greater share of the scarce medical resources. The Quebec news site La Presse warned the tax could target vulnerable members of society who often lack the resources or information needed to access vaccines. Minorities, including Black and Indigenous residents, also have a long history of discrimination in the province’s healthcare system. “They must not become the scapegoats of the collective fed up,” the paper wrote. But La Presse concluded the tax was necessary tool in the fight against the virus. “In this exceptional context, asking non-vaccinated people to pay a reasonable price can be explained. It’s a question of fairness. Everyone must contribute to the war effort.” The province has not released a timeline for when it could impose the tax – the first of its kind in North America – or how much it might charge. Austria, which plans to roll out a similar fine system, will require residents aged over 14 years to pay €3,600 (US$4,100) every three months they remain unvaccinated. Canada’s vocal anti-vaccine movement has made headlines in recent months for protests outside hospitals, and has prompted frustration across the country. But experts warned against reactionary policies that undermined access to healthcare. “Even anti-social, obnoxious, misinformed and ignorant people have rights,” wrote the Globe and Mail health columnist André Picard. “In a public-health regime, patients must be treated based on medical needs. Period. There is no room for moralistic judgment or financial penalties. You don’t abandon your principles because somebody’s actions (or inaction) irks you.” The announcement appears to already have had some impact: Quebec’s health minister, Christian Dubé, announced on Wednesday that first-dose appointments had surged over the previous 48 hours. But the Canadian Civil Liberties Association questioned whether the policy could stand constitutional challenges. “Allowing the government to levy fines on those who do not agree with the government’s recommended medical treatment is a deeply troubling proposition,” Cara Zwibel, the acting general counsel for the CCLA, said in an emailed statement. “We have universal public healthcare in Canada … Some essential services – like basic healthcare for those who are ill – transcend such individual choices.” A recent poll found that Quebecers were consistently more willing to implement strong mandates for vaccines than other regions of the country. The province also has some of the strongest lockdown measures, including an evening curfew. The decision to financially punish residents marks a sharp departure from other provinces, which in the past looked to reward the vaccine-hesitant. Last summer, more than 150,000 Albertans signed up for a program that gave those with a first dose a C$100 (US$80) gift card – a program that likely cost the provinces more than C$10m. Premier Jason Kenney said on Tuesday his government had no plans to implement a tax. As the debate over the tax plays out, health minister Dubé warned the coming week will be the most difficult for the province, with hundreds more people expected to require hospitalization, further pushing Quebec’s healthcare system to the breaking point. “We’re very close to a point of no return,” he said. • This article was amended on 13 January 2022. An earlier version said that Austria had rolled out a tax for the unvaccinated in November. In fact, the country is at the planning stage of a system to fine those who have not had the Covid jab.Hundreds of dogs have fallen to a mystery illness after taking walks on beaches along the Yorkshire coast. Veterinary nurse Brogan Proud issued a warning to dog owners to avoid the beach on Monday, after noticing a “high increase” of dogs coming into veterinary practices with severe vomiting and diarrhoea. One was Copper, a nine-month-old beagle spaniel, who began vomiting on Monday after enjoying a walk on Fraisthorpe beach in East Riding, Yorkshire, on Sunday. His owner, Ashley Brown-Bolton, from Tadcaster, said she took him to the vet on Tuesday after became increasingly worried about thim. “They gave him an anti sickness jab, which has helped. But it’s just coming out the other end now,” she said. About two weeks ago, Proud and her colleagues began treating dogs that had been walked on beaches including Scarborough, Robin Hood’s Bay, Whitby and Marske-by-the-sea. She issued an alert on Facebook on Monday, which has attracted more than 1,000 responses, with several dog owners sharing similar stories from inland areas and further down the coast in east Yorkshire. The post “blew up”, leading Proud to fear that “thousands” could have been affected by the mystery illness. Many responses were from those who had visited the coast in early January and had now returned home. “Their dogs are then carrying that virus or that bacteria or that problem. And so it’s no longer being kept on the coast as far as I can see, and it is spreading.” Although theories abound on social media, Proud said no vet, agency or authority had been able to establish a cause or a common theme in behaviour, such as eating or chewing anything washed up on the beach, or swimming in the sea. Whatever the cause, according to Proud, “if there’s going to be something spread, dogs will spread it”. She added: “If it’s a virus or a bacteria, it’s going to be spread in their urine or faeces or in the shedding of their fur. And we all know how dogs like to meet and greet each other – nose to nose, touching bums and all sorts. “My advice would be, if you’ve been on the beach, wash your dog in case it’s carrying anything and be vigilant about your dog’s behaviour.” Aaron Yeates and his French bulldog, Ada, from Carlisle, were on holiday in Robin Hood’s Bay over new year. The day after they returned on the 4 January, Ada had severe sickness and diarrhoea. After two trips to the vet, she is only just starting to keep food down again. “She’s lost a considerable amount of weight, her harness barely fits.” Kirsty Salisbury, coastal general manager for East Riding council, said the inspections team had not noticed anything unusual on the beaches. “We have been liaising with external partners during the course of yesterday to try to establish a cause, whilse also liaising with local colleagues, and also nationally. “From reports from local veterinary surgeries, the illness they are seeing within dogs and the tests carried out have not provided any direct links with the use of beaches.” Scarborough borough council also said that while dogs walked on beaches have been affected, other dog owners are reporting the same symptoms from inland locations. “If any vets have information about possible links to a canine virus that could help these investigations, we kindly ask them to contact our dog warden service.” The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra), said it was aware of the incidents and was in contact with the Animal and Plant Health Agency. “We are not aware of any link with the issue of crustaceans washed ashore in the area late last year,” Defra said.Time to wrap up. Here’s all today’s stories on the jump in US inflation: The cost of living squeeze in the UK: The energy crisis: And the other main news: Goodnight. GW The jump in US inflation to 7% will have consequences. Increases in interest rates are inevitable, explains our economics editor Larry Elliott, but the Fed would be wise not to move too fast. Not since Ronald Reagan was president and Paul Volcker was the hardline chairman of the Federal Reserve has US inflation been as high as 7%, so inevitably the latest jump in the country’s cost of living index will have consequences. The US central bank has historically tended to fear deep recession more than runaway inflation, scarred as it still is by the legacy of the Great Depression. The Fed, however, cannot ignore the risks of a wage-price spiral developing and will be forced to act. In part, that’s because of what’s been happening to core inflation, a measure that strips out volatile elements of the consumer prices index such as fuel and food. This rose sharply in December to an annual rate of 5.5%, making it harder for the Fed to argue inflationary pressures will be fleeting. The price of used cars, clothes and air fares all registered hefty increases. Here’s Larry’s full piece: While US inflation is a near 40-year high, US interest rates are still at historically low levels, as this chart shows: AJ Bell investment director Russ Mould says: “Just because inflation was no higher than economists had forecast at 7% year-on-year for December does not mean that investors or central bankers can relax. The last time inflation was this high in the USA, back in summer 1982, the effective Federal Reserve Funds Rate stood at north of 14%. “Nor was the central bank running a balance sheet that has doubled in size in two years and grown by a factor of ten over the last twelve years, thanks to Quantitative Easing policies designed to fight the Great Financial Crisis and the pandemic, among other things. “In that context, any notions that current Fed chair Jay Powell is talking or acting tough when it comes to inflation seem entirely fanciful. In real – post-inflation – terms, the effective Fed Funds Rate has never been lower. Leading shares in London have closed at their highest level in nearly two years. The blue-chip FTSE 100 has ended the day 60 points higher, or +0.8%, at 7551.72 points, the highest close since January 2020. Copper producer Antofagasta (+7.5%) led the risers, followed by fellow miners BHP Group (+4.5%), Anglo American (+3.9%) and Glencore (+3.5%). BP also rallied, up 3.2%, lifted by the jump in crude prices, while supermarket chain Sainsbury’s gained 3.1% after lifting profit forecasts this morning. European stock markets also rose, as optimism over the economic recovery appear to outweigh worries about inflation. David Madden, market analyst at Equiti Capital, explains that equities are benefitting from a dip in US government bond yields. Yields (or interest rates on the bonds) jumped this month, as traders anticipated three US interest rate rises this year. The sharp rise in the cost of living is one of the reasons why the US central bank has adopted a more hawkish position recently. Although it is worrying that costs are rising, at least the rate at which they are increasing seems to be cooling, after all, it was only a 0.2% rise. Last week it was confirmed the unemployment rate fell to 3.9%, the lowest level since the pandemic began. The impressive rebound in the labour market is also why the Fed is moving towards lifting rates. There are some concerns in the markets the rate hikes from the Fed might tip the economy into recession, which is part of the reason why stocks suffered at the start of the week Could inflation in the UK soar as high as 7%? The UK consumer Prices Index (CPI) rose by 5.1% in the 12 months to November 2021, and the Bank of England has forecast it will hit 6% this spring, when energy bills rise. But America is a timely example that prices can rise much faster than policymakers think. Kevin Brown, savings specialist at ScottishFriendly, says: “Prices started spiking in the US in April and at the time the Fed hoped that rising inflation would be temporary, but it has become clear that intervention is needed to bring it under control. A series of rate rises are expected this year, but it is unclear how long it will take for prices to begin to fall. “A very similar picture is emerging in the UK and all eyes will now be on the latest ONS inflation data for December to see whether the emerging cost of living crisis can be brought under control. “There are fears that inflation could hit 7% here in the UK too which would hurt the thousands of households who are already feeling the pinch and have very little spare change left at the end of the month.” Here’s a handy chart of inflation rates at different countries: The pound has hit a new two-month high against the dollar, as the US currency eases back despite the jump in inflation. Sterling has touched $1.3690, for the first time since 4th November (when it tumbled as the Bank of England surprisingly didn’t raise interest rates, although it did act in December). Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, suggests the pound could have further to climb: It looks as though the markets had already priced in today’s strong US inflation reading so much so that the US dollar in fact continued to push lower against the pound, extending the recent uptrend for cable. GBPUSD has gained more than 3.5% off the December trough, breaking above key resistance at $1.35 with the next major resistance hurdle at $1.38. This week’s price action has seen a break above the medium term descending trendline that has been in play since June. The creation of a higher low and a push above that trendline resistance potentially paves the way for further bullish price action ahead. The price of goods and services in the US continue to rise at rates unseen in decades, jumping 7% in December compared to the same month last year – the seventh consecutive month in which inflation has topped 5%. The news represents a blow to the Biden administration and the Federal Reserve, which until recently have characterized soaring prices as a “transitory” phenomenon brought about by supply chain issues triggered by the pandemic. On Wednesday, the labor department said the consumer price index (CPI) – which measures what consumers pay for a wide range of goods – rose 0.5% last month compared with November and 7% compared with December 2020. Price increases in housing and used cars and trucks were the largest contributors to the inflation rate, with 0.4% and 3.5% increases in price compared with November, respectively. Food prices also continued to increase, though the 0.5% jump in prices is not as high as increases seen in previous months. Disruptions to the global supply chain caused by the pandemic are still causing shortages and driving up the price of goods, from cars to meat and furniture. In November the average price of a used vehicle in the US was $29,011 – 39% more than just 12 months earlier. Here’s the full story: Wall Street has opened higher, as investors reacted calmly to the news that US prices are rising at the faster rate in almost four decades. The Dow Jones industrial average has gained 0.3%, or 114 points, to 36,366 points. The tech-focused Nasdaq has gained 0.5%, having wobbled last week when anxiety over the prospect of US interest rate rises hit markets. Today’s reaction shows that traders had already priced in today’s CPI reading, and are reassured by Fed chair Jerome Powell pledging yesterday not to allow inflation to become entrenched. Housing costs will be crucial in determining whether US inflationary pressures ease this year, says Erik Norland, senior economist at CME Group: Looking inside of the data, housing, which accounts for over a quarter of the index, rose at 5.1% year on year while the main drivers of price increases remained gasoline (+49.6% year on year), transportation (+21.1% YoY), new vehicles (+11.8% YoY) and used cars and trucks (+37.3% YoY). Food and apparel prices have risen at close to 6% YoY. Below average price increases came from medical care, education and recreation whose prices rose between 1.5% and 3.3% during the past year. Looking ahead, used car and truck prices may be close to a peak – they typically rise during periods of economic downturn and fall during expansions. However, housing costs remain a significant upside risk. While rents have risen only around 4-5% during the past year, the cost of buying a home has risen by around 20%. Sometimes in the past purchase prices for homes has lead rent costs by as much as one year. As such, housing costs will be critical to seeing whether or not overall inflation abates in 2022 after 2021’s 7% pace which was the highest in 40 years.” Hinesh Patel, portfolio manager at Quilter Investors, fears that US inflation is becoming ‘stickier’: “While inflation was predominantly feeding through from the automotive, energy and pandemic-hit sectors, this is now moderating which makes the 7% figure all the more startling. Healthcare and housing/rental costs are likely to push higher and means it has now become stickier than first feared. America isn’t the only country facing high inflation, of course, but price pressures are particularly intense in the States. Yesterday, the OECD reported that inflation in its 38-strong group of rich countries rose to 5.5% in November, with the US ahead of the pack with annual CPI of 6.8%. Neil Birrell, chief investment officer at Premier Miton Investors, warns that there’s no immediate respite from rising prices: “At 7.0%, the December CPI number in the US has got to a level that should focus the minds of investors and the Fed on a possible rate rise in March. It’s likely that there will be more upward pressure coming from supply side bottlenecks this month and maybe next, so there is no immediate respite. The inflation spike is being felt in most regions, although China and Japan are notable exceptions, and it will stay top of the agenda for a couple of months yet.” Seema Shah, Chief Strategist at Principal Global Investors, also thinks US inflation could have peaked -- but at a painfully high level. “Inflation at 7% is no joke. It’s the highest annual CPI number since 1982 and driven not by energy prices, but by just about everything else. Yet, December’s number could mark the peak for annual inflation readings. Not only are the base effects starting to fall out of the annual comparisons, but there are growing signs of supply strains easing, with freight rates coming down, delivery times shortening, and backlogs reducing. This should mean that the most acute price pressures start to fall back in coming months, suggesting a more digestible run of CPI readings are in the offing in the coming quarters. “For the Fed however, a 7% figure will inevitably make for uncomfortable reading. Chair Powell believes that there is no need to rush to get back to neutral, but today’s number will increase pressure on the Fed to get monetary policy tightening off the starting block.” The jump in US inflation underlines the pressure on America’s central bank, the US Federal Reserve, to start raising interest rates in the coming months Richard Flynn, Managing Director at Charles Schwab UK, explains: Today’s rise in the rate of inflation falls within investors’ expectations. It’s clear that both the virus and the recent inflation surge have put a big dent in measures of consumer confidence. There are rampant fears of stagflation akin to the 1970s, but the good news for now is that unemployment is not on the rise. Nevertheless, assuming no significant hit to economic activity from Omicron, nor a surprise-retreat in inflation, the Fed may come under pressure to tighten monetary policy as we head further into 2022. Based on history, it’s not the timing of the first-rate hike that matters, it’s the trajectory and speed once rate hikes begin.” US inflation may have peaked at 7% in December, suggests Paul Ashworth, Chief US Economist at Capital Economics. But he also cautions that pandemic disruption, bad weather, and the pick-up in oil prices will all push up the cost of living this month. With crude oil prices rebounding substantially in recent days, gasoline prices will rise again in the January CPI. Food prices increased by a slightly more modest 0.5% m/m in December, but that relief may be temporary too. The latest media reports of empty grocery store shelves in the Northeast - caused by Omicron staff absenteeism and the disruption from winter storms - points to renewed upward pressure on food prices. Excluding food and energy, core prices increased by a stiff 0.6% m/m. Used vehicle prices increased by 3.5% m/m and new vehicle prices increased by 1.0% m/m. Ashworth also warns that the price pressures from supply chain problems, such as semiconductor shortages, may not ease soon. They have led to shortages of new cars, pushing up costs of used autos and trucks by 3.5% in December, and 37.3% over the last year. Ashworth adds: Clothing prices increased by 1.7% m/m, as the knock-on impact from the earlier delta-linked disruption to production in Asia and West Coast port congestion continued. More recent Omicron-linked staff absences probably explain the 2.7% m/m increase in air fares and the 1.2% m/m increase in lodging away from home. Here’s a great breakdown of the steep price rises pushing US inflation higher, from Washington Post’s Heather Long. More snap reaction to the news that US consumer prices are rising at their steepest rate since 1982: Shelter (housing costs), and used cars and trucks were the largest contributors to the jump in US inflation last month, the Labor Department says. Food prices also kept rising, up another 0.5% in December. Household furnishings and operations, apparel, new vehicles, and medical care all increased in December, the inflation report says. But....the energy index declined in December, ending a long series of increases. It dropped by 0.4% last month, as the indexes for gasoline and natural gas both decreased. That could bring some relief to motorists. But over the last 12 months, energy prices have surged 29.3%, while food prices have jumped 6.3%. Core inflation in the US, which strips out food and energy, rose by 5.5% per year in December - as Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, shows: Just in: US inflation has jumped to 7% as the cost of living squeeze in America intensified. Consumer prices rose by 0.5% in December along, lifting the annual inflation rate to 7.0%. That’s the highest reading since June 1982, during Ronald Reagan’s first term as US president. More to follow! The head of the International Energy Agency has accused Russia of undermining gas supplies to Europe, at a time when “geopolitical tensions” between Moscow and the West are rising. Fatih Birol said today that the Paris-based energy watchdog believes Russia is contributing to Europe’s gas shortage, which pushed up wholesale prices to record levels last year. Birol argued that Russia could increase deliveries to Europe by at least one-third through abundant spare capacity. Russia, though, has denied using gas as a lever over the West, at a time when tensions over Ukraine have risen. Reuters has the details: “We believe there are strong elements of tightness in Europe’s gas markets due to Russia’s behaviour,” Birol told reporters, noting “today’s low Russian gas flows to Europe coincide with heightened geopolitical tensions over Ukraine”. Russian gas company Gazprom reduced exports to Europe by 25% year-on-year in the fourth quarter of 2021 despite high market prices and reduced spot sales while other exporters boosted them, Birol said. “The current storage deficit in the European Union is largely due to Gazprom,” he added. “The low levels of storage in company’s EU-based facilities account for half of the EU storage deficit although Gazprom facilities only constitute 10% of the EU’s total storage capacity.” Birol also suggested that the high energy prices and consumer pain created by the gas crunch makes the case for future mandatory storage quotas for European companies. Whitbread, the owner of the Premier Inn hotel chain, is warning that it expects cost inflation for the hospitality sector to reach between 7% and 8% over the coming months. Higher labour costs, rising energy bills and increased construction costs for its new hotels are putting pressure on the FTSE 100 company, according to Whitbread’s chief executive, Alison Brittain. The group said it expected to offset these increased costs through charging higher rates for rooms in its 800 Premier Inn hotels, as well as through cost efficiencies and by growing its estate. The company, which also owns restaurant chains including Beefeater, Bar + Block, and Brewers Fayre, said higher levels of inflation would affect about £1.4bn of its cost base until April 2023. Here’s the full story: Shares in Whitbread have nudged a little higher today, up 0.4%, and on track to close at a two-month high. Neil Wilson of Markets.com says: Whitbread shares were steady after it reported a solid Q3 marked by ‘resilience’ to Omicron. Total UK sales rose 3.1% vs last year, but lockdowns are wrecking German occupancy rates, which have declined to 36% in the last 6 weeks from 60% in the third quarter. Whitbread faces “a tough gig” until more corporate travel returns, and weddings, and stag and hen dos really pick up properly, he adds. One third of UK consumers plan to reduce their household spending this year as inflation eats into their income. A survey of 3,000 UK consumers found that 32% expect to cut back on their household spending in 2022, while just 9% plan to spend more. With prices of staple goods and services such as food and energy rising, people are planning to cut discretionary spending such as eating out (55%), clothing (50%) and takeaways (49%). A third plan to spend less on holidays, while 26% aim to cut back on technology. The survey also found that 26% of consumers hadn’t managed to save during the pandemic - a reminder that not everyone put money aside during lockdowns. Linda Ellett, head of consumer markets, leisure and retail at KPMG UK, said the cost-of-living squeeze is hitting many households: “Faced with inflationary pressures, some businesses are mulling upping their prices, or have done so. But they will be mindful that they are operating in a marketplace where consumers are themselves having to tighten the purse strings. “The competition for share of wallet in 2022 is heating up. It’s vital that businesses double-down on their productivity, on the value and efficiency of their supply chain, and assess whether new products or offers can give them an edge in this landscape.” The US competition watchdog can proceed with a breakup lawsuit against Facebook’s owner, a federal judge has ruled. Mark Zuckerberg’s Meta, the parent of Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp, had asked a court to dismiss an antitrust complaint brought by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) for the second time. However, Judge James Boasberg said on Tuesday that the FTC’s revised lawsuit should be allowed to proceed. Boasberg, of the US District Court for the District of Columbia, wrote: “Ultimately, whether the FTC will be able to prove its case and prevail at summary judgment and trial is anyone’s guess. The court declines to engage in such speculation and simply concludes that at this motion-to-dismiss stage, where the FTC’s allegations are treated as true, the agency has stated a plausible claim for relief.” More here: Matt Britzman, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, says Whitbread is making a ‘continued recovery’ despite the impact of Omicron, as price rises loom: It’ll come as welcome news to investors that Omicron doesn’t look to be having a major impact on demand for hotel rooms in the UK. Fresh testing requirements for overseas travel is likely to have helped here, with would be travellers forced to find a break closer to home. The same can’t be said for the German hotels, which are being hit hard by restrictions and saw occupancy fall to 36% in the 6 weeks to 6 January. For now though, the region only makes up a very small part of the business, but it’s where a lot of the group’s growth prospects are pinned. Food and beverage sales haven’t been quite as resilient, with restrictions across Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland acting as headwinds. New menus and marketing strategies are being deployed in an attempt to breathe new life into this part of the business– it remains to be seen whether that’ll be enough to get back on track. Inflation across the wider sector is expected to pick up into 2022, which’ll provide a challenge for many businesses and Whitbread won’t be immune. The company is hoping to be able to offset the majority of this with cost savings and pricing, and that’s where having a strong brand helps.” Rising wages and energy costs are both key factors pushing up Whitbread’s costs, which could lead to prices at its Premier Inn hotels increasing this year (see earlier post). The FT has a good take: The majority of the impact will come from higher wage costs, said chief executive Alison Brittain, as hospitality businesses fight to attract and retain staff, many of whom left the sector due to uncertainty around the return of restrictions and lockdowns. Whitbread raised employee wages by 5 per cent in October and Brittain said that for staff on hourly rates, the company “probably will go again on pay as we come into the spring”. She also flagged “highly inflationary” energy bills and rising construction costs as other major sources of pressure. Whitbread also hopes that cost cuts and new openings will mitigate sector inflation of 7-8% this year, alongside higher room rates. More here. In a busy morning for retail news, homewares and furniture retailer Dunelm has also lifted its profit forecasts. Dunelm reported that it had a record quarter with strong performance across all channels. Sales grew 13% in the 13 weeks to Christmas Day, and were 26% higher than pre-pandemic levels in 2019. Dunelm had benefitted from the boom in online shopping since Covid-19. Digital sales have doubled compared to two years ago, while it also saw “particularly encouraging” store growth. Chief executive Nick Wilkinson said Dunelm’s “fantastic colleagues and supplier partners” had kept customers served despite the challenges of Covid and industry-wide supply chain disruption Wilkinson adds: “Whilst there are several macro uncertainties to be navigated, we feel well placed to continue to deliver profitable growth across all channels and grow market share as the 1st choice for home for UK homelovers.” In the City, the FTSE 100 index has hit its highest level in almost two years. The blue-chip index hit 7551 points this morning, up 0.8%, its highest level since late January 2020 -- before the pandemic hit global markets. Mining stocks are leading the risers, with Anglo American (+3.8%), Antofagasta (+3.5%) and BHP Group (+3.5%) benefitting from optimism over the global recovery. The jump in the oil price has also lifted energy producers. Investors look to be regaining their confidence after a choppy start to 2022, explains Russ Mould, investment director at AJ Bell: “Driving confidence were remarks by Federal Reserve chairman Jay Powell that the central bank would do everything it could to stop inflation running out of control. The top FTSE 100 six risers were all metal producers, and this sector is a bellwether for global economic activity. “Risk appetite appears to have returned given how more stodgy companies like BT, Reckitt Benckiser and Imperial Brands were among the fallers on the FTSE. Instead, investors were more interested in bidding up some of the tech plays which have been beaten up recently, including Scottish Mortgage. “Also in vogue were a slew of consumer-facing companies riding high after upbeat trading statements. These included Sainsbury’s which upgraded its profit guidance, and Whitbread which said it continued to trade ahead of the market.” The FTSE 100 is still below its record high of 7903 points set in 2018, unlike the US and major European indices which hit record highs last year. Estate agents group Savills has seen ‘extraordinarily strong’ demand in recent weeks, as it lifts its profit forecasts this morning. Savills told the City this morning that its full year performance will be “very significantly ahead” of expectations, including a boom in expensive homes. Since the trading update on 9th November 2021, the Group has experienced an extraordinarily strong final trading period, particularly in the UK and Asia Pacific regions alongside improved performances in Continental Europe and the Middle East, and North America; both of which have more than eliminated the losses of 2020. Savills says it completed much more commercial capital transactions and prime residential (high-end) sales than expected, including in London. The UK prime residential market continued to perform exceptionally strongly through the last quarter and volumes in the Prime Central London market clearly began to improve. Currently there is a definite shortage of sale stock, so despite outperformance in 2021, our expectation of a moderation of activity in 2022 remains intact. Oil is heading back towards multi-year highs this morning, in another sign of inflationary pressures. Brent crude, the international benchmark sourced from the North Sea, has risen to $84.20 per barrel, approaching the three-year high over $86/barrel set last October. US crude is approaching $82/barrel - it hit seven-year highs last autumn, driven by rising demand, and the slow production increases coordinated by the Opec+ group. The boss of the UK’s largest energy supplier has said rocketing energy prices, which are adding to the soaring cost of living for British households, could last for as long as two years, my colleague Joanna Partridge writes. Chris O’Shea, the chief executive of British Gas owner Centrica, said the energy market “suggests that high gas prices will be here for the next 18 months to two years”. O’Shea told the BBC there was no reason to think that gas prices would start to fall again “any time soon”. The rising global demand for gas is partly being driven by the energy transition, according to O’Shea, as countries move away from reliance on coal and oil. “As we move towards net zero, gas is a big transition fuel, so as you turn off coal-fired power stations in other countries, maybe there is more demand for gas,” O’Shea said. “There isn’t an abundance of gas that you can just turn on quickly, so I can’t say that this will be done in six months, or nine months, or a year.” However, O’Shea said he did not believe that increasing the domestic supply of gas from the North Sea would help to solve the energy crisis. “I’m not sure an increase in UK supply would have brought the price down from £3 a therm, as it was in December, from 50p as it was a year ago. Here’s the full story: JD Sports Fashion has joined Sainsbury’s in lifting its full-year profit forecast ahead of market expectations, after seeing strong sale of sportswear brands. JD saw from robust demand during the Black Friday and Christmas period, and also benefitted from America’s fiscal stimulus package, which it estimates contributed up to £100m of profits. Following “sustained positive” consumer demand, JD now expects pre-tax profit of at least £875m in the year to 29 January 2022, ahead of current market expectations of £810m. CEO Peter Cowgill has joined the chorus of politicians and business leaders urging chancellor Rishi Sunak to rethink looming tax rises, the Evening Standard reports. Cowgill told the Standard: “The imposition on businesses this year, at a time when you’ve got such wage inflation in any event, is pretty strong. You’ve got the imposition of national insurance and you’ve got the increase in corporation tax as well. That impacts on retained profits for investment. “I would certainly question it, very much so” Premier Inns owner Whitbread has warned that cost inflation could hit 8% in the coming year. Whitbread, which also runs pub chains including Beefeater and Brewers Fayre, says that costs are expected to be higher than average. It currently expects sector inflation rate in the year to April 2023 to run at around 7-8%. Whitbread expects to ‘largely offset’ this inflation surge, through cost efficiencies, estate growth and higher prices (average room rates) -- suggesting consumers will see an impact. Hospitality firms have been hit by a surge of costs in recent months, including higher energy bills and supplies, and rising wages. In a third-quarter trading update, chief executive Alison Brittain said Whitbread achieved a “strong performance” in the UK in the last quarter, but that conditions were challenging in the pub and restaurant sector: High levels of leisure demand and improving business demand helped maintain like-for-like accommodation sales ahead of pre COVID-19 levels. UK accommodation sales remained resilient in December, albeit softening as we moved through the month and into the festive period as a result of the onset of the Omicron COVID-19 variant. Whilst our hotel performance was excellent, the value pub and restaurant sector in which we operate remains more challenging. Whitbread also says it has seen “resilient trading” in the UK despite the onset of the Omicron COVID-19 variant. Total UK accommodation sales grew 5.1% in the last six weeks, compared to pre-pandemic levels. But total food and beverage sales are down 17.2% in the six weeks to 6th January, with recent weeks “adversely impacted by the Omicron variant and increased Government restrictions on eating-out in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland”, it adds. Richard Lim, CEO at Retail Economics, says Sainsbury’s benefitted from customers prioritising Christmas get-togethers despite rising anxieties about the virus. The wave of cancellations that hit hospitality firms last month also helped, as Omicron fears led people to stay (and eat) at home. Food sales held up well against the previous year (given the restrictions in 2020) as more family gatherings took place and consumers indulged across premium lines. “To ensure a covid-free Christmas, many people limited their social interactions in the run-up the big day, boosting home-cooked meals to the detriment of the hospitality sector. This displacement of spending from bars, restaurants and pubs supported food sales over the period. “The retailer was also much better placed to cope with the surge in online grocery sales having invested heavily to boost capacity and improve efficiency over the last couple of years. A wave of new online grocery shoppers helped almost double sales on 2019 levels.” Sainsbury’s is in a good position to ride out rising inflation, predicts Zoe Gillespie, investment manager at Brewin Dolphin: “UK supermarkets faced tough comparisons against Christmas 2020, when lockdown caused a boom in food and drink sales, but the spread of the Omicron variant saw consumers stay away from bars and restaurants last year as well. Sainsbury’s is continuing to deliver strong results on the back of the range of measures it took to improve business performance. Encouragingly, profit guidance has been lifted, cost savings are helping to stave off the effects of increased inflation, and debt reduction is ahead of schedule. Even the supermarket’s banking operation is seeing a turnaround in fortunes. Sainsbury’s is in a good position and that is being reflected in its increased market share and a share price that is up more than 50% since the very beginning of the pandemic – although, it is still off recent peaks. While the spectre of inflation remains, Sainsbury’s has the ability to manage this better than many other businesses.” British supermarket group Sainsbury’s profits this year will beat expectations, after stronger-than-expected food sales over Christmas Sainsbury’s raised its full-year profit forecast for the year to April this morning, saying that it had seen strong sales in the crucial Christmas period. Sainsbury’s reported that stronger than expected grocery volumes, driven in part by increased in-home grocery consumption, helped to offset the jump in cost inflation. Group sales in the last quarter didn’t match last year, when the pandemic led to a boom at grocers. Total retail sales (excluding fuel) were down 5.3% in the last 16 weeks. Grocery sales dropped 1.1% in the quarter, but did grow 0.1% in the six-week Christmas period, or by 0.8% if you account for Sainsbury’s closing its stores on Boxing Day. General Merchandise and Clothing sales struggled, down year-on-year in the last quarter. Sainsbury’s now expects to report underlying profit before tax of at least £720m in the financial year to March 2022. That’s up from previous guidance of “at least” £660m, and an improvement on the £356m a year ago. Sainsbury’s CEO Simon Roberts said it was challenging to ensure that products were available for Christmas, given the supply chain problems: “We were bold in our plan for product, value, innovation and service and delivered volume growth ahead of the market. We delivered our best value food this Christmas, launched our lowest ever priced Christmas dinner heading into the key Christmas shopping week and we had our biggest ever New Year. Customers also treated themselves and new Taste the Difference products in party food, desserts, wines and spirits were really popular and we had record sales of champagne and sparkling wines. Offering great value will be more important than ever this year and we have just launched our bold new Sainsbury’s Quality Aldi Price Match campaign, which targets 150 fresh products that customers buy most often. Shares in Sainsbury’s have jumped almost 2%. Centrica chief Chris O’Shea also questioned whether energy producers, who have benefitted from the surge in wholesale prices, should face a windfall tax. The Labour party have proposed a £1.2bn levy on North Sea oil and gas producers, as part of a package to help households and businesses with soaring bills. O’Shea argues that the Treasury will already benefit from the jump in earnings: If their profits are higher, they’ll be paying more tax. That will go into the government coffers. So there will be a tax windfall for this. And he suggests that change to the tax regime could deter investment: If your reaction to anything is to suddenly change the tax regime, then the only question I would say is, is that consistent with a long-term stable investment framework. Is that consistent with a long-term stable solution, because that’s what need to ensure this never happens again. Energy producers are certainly benefitting from the jump in energy prices, though. Last November, BP CEO Bernard Looney said that soaring global commodity prices have made his energy major a “cash machine”, as it lifted its share buyback programme thanks to a sharp rise in quarterly profits. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The UK’s energy crisis could last for two years, Centrica chief executive Chris O’Shea has warned, in a sign that the cost of living squeeze will intensify. Speaking to the BBC, O’Shea warned that gas prices won’t fall soon, as consumers brace for bills to jump by around 50% this spring. O’Shea, whose firm owns British Gas, the UK’s biggest energy supplier, warned that the energy squeeze will not be short-lived, so the government needs to provide targeted help to those who will suffer most. “The market suggests the high gas prices will be here for the next 18 months to two years.” There’s no reason to think that energy prices will come down anytime soon. Wholesale gas price soared last year, hitting record highs towards the end of 2021. Although they have dropped back since, prices are around four times higher than a year ago. O’Shea says the high demand for gas was partly being driven by a move away from coal and oil -- creating rising demand for gas and a scramble for supplies. “As we move towards net zero, gas is a big transition fuel. “And so as you turn off coal-fired power stations in other countries, there isn’t an abundance of gas that you can just turn on quickly.” But he doesn’t believe boosting supply from the North Sea as a domestic solution would have helped: “We bring gas in from the United States, from Norway, from Europe, from Qatar, from other places. So we’re not in a position to simply have the UK as an isolated energy market. We are part of a global market.” Bills are expected to jump by up to £700 in April after Ofgem next reviews the UK’s energy cap, taking the annual cost of electricity and gas for households on a supplier’s default tariff to £2,000, compared with £1,300 at present. O’Shea says the government can take three steps to help: Defer the cost incurred by surviving suppliers from taking on customers of the many companies that have gone bust, rather than it be added to upcoming bills. Take the 5% VAT off energy temporarily or permanently. Move levies charged to fund a green transition from bills to general taxation. Those moves, he claims, could be implemented quickly: “And that would take care of half of the price rise. And then you could get a further relief targeted to those households that needed most.” Pressure is mounting on the government to act, with Ofgem due to announce the price cap next month. Last week, Liberal Democrat leader Sir Ed Davey has called for the Warm Home Discount scheme, which helps people receiving some benefits, to be expanded. Davey argue that the Warm Home Discount should be more than doubled, from £140 to £300, and allow many more people to qualify. O’Shea, though, argues that the current design of the Warm Home Discount scheme would see relief for some result in rises in everyone else’s bills. You can read the full story here: BBC: British Gas owner Centrica warns high energy bills to last two years The cost of living squeeze means that UK households have suffered the sharpest fall in the amount of cash they have available to spend for almost eight years, as high inflation and rising energy bills hit households. According to a report by the insurer Scottish Widows, increasing living costs at the end of last year hit people’s pockets and led to the steepest decline in cash availability since the start of 2014. It said people were increasingly pessimistic about their future finances in 2022, according to the latest reading from its quarterly household finance index. The agenda 10am GMT: Eurozone industrial production for November 1.30pm GMT: US CPI inflation for December 3.30pm GMT: EIA weekly US oil inventory figuresA Benin bronze in the collection of a Newcastle museum is to be proactively returned to Nigeria, the latest in a number of repatriations that ratchet up pressure on the British Museum to follow suit. Bosses of the Great North Museum: Hancock announced that it had recently been established that a brass stave with a distinctive bird finial had been looted from Benin City by the British military in 1897. It was taken during the ugly “punitive expedition” in which a palace and much of the ancient city was destroyed. The bronzes, about 4,500 plaques, statues and other objects actually made from a brass alloy, were later auctioned off to defray the expedition costs. They are in museum collections across the world and momentum has been growing for institutions to voluntarily repatriate them. On Wednesday it was announced the Newcastle museum would do that, following the example of institutions including Jesus College, Cambridge and the University of Aberdeen by sending back the bronze. Vee Pollock, dean of culture and the creative arts at Newcastle University, which has stewardship of the collections, said they had “no hesitation” in making the decision. “There is no real question for us that the right thing to do was to offer its return.” The distinctive object, currently on display at the museum, was acquired in 1951 after the Wellcome Historical Medical Museum dispersed non-medical objects from its collection. The original accession cards for the objects were recently digitised, said Pollock. “We were able to trace the provenance, which categorically let us know that it was part of the punitive expedition.” Pollock said the decision was a significant one but a continuation of work it had been doing since the early 2000s, when the museum returned human remains to New Zealand and Australia. In this instance the evidence said categorically that the object was taken illegally “and in circumstances that I doubt any would condone”. Keith Merrin, the director of Tyne &amp; Wear Archives &amp; Museums, said returning the stave was the right thing to do. “Repatriation can be a powerful cultural, spiritual and symbolic act which recognises the wrongs of the past and restores some sense of justice,” he said. The return is part of the museum’s wider repatriation and decolonisation policy. The kingdom of Benin, in what is now southern Nigeria and not to be confused with the modern-day country of Benin, was one of the most important and powerful pre-colonial states of west Africa. Germany has said it will this year hand back to Nigeria Benin bronzes in its public collections. The Smithsonian in Washington has also committed to repatriation. All of which adds pressure on the British Museum, home to the most famous collection of Benin bronzes – about 900 – in London. It has not agreed to return the bronzes but is a member of the Benin Dialogue Group. A central objective of the group is to establish a new museum in Benin City to allow “the most comprehensive display in the world of Benin bronzes”. The Ghanaian-British architect Sir David Adjaye has designed it. A spokesperson for the British Museum said: “We believe the strength and public value of the British Museum collection resides in its breadth and depth, allowing millions of visitors every year an understanding of the cultures of the world and how they interconnect over time – whether through trade, migration, conquest, or peaceful exchange. “The museum understands and recognises the significance of the issues surrounding the return of objects and works with communities, colleagues and museums across the globe to share the collection as widely as possible.”Finally we got some kind of explanation from the prime minister for his boozy parties at Downing Street. It turns out that Boris Johnson wants us to believe that Boris Johnson thinks that Boris Johnson is catatonically stupid. And that the British public are equally half-witted enough to believe any old lies he happens to come up with. There’s just one problem with this. Boris may be dim, but he’s not that dim. And the rest of us have long since learned to see through his mendacity. This was the prime minister’s questions at which Johnson finally ran out of road. An outright denial that he had been at the party on 20 May 2020 would no longer keep him out of trouble as there was anecdotal evidence he was there. So all that was left to him was to come up with the best possible excuse and hope it would buy off a few of the more gullible Tory MPs. Only the best possible excuse turned out to be a crock of total shit. Here’s how it was, said Johnson, as he made a short statement to the Commons. He recognised the sacrifices the country had made and he wanted to apologise for having got pissed with No 10 staff in his own back garden. The thing was that he had just not realised the party was a party. When the email was sent – which he definitely had not read – inviting everyone to enjoy the sunshine and to bring your own booze, the last thing he had imagined was that a party was about to take place. Even though 60 staffers had made that assumption, realised it was against the law and decided to stay away. So anyway, he and his then fiancee – Carrie always came along to work meetings – coincidentally turned up at the party that wasn’t a party, even though they hadn’t seen the invite, and stayed for 25 minutes just because it seemed rude not to. He discussed a few work matters before going back to his flat and remembered thinking how brilliant it was that so many people were staying late to work outdoors over a few bevvies. And he hadn’t even thought the party was a party when he saw the staff clearing up the empties from the flower bed the following morning. Indeed it was only when Dominic Cummings had mentioned last week that the party might have actually have been a party that it occurred to him the party could have been a party after all. He now bitterly regretted everything – most of all, getting caught – and all he was asking was that people gave him a bit of wriggle room before Sue Gray submitted the findings to her investigation. Hopefully she would be as gullible as he imagined everyone else to be. None of which cut any ice with Keir Starmer. This PMQs may have seemed like the most open of goals for the Labour leader but he still needed to stick the ball in the net in front of a packed Commons’ chamber. Which he did six times. Johnson was pathetic: after months of denial, was this the best he could come up with? A dog ate my homework excuse would be less insulting. The prime minister had attended the party. He had broken lockdown rules. He had misled parliament when he had said how sickened he was about other No 10 parties. The country thought he was a pathological liar. He needed to resign. Boris visibly crumpled. Unlike Prince Andrew, he knew what it was like to sweat. Back in No 10 he had managed to convince himself that his feeble explanation might be enough to get him off the hook. After all, he had a long history of getting out of tight situations by lying through his teeth. But now he could feel his optimism seeping away. He was fooling no one. Not even himself. He tugged at his toddler haircut in desperation. His eyes folded in on themselves to bloodshot pinpricks. The king of bullshitters was all out of ideas. Even he could see how abject his lies were. He willed himself not to exist. To be elsewhere. Somewhere he wouldn’t be exposed to the starkness of his own self-hatred. His voice became strangely disconnected. Like an automaton. Without effect. He could only express his regret at the way events had panned out. A narcissist can’t do empathy and can only feel sorry for himself. And this was ultimately his tragedy. His fall from grace. He had never felt so exposed. Just wait for Sue Gray. Hope that she dematerialises. Rishi Sunak had made himself scarce in Devon. “I’m right behind you, prime minister. 200 miles behind you.” The rest of the cabinet stared impassively at the floor, their expressions hidden behind their masks. They too would rather have been anywhere but the Commons. This was also their humiliation. They were the ones who had put a man transparently unfit to be prime minister into No 10. They knew what Boris was like but hadn’t cared. His incompetence and corruption was also theirs. The Tory backbenchers were also out of sorts. No one could bring themselves to actually defend their leader; but neither did they dare attack him. His immorality cast a toxic pall over proceedings. Boris was the turd that would not flush and which no one dared mention. So instead they asked him about irrelevant details of constituency business. A county motto. It was all somewhat surreal. It was left to Labour’s Chris Bryant to get the last word. How stupid did he think we all were? Did he really imagine even a 10-year-old thinking he would get away with lines like that? And would it yet again be people, like Allegra Stratton, who had worked for Boris that would end up losing their jobs? Johnson shrugged, still a semi-absentee observer of his own downfall. Needs must. If that’s what it took for him to survive. It was a fight to the death. Whose exactly would soon become clear. Join our journalists for a Guardian Live online event on the No 10 lockdown party and Boris Johnson’s future on Wednesday 19 January. Book hereHobart’s role on previous Ashes tours was often to put a chill into English cricketers during their final tour game before being plunged into the tropical heat of the Gabba in Queensland like lobsters being dropped into a pot of boiling water. This time, however, after Perth ruled itself out through a hard Covid border, the Bellerive Oval hosts the Ashes denouement that begins on Friday. A boutique ground with views of the spectacular Derwent estuary, it has staged 13 Tests since its first in 1989 but none between Australia and England. Tim Paine, the local favourite who lost the Test captaincy before the series, will be heartbroken to miss this slice of history. An extra twist, and one that may well see a few more cable-knits worn, is that the match is also a second day-night affair of the series in order to maintain the same primetime broadcast hours in the eastern states as had Western Australia not held firm on its seclusion. And if a reminder is needed, Australia’s record in pink-ball home Tests after their victory in Adelaide now reads played nine, won nine. Whether an upset can follow England’s rearguard draw in Sydney or not, the 3-0 scoreline means their tour will struggle to look polished or rolled in glitter come the end. Chris Silverwood, the head coach, is back on site after recovering from Covid-19 and received loyal support from Joe Root on Wednesday but it remains to be seen how far this goes. The status quo held after a 4-0 defeat four years ago but Root’s captaincy was in its infancy and Trevor Bayliss, Silverwood’s predecessor, was locked into the World Cup project. Even factoring in the pandemic, change feels far likelier this time. Either way, England must harness plenty of what they did well last week even if they slightly hobble into the fifth Test with niggles, collective fatigue and one confirmed absence in the shape of Jos Buttler. His tour was ended with a broken left index finger and a bad one too, with the stomachs of teammates said to have turned when he had a pain-killing injection directly into the busted digit before bravely walking out to bat. In comes Sam Billings behind the stumps for a surprise Test debut by dint of his being in the country playing Twenty20 cricket and cap No 700. The 30-year-old brings infectious energy and an orthodox batting technique but it is worth noting he has kept in just one first-class match for Kent in the past three years, the sum total of 95.3 overs across two innings versus Leicestershire at the end of the summer. There is an expectation that, having stumped up a reported A$5m to host, Tasmania isn’t in the market for such a quick game either and so a pitch that was still green two days out is still tipped to start flat. As such, Billings may well see his endurance and concentration significantly tested, as well as the glovework that has been the subject of assiduous drills from James Foster, the designated coach on tour. Haseeb Hameed appeared to be struggling with a rib issue at training on Wednesday but, more acutely, his run of six successive single figure scores means he needs withdrawing from the frontline regardless. Rory Burns now has the chance to prove he was dropped too soon and, surprisingly given the musical chairs of the past few years, this looks to be the first time he has opened alongside Zak Crawley in Test cricket. Further injury clouds hung over Ben Stokes and Jonny Bairstow but their respective side and thumb problems were overcome so impressively in Sydney as to suggest they will likely go again. Root was still preaching caution here, however, stressing the need for players to be “fit to perform” not simply fit to take the field. Stokes will definitely be unable to bowl, however, which, going by selections during the summer, may mean Jack Leach has to make way for an extra seamer. To do so after producing his best performance on tour – four wickets and a defiant 77-minute vigil with the bat – would rather sum up the left-arm spinner’s fortunes. In terms of the seam attack, Mark Wood appears likely to play a third successive Test match, raising yet more eyebrows as to why he was rested in Adelaide after just 25.1 overs in Brisbane when the series was live. But two pairs of fresh legs may still come in and, if so, this means one of Jimmy Anderson or Stuart Broad has played their final Test match in Australia, even if both say they want to plough on to the Caribbean. Chris Woakes and Ollie Robinson are the two likeliest to be considered and in the case of the latter it comes after a breather that might not have been required so early were he simply in better physical shape. Given Mitchell Starc bowls 10mph quicker and is about to play his fifth Test in a row, Root said he hopes Robinson – and English county seamers more generally – learn “serious lessons” about what is required at this level. Australia’s headaches are, once again, good ones after Usman Khawaja surely secured his spot with those magical twin centuries at the SCG. If Travis Head returns at No 5 after his recent bout of Covid, Khawaja may replace Marcus Harris at opener. Ultimately only one team is feeling the heat in chilly Hobart.Joe Root has thrown his support behind Chris Silverwood, insisting the embattled head coach should keep his job as England prepare for “one last push” to end their failed Ashes campaign with a win. After missing the drawn fourth Test in Sydney with Covid-19, Silverwood has rejoined the tour for Friday’s fifth instalment in Hobart but at 3-0 down finds his position under review for a winter that has already seen the goal of winning the T20 World Cup end with a semi-final defeat by New Zealand. Tom Harrison, the ECB’s chief executive, and Ashley Giles, the managing director of England men’s cricket, are both on tour and must now decide whether these two disappointments are mitigated by the strains of the pandemic. Root, who will discuss his own future as captain after a series finale in which Sam Billings appears likely to make his Test debut, appears to think they are. Asked if he would like Silverwood to remain in place for the tour of the Caribbean in March, Root replied: “Yes I would. It was a difficult week for the group of players with him not being around and it must have been very difficult for him. “The performances we put in during the first three games, I feel we let him and the coaches down to a degree. We’ve not played anywhere near the level we’re capable of. It’s a chance to do that this week.” On Silverwood’s qualities, Root said: “I think he’s very calm, he has the respect of the guys and he’s got a desperation to see everyone do well or up-skill the players as best he can. I think he’s had a very difficult time of it with the environments we’ve been living in, trying to manage winning matches with bubble environments away from home, and multi-format players trying to prepare for an Ashes and a World Cup. It’s very difficult. “For a long time we’ve not been able to put our best teams out because we’ve been constantly trying to make sure from a mental wellbeing point of view everyone is looked after properly, because of the schedule we’ve dealt with over two years.” The endorsement notably differs from Root’s opposite number, Pat Cummins, who despite Australia’s T20 World Cup and Ashes wins recently insisted head coach Justin Langer’s expiring contract would not be discussed until the end of the series. Trevor Bayliss, the former England head coach, is favourite to succeed him. Root looked exhausted at the end of the Sydney Test but said he will strive for “one last push” in Tasmania. Before then comes a decision whether to enter next month’s Indian Premier League’s “mega-auction”, with paperwork due to be submitted by the end of the week. The 31-year-old has spurned previous editions of the competition but appears tempted. “Time is ticking but I have a lot to weigh up,” Root said. “Will it have a negative impact on me playing Test cricket? If I don’t think so then I will put myself in the auction. But I will never do anything that will detract from playing Test cricket for England. It is so important to make sure that is the priority for me and other players as well.”With MPs and the leader of the opposition calling for Boris Johnson to resign, speculation about who may take over is rife. Here are some potential runners and riders should the prime minister resign or be forced out. Liz Truss Despite being a former remainer, the 46-year-old foreign secretary is the darling of the Conservative grassroots, regularly topping the poll of party members carried out by website Conservative Home. Fans love her rhetoric, which is heavy on liberty, free trade and patriotism, and credit her with signing a slew of post-Brexit trade deals. She has a carefully honed public image, helped by lavish use of taxpayer-funded government photographers – including recently having herself pictured Margaret Thatcher-style, atop a tank. Rishi Sunak The chancellor, 41, was for some time regarded as the frontrunner to replace Johnson but his popularity has slipped of late among the Tory members who will make the final decision. Sunak is the son of Indian immigrants from east Africa – a doctor and a pharmacist – who sent him to Winchester, the prestigious private school. He worked in the City before entering politics and takes a markedly different economic approach to Johnson, favouring lower taxes and tougher public spending restraint. Sunak was criticised recently for being in California as businesses were crying out for help when the Omicron coronavirus wave sent restaurant and pub bookings plunging. Jeremy Hunt The foreign secretary, 55, lost out to Johnson in the 2019 leadership contest by a clear margin but is still regarded as a potential contender if the job falls vacant again. Returned to the backbenches by Johnson, he has been scrupulously loyal, using his experience as a former health secretary to chair the health select committee. His South West Surrey constituency is among those being targeted by the Liberal Democrats, who believe traditional Tory “blue wall” voters are turned off by Johnson’s rule-breaking. By contrast, Hunt would be regarded as a safe pair of hands, though some colleagues fear he lacks political pizzazz. Priti Patel The home secretary is a controversial figures to many but her right-leaning views and very obviously tough line on immigration make her appealing to many among the Tory membership, as well as to like-minded MPs. An MP since 2010, Patel, 49, has held a series of ministerial posts but faced a two-year exile from the frontbench after being forced to resign as international development secretary for having unofficial meetings with Israeli officials. Brought back as home secretary by Johnson, he expended political capital keeping her in the job even after an official report concluded she had bullied officials. Paradoxically, while she in an immigration hardliner, the fact Patel has overseen a period in which there has been much coverage of unofficial Channel crossings by refugees and migrants could count against her. Sajid Javid The chancellor turned health secretary came a fairly distant fourth in the race to succeed Theresa May but is likely to fancy his chances of doing better this time. The 52-year-old former investment banker and MP for Bromsgrove since 2010 officially backed remain in the Brexit referendum but is not defined by that, and has a suitably robust Tory ideology which would appeal to many elements of the party, as well as a stirring backstory, growing up above the family shop in Bristol. Javid left Johnson’s cabinet in spectacular fashion in early 2020 after No 10 tried to impose a team of advisers on him but returned as health secretary in June 2021. His current role could count against him if there is a sense Javid has been influenced by the public health “blob” over Covid rules that are unpopular among many Tory MPs and party members. Kwasi Kwarteng The business secretary, 46, certainly has the free marketeer credentials to appeal to key elements of the Tory party and was a contributor, like Truss, to the 2012 tome Britannia Unchained, a handbook for post-Thatcherite Conservatives. The first black British Conservative to run his own government department, Kwarteng became an MP in 2010 but did not thrive in the Cameron years, waiting until 2018 for his first junior ministerial post. The east London-born Eton scholar is known as intelligent but with an occasional tendency to speak without properly thinking such as when, late last year, he suggested the parliamentary standards commissioner, Kathryn Stone, should step down over the case of Owen Paterson. Nadhim Zahawi While his current job as education secretary is Zahawi’s first department-leading cabinet role, his prominence and popularity shot up during his year-long stint as minister for vaccines, overseeing probably the most successful project of the Johnson era. MP for Stratford-upon-Avon since 2010, Zahawi, 54, has a backstory perhaps more compelling even than Javid’s. Born in Baghdad, he and his Kurdish family fled Saddam Hussein’s rule when he was nine and Zahawi went on to have a private education in London. The co-founder of polling firm YouGov, Zahawi has also worked extensively in the oil industry, and is one of Westminster’s richest MPs, owning a significant portfolio of properties.A prominent opposition figure and a soldier have been killed in separate attacks in Cameroon’s restive anglophone regions, intensifying security concerns as the country hosts the Africa Cup of Nations football tournament. Henry Kemende, a senator for the Social Democratic Front party, was shot dead in Bamenda city in the north-west region. His party, who blamed separatist fighters for the attack, said gunmen forced him from his car and shot him in the chest. In Buea in the neighbouring south-west region, separatist rebels killed a soldier with an improvised explosive device during an attack in which rebels exchanged gunfire with the army, Cho Ayaba, the head of the rebel Ambazonia Defence Forces, told Reuters. Four teams competing in the Cup of Nations – Mali, the Gambia, Tunisia and Mauritania – are based in Buea, where many clashes between the army and the rebels have occurred. Ayaba said the aim of the attack was to disrupt preparations for two Group F games that are being played on Wednesday in Limbe, a coastal city about an hour’s drive south from Buea. No group has claimed responsibility for Kemende’s death, but assassinations by armed separatists of figures deemed to be working with Cameroonian authorities are common in the anglophone regions. The regions have been beset by violence since 2017, after protesters took to the streets in 2016 accusing the francophone-dominated authorities of marginalisation and of attempting to assimilate their education and legal systems into the dominant francophone system. The protests were brutally suppressed, fuelling violence from armed separatist groups. Both the separatists and government forces have been accused of atrocities in the fighting, which has killed more than 3,000 people and forced more than 700,000 to flee their homes. Groups from the minority English-speaking regions have sought to form a breakaway state called Ambazonia and have been accused of several gun and bomb attacks. Schools in particular have been targeted, escalating an education boycott that began in 2017 and has deprived a generation of Cameroonian children of an education, according to a report by Human Rights Watch. Cameroonian security forces have been routinely accused of human rights abuses against anglophones, especially in rural areas. Kemende was elected a senator for the Social Democratic Front in 2018, and was a high-profile critic of government failures to solve the crisis. “We recovered his body, his chest riddled with bullets,” Joshua Osih, the vice-president of the SDF, told Agence France-Presse. Osih said separatist elements opposed the SDF because it is a predominantly English-speaking party that participates in the political process and is opposed to the partition of Cameroon. Richard Tamfu, a human rights lawyer and member of Cameroon Bar Council, described Kemende as an inspirational figure in Cameroon. “We call on the government to immediately open investigations for his killers to be brought to book,” Tamfu said. Cameroon’s government has tried to distance itself from the anglophone crisis and the country’s fragile security situation while it hosts the Africa Cup of Nations – the first time it has done so in 50 years. The government has assured teams and spectators that security for the football tournament is guaranteed, and heightened security has been put in place in host cities.The eight-year jail sentence handed to Frankie Smith for causing or allowing the death of her toddler daughter, Star Hobson, has been referred to the court of appeal. Suella Braverman, the attorney general, said the case was “tragic and extremely upsetting” and she believed 20-year-old Smith’s sentence was “unduly lenient”. Smith was jailed last month after being convicted of causing or allowing the death of her 16-month-old daughter, after a jury cleared her of murder and manslaughter charges. Her partner, Savannah Brockhill, 28, was found guilty of murder and sentenced to life imprisonment with a minimum term of 25 years. Braverman said she had concluded that she could not refer Brockhill’s sentence. “I can only challenge a sentence if it is not just lenient but unduly so, such that the sentencing judge made a gross error or imposed a sentence outside the range of sentences reasonably available in the circumstances of the offence. The threshold is a high one, and the test was not met in this case,” she said in a statement. The toddler died of cardiac arrest after being punched or kicked by Brockhill in September 2020 using “massive force” on a par with “a road traffic accident”, according to the judge. A postmortem revealed previous brain injuries, fractured bones and internal organ injury. Halfway through the seven-week trial, Smith pleaded guilty to eight instances of child cruelty. The court heard Smith was of extremely low intelligence and “abnormally compliant” when told to do something by an authority figure. However, the judge said she “did not accept” these factors excused Smith’s conduct, describing her as a “neglectful and callous parent” who thought only of her own interests and would have realised her partner was abusing Star. A local review of Star’s death is due to be published in January after at least five safeguarding referrals were made to Bradford council. It will feed into a national one ordered by the government after the murder of Arthur Labinjo-Hughes. The jail sentences handed to Emma Tustin and Thomas Hughes, who killed six-year-old Labinjo-Hughes, were also referred to the court of appeal for being too lenient in December. Braverman said her thoughts “are with all those who loved Star Hobson”. “This vulnerable and innocent child was subjected to continued physical abuse, and her mother, Frankie Smith, allowed it to happen. “This case will have caused upset to anyone who read about it, but my job is to decide if a sentence appears to be too low based solely on the facts of the case. I have carefully considered the details of this case, and I concluded that I can refer Frankie Smith’s sentence to the court of appeal as I believe it is unduly lenient.”Novak Djokovic’s preparations for the Australian Open continued on Wednesday as the question of his presence in the country remained unresolved. Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, is still deliberating over whether or not he should revoke the world No 1’s visa. On Wednesday afternoon, Djokovic returned for his third practice session at Melbourne Park since he was released from immigration detention. With a small contingent of media present, Djokovic trained with the Australian youngster Tristan Schoolkate and worked through a series of drills. He had previously ensured his practice was closed to onlookers, with the doors of Rod Laver Arena locked during his sessions and the live feed from the arena turned off. At the same time the Serb was on court, he published a statement on Instagram addressing the pictures of him attending an award presentation for children – “I was asymptomatic and felt good, and I had not received the notification of a positive PCR test result until after that event” – and an interview with French newspaper L’Équipe after he had tested positive for Covid-19. According to The Age newspaper in Melbourne, the Department of Home Affairs is investigating the various issues Djokovic addressed in his social media post – his incorrect Australia Travel Declaration, his reported failure to comply with Covid-19 rules in Serbia and questions about the date of his Covid test – in addition to Hawke’s investigation into his medical exemption. The reception from Djokovic’s colleagues continues to be mixed. João Sousa, a Portuguese veteran and longtime top 100 player, described Djokovic’s attitude as “a little selfish” towards his fellow players, a top 100 field that is now 97% vaccinated, according to the ATP. “I can put myself in his shoes and understand what he’s going through,” Sousa said, according to Bola Amarela. “I understand that it’s what he believes in, but it’s a little selfish towards his colleagues in the profession because many of us – not me – didn’t want to get vaccinated and we had to do it in order to play. It was the rules. It turns out to be a rule that Djokovic managed to get around.” At a time when politicians have been roundly critical of Djokovic, a sympathetic voice has come in the form of Matt Canavan, a National party senator, who stressed the necessity of de-escalating the situation. “I don’t want to live in a world of strict bureaucracy when if we make a mistake on a form we are hauled off to jail. If there’s been an error or a lie, he needs to be questioned again and see how or why that happened,” he said. Meanwhile, the Women’s Tennis Association has addressed the deportation of Renata Voracova, the Czech doubles specialist who was detained by Australian Border Force and deported after Djokovic’s run-in with the authorities. “Renata Voracova followed these rules and procedures, was cleared for entry upon her arrival, competed in an event and then suddenly had her visa cancelled when she had done nothing wrong,” said the WTA. Unlike Djokovic, Voracova has placed blame on Tennis Australia and in a recent interview with AFP she said she expects compensation from the governing body.The leader of the Scottish Conservatives and one of the party’s most senior backbenchers have publicly called for Boris Johnson to resign over a lockdown-busting party in Downing Street, heaping intense political pressure on the prime minister. While Johnson apologised for attending the event in May 2020, claiming he believed it was a “work event”, many Conservative MPs said they remained unsatisfied by a carefully worded explanation at prime minister’s questions. Douglas Ross, who spoke to Johnson on Wednesday, became the first senior Tory figure to call publicly for the prime minister’s immediate departure. “Regretfully I have to say that his position is no longer tenable,” he told reporters. He was followed by William Wragg, vice-chair of the powerful 1922 Committee of Conservative backbenchers, who said fellow MPs were “frankly worn out from defending what is invariably indefensible”. “For their sakes at least the prime minister should see that and do the right thing,” Wragg told BBC Radio 4. In his comments, Ross said he had demanded an explanation after an email emerged on Monday from the prime minister’s principal private secretary inviting colleagues to “socially distanced drinks” on 20 May 2020 during the first Covid lockdown. Ross said: “What we also heard from the prime minister today was an apology. And he said, with hindsight, he would have done things differently, which for me, is an acceptance from the prime minister that it was wrong, and therefore, I don’t want to be in this position, but I am in the position now where I don’t think he can continue as he leader of the Conservatives. “The evidence is clear. People were invited to bring their own booze, to enjoy the garden in Downing Street and that is by any definition a party, a gathering that wasn’t allowed and therefore the prime minister broke his own rules.” Ross said it is up to the prime minister how quickly he stood down and it was up to other MPs whether they pressed for a motion of no confidence in him. Nearly two-thirds of Scottish Tory MSPs have now publicly called for Johnson to quit. Wragg indicated Johnson should depart soon, saying the “constant distraction” of stories such as those about the party was affecting the government of the nation and unfairly damaging the names of other MPs. While Johnson has said people should wait for an inquiry into a series of alleged lockdown parties led by senior official Sue Gray, Wragg said it would be unfair to expect her to effectively decide Johnson’s future. He said: “As colleagues are saying to one another and off the record, I sadly think that the prime minister’s position is untenable. “I don’t believe it should be left to the findings of a civil servant to determine the future of the prime minister, and indeed who governs this country. I think it is for the Conservative party, if not the prime minister in fact, to make that decision and to realise what is in the best interests so that we can move forwards both as a party and the country.” However, other Tory backbenchers said Johnson’s account had bought him the right to wait for the investigation, which could report as soon as next week. Dan Poulter said he was “pleased” Johnson had apologised but it was “not much consolation to those of us who cared for patients on the frontline of the NHS and saw them die of Covid”. He said the inquiry should be conducted “very quickly” and “should the PM be found to have actively misled parliament or if he faces criminal sanction (or both) then his position would be untenable”. The former health minister Stephen Hammond told the BBC he welcomed the fact Johnson had shown “some transparency” in admitting mistakes had been made. But he questioned Johnson’s explanation that he “believed implicitly” the booze-fuelled gathering where he spent 25 minutes was a “work event”. In a brief statement as prime minister’s questions kicked off, Johnson said that he joined the 20 May event for about 25 minutes from around 6pm, saying that, with the No 10 garden being used as “an extension of the office” amid lockdown, he believed it was a work event. Cabinet ministers appeared to be rallying round Johnson in public. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said “the PM did the right thing by apologising”. The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, said he was “right to personally apologise” and “the inquiry should now be allowed to its work and establish the full facts of what happened”. Michael Gove retweeted this and wrote “Nadine is right”. The justice secretary, Dominic Raab, gave an interview supporting Johnson’s “clear account” of the party. Join our journalists for a Guardian Live online event on the No 10 lockdown party and Boris Johnson’s future on Wednesday 19 January. Book hereAs a five-year-old in the 1950s, I wrote a letter with my Toytown writing set to my favourite uncle, who was in the navy. Before posting, I chose the shade of Noddy stamp to best complement the matching paper and envelope, then addressed it to “Uncle Bob, Malta” (Letters, 11 January). He received it, along with a hefty excess postage fee, but carried it with him in his wallet long afterwards as a cherished memory of home. Andrea Clarkson Barrow-in-Furness, Cumbria • You report that “the British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, insists the UK has some of the toughest anti-corruption laws in the world” (MPs to re-examine UK response to dirty money from Russia, 10 January). But laws and acts of parliament are just pieces of paper until their implementation is monitored. Marika Sherwood Oare, Kent • It’s good to see that the Sacklers are continuing to support culture and the arts in the UK (Sackler Trust gave more than £14m to UK public bodies in 2020, 9 January). Surely it’s time to acknowledge their philanthropy by erecting a statue? Fred Robinson Durham • It is to be hoped that whichever recipe is chosen for the platinum pudding for the Queen’s jubilee year (Platinum pudding for Queen’s jubilee to follow 1953’s coronation chicken, 10 January), the ingredients will be readily available from all food banks. Mike Abbott Beckenham, London • Re the world’s most northerly parish, Grise Fiord is in fact at latitude 76N, not 82N (Letters, 11 January), while Longyearbyen is at 78N. Ergo, the latter is about 200km further north. Gitte Edelman Durham • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Nicholas Maxwell says that universities are doing little of practical use to solve the climate crisis (Only a culture change can end this state of climate inaction, 9 January). He and I are at the same university, but I don’t recognise his characterisation. Over at the UCL Energy Institute, we all work every day on practical applied solutions. We work for the British and foreign governments, the International Energy Agency, energy companies, local authorities, NGOs and citizen groups. We work to cut emissions from buildings, road travel, air travel and shipping. We try to write papers too – which can sometimes have big impacts on policy – but, as Maxwell says, at this juncture these have to take second place. (And we are by no means the only university group, in Britain or internationally, doing these kinds of things.) Perhaps Maxwell would like to come over and join us? Philip Steadman UCL Energy Institute • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I read Gaby Hinsliff’s article (A hard lesson for Novak Djokovic: patience with vaccine sceptics is wearing thin, 6 January) after I had been sent home with two other cancer patients from a Midlands hospital because of a lack of beds. For two of us, it was the second time this had happened. While waiting for our operations, the conversation in the ward had turned to Novak Djokovic and anti-vaxxers. They were scorned as idiots, and in Djokovic’s case as an entitled and privileged idiot – but all as deeply selfish and a danger to the community. Boris Johnson and the government have a lot to answer for, as they have acted disastrously all through this pandemic, pandering to these science deniers as well as to the Conservative party’s libertarians and to business interests – while acting irresponsibly themselves and with contempt for the rest of us. We need to argue and campaign for a “No jab – then no job and no entry into public spaces” policy. Anti-vaxxers need to face penalties for their selfish choices, which threaten the lives of others. Dave Green Northampton • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A man has climbed on to the front of the BBC’s Broadcasting House headquarters and used a hammer to damage a prominent statue by Eric Gill, as another man shouted about the artist’s history of paedophilia. Gill was one of the most prominent early 20th-century British artists and designers until his death in 1940. But his diaries, published many decades later, reveal his sexual abuse of his daughters and family dog. The carving, which depicts Prospero and a part-naked Ariel from Shakespeare’s The Tempest, was installed by the artist on the front of the BBC’s Broadcasting House headquarters in London in 1933, shortly after the building opened. It sits above the entrance to the BBC on Regent Street and is an integral part of the globally recognised Grade II*-listed building. The presence of an artwork by a known paedophile on the headquarters of the national broadcaster has become a regular focus of social media discussion and far-right activists such as Tommy Robinson have regularly cited its presence while criticising the BBC. The broadcaster’s culture editor, Katie Razzall, said that while one man had used a ladder to climb up the statue and chip away at its base with a hammer, another man stood nearby livestreaming and “talking about paedophiles”. BBC Monitoring journalist Shayan Sardarizadeh said the presence of Gill’s statue on the front of the building had been “an obsession for British QAnon, ‘save our children’, ‘satanic ritual abuse’ and other conspiracy groups for a very long time”. The motives or identity of the person attacking the statue with a hammer are unknown. According to the BBC’s own website, after the statue was installed in the 1930s and at the time there was public concern “about the size of the sprite’s genitalia”. “A question was tabled in the House of Commons, but the popular story, that Gill was ordered to modify the statue, is not substantiated,” states the corporation’s history of the artwork. In addition to his sculptures, Gill also created the widely used Perpetua and Gill Sans typefaces – with the BBC only dropping the use of the latter as its official font earlier this year. The BBC previously faced calls from sexual abuse charities to remove the statue from its headquarters in 2013 but refused, citing Gill’s record as “one of the last century’s major British artists whose work has been widely displayed in leading UK museums and galleries”. Although police have been called to the scene, the man has yet to be removed and has been allowed to continue chipping away at the statue for two hours. The damage to the BBC artwork comes shortly after a jury cleared four individuals of criminal damage after they removed a statue of the slave trader Edward Colston from its plinth in Bristol and dumped it in the city’s harbour. They successfully argued that they had been making a sincere protest against the Colston statue, were exercising their right to free speech, and insisted it was a criminal offence to keep that statue up because it was offensive. As a result the government has pledged to pass new laws to protect existing statues in public spaces, arguing it is better to provide context. Although many other statues have been targeted for removal in recent years, the Gill statue at the BBC is unusual because the objection is to the artist rather than the person it depicts.Thank our mutual god for the intelligence and eloquence of David Baddiel (‘Why don’t Jews play Jews?’ – David Baddiel on the row over Helen Mirren as Golda Meir, 12 January). But may I take issue with the Guardian on one point? I did not attack Dame Helen Mirren (Maureen Lipman attacks casting of Helen Mirren as former Israeli PM Golda Meir, 12 January). I was asked by a reporter for my opinion in a continuing debate. (I don’t tend to charge out of the house to Speaker’s Corner with a loud-hailer and a dustbin lid.) My opinion was that if the ethnicity or gender of the character drives the role then that ethnicity should be prioritised, as it is now with other minorities. This applies, in my opinion, to the role of prime minister of the first and only Jewish state. Importantly, I also stated that Dame Helen is a great actress and very sexy in her eighth decade, which is important for playing Golda. Not being on social media, I haven’t seen the outcry, but I bet it is bigger than the outcry ever against casting Shylock, Golda, Tevye, Mank etc with non-Jews. Especially so from most Jewish people – the ones who can really see the difference the casting makes – but who prefer to keep their heads well below the parapet. Maureen Lipman London • This letter was amended on 14 January 2022. Dame Helen Mirren, who is 76, is in her eighth decade, not her seventh as an earlier version said. • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The restructuring group Hilco took a £25m dividend payment from the DIY chain Homebase in 2020 despite accepting at least £10.6m in government aid. The company, which bought Homebase for £1 in 2018 from its Australian owner, Wesfarmers, said it had accepted business rates relief for the Homebase chain on top of £10.6m in furlough payments and grants for the Bathstore chain, which was forced to close for many weeks under government high street lockdowns. The total amount of government assistance booked by Homebase has previously been estimated at up to £40m. The group operates about 150 DIY stores after closing 15 in 2020 and also owns 15 Bathstore outlets and two Decorate by Homebase stores, which are smaller high street versions of its DIY chain. The government support payouts came as the chain rang up a ££48m pretax profit in the year to 27 December 2020, from a ££8.2m loss a year before. Its highest paid director, thought to be the chief executive, Damian McGloughlin, also received a 14% pay rise to £1.42m. The change in fortunes came despite a 3.2% fall in sales to £839.2m, according to accounts filed at Companies House. Hilco UK, founded by the accountant Paul McGowan, who still chairs the business, is known as the group that bought the entertainment retailer HMV out of administration in 2013 before it later fell back into administration in 2018. The company also owns the British pottery Denby. Homebase said in its accounts that the government funding “was used to help offset the significant impact and losses from the temporary closure of all Homebase stores during the peak trading period and longer closures of Bathstore stores, Decorate by Homebase stores and kitchen and bathroom showrooms”. It added that the government support also “offset incremental costs due the pandemic” including protective equipment for staff and other health &amp; safety measures as well as the multimillion-pound write-off of live plants due to store closures. It said the plants had been donated to charities and good causes. Homebase’s decision to hold on to government support, including business rate relief, contrasts sharply with other large retailers. Kingfisher, the owner of Homebase’s rival B&amp;Q, pledged to repay the £130m it received in business rates relief in December 2020 after benefiting from a boom in DIY trade during the Covid pandemic. The business also handed back at least £23m in furlough payments. The shift to working and studying at home, as well as more entertaining at home, particularly outdoors, prompted many to alter their houses and flats to suit the new way of living. Boredom during lockdowns also enticed younger people to learn DIY skills to improve their homes. Other retailers, including all the large supermarkets, have also returned almost £2bn in business rates relief and furlough payments. Hilco declined to comment and Homebase did not respond to a request for comment.Christian Wolmar is right to raise serious concerns over the possibility of major cuts to the rail network (UK railways are heading into a perfect storm. Now is the time to nationalise them, 10 January). But I’m not convinced that his solution of nationalisation is the answer. He says that there’s an opportunity for “a publicly owned, integrated railway, run independently of state interference”. I’d say that was a contradiction in terms, and a return to a centralised British Rail would be subject to the whims of the Treasury, as it is now. That doesn’t mean we should stick with the unsatisfactory hybrid of a privately delivered, publicly specified railway. We need to learn from other European railways, where publicly accountable regional transport authorities run efficient rail networks, sometimes directly owned by the local state. The Merseyrail network, specified by a locally accountable public body but privately delivered, works. Could Liverpool’s combined authority go a step further and own and operate the regional network, or set up an arms-length co-operative to do the job? I’m sure it could, and that could apply to many other regional networks across the country. Inter-city operations are different, and the example of “open access” operators such as Grand Central and the recently introduced Lumo suggests that there is a commercial as well as environmental case for good-quality long-distance services that are not subject to micromanagement by civil servants in London. Prof Paul Salveson Visiting professor, universities of Huddersfield and Bolton • Christian Wolmar is right to say that the Covid-induced crisis hitting our railways needs to be addressed by nationalisation. As well as being more efficient, we calculate that it would save the industry at least £600m a year simply through preventing cash leaking into private profit. That includes the rolling stock companies who own our trains and have engaged in shameful pandemic profiteering to the tune of £1bn last year – all ultimately paid for by the taxpayer, while passenger fares rise. But instead of taking on vested interests, the government has decided to take on rail staff who have been key workers during the pandemic. The cuts agenda includes closing all ticket offices and slashing thousands of safety-critical track worker jobs. We are now heading towards a national dispute on our railways to defend rail jobs and services. If we are to protect our climate and economy, we need to protect our railways and rail workers. Michael Lynch General secretary, RMT • I was surprised that Christian Wolmar made no mention of the climate impact of a declining railway system. Rail is the most economical of all the major transport modes in terms of damaging carbon emissions. The government should be encouraging a “modal shift” to rail from car and air travel. Instead, there is a have-your-cake-and-eat-it policy that people don’t need to change their personal transport. The two most significant moves would be making rail travel much cheaper, and improving convenience and the integration of rail with other transport. This, along with a major government-backed publicity effort – many people haven’t used rail for years – could have a huge impact on lowering our transport sector’s carbon footprint. Upping the pace of rail electrification would be another huge positive, from which passengers, freight and the climate could gain. Tim Dumper Exmouth, Devon • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A judge in New York has rejected Prince Andrew’s attempt to persuade a US court to throw out a sexual abuse lawsuit brought against him by longtime American accuser Virginia Giuffre. Giuffre, now 38, says she was forced into sex at 17 with Andrew, the Duke of York, by associates of his, the late sex offender and financier, Jeffrey Epstein, and Ghislaine Maxwell, the British media heiress who was convicted in New York last month of sex-trafficking girls for Epstein. Giuffre’s lawsuit against Prince Andrew can move forward, Manhattan federal judge Lewis Kaplan ruled on Wednesday morning, noting it was too early to make a determination on the duke’s attempts to undermine Giuffre’s claims. Giuffre, who has also alleged that Epstein and Maxwell sexually abused her, said they had coerced her into having sex with Andrew in London. Giuffre has also accused Andrew of engaging in sexual misconduct on other occasions. She filed suit against the royal on 9 August last year, citing battery and intentional infliction of emotional distress. Prince Andrew’s legal team had argued in court papers and proceedings that Giuffre’s 2009 settlement with Epstein shielded the duke from her lawsuit. The settlement with Epstein, which was unsealed on 3 January, awarded Giuffre $500,000. Their agreement contained a provision that stated it was releasing: “Second parties and any other person or entity who could have been included as a potential defendant … from all, and all manner of, action and actions of Virginia [Giuffre], including state or federal, cause and causes of action.” Andrew was not mentioned by name in this settlement. Kaplan pointed out that this push for dismissal largely relied on the royal’s discussion of the 2009 agreement. Kaplan said: “The law prohibits the court from considering, at this stage of the proceedings, the defendant’s efforts to cast doubt on the truth of Ms Giuffre’s allegations, even though his efforts would be permissible at trial.” He continued: “In a similar vein and for similar reasons, it is not open to the court now to decide, as a matter of fact, just what the parties to the release in the 2009 settlement agreement signed by Ms Giuffre and Jeffrey Epstein actually meant. “The court’s job at this juncture is simply to determine whether there are two or more reasonable interpretations of that document. If there are, the determination of the ‘right’ or controlling interpretation must await further proceedings. “With limited exceptions, the motion must be decided solely on the basis of the allegations of the complaint without regard to any extraneous claims or materials,” Kaplan also wrote. “The 2009 agreement neither appears in nor is referred to” in Giuffre’s civil complaint. The judge also rejected Andrew’s claims that Giuffre’s civil allegations against him lack necessary specificity. “Ms Giuffre’s complaint is neither ‘unintelligible’ nor ‘vague’ nor ‘ambiguous.’ It alleges discrete incidents of sexual abuse in particular circumstances at three identifiable locations. It identifies to whom it attributes that sexual abuse,” Kaplan wrote. He said that Andrew’s position about the Giuffre complaint’s alleged vagueness, and how they limit his ability to mount a defense, was undermined by his denials. “Moreover, the defendant’s assertion that he cannot reasonably prepare a response to plaintiff’s allegations plainly contradicts the content of his moving papers, in which he denies Ms Giuffre’s allegations in no uncertain terms,” he said. Kaplan’s decision deals yet another blow to the embattled British prince, whose reputation and standing within the royal family has been saddled by his ties to Epstein and Maxwell. High-profile criminal proceedings against Epstein and Maxwell over the past two years have further damaged his reputation. Maxwell, the daughter of the late British press titan Robert Maxwell, was found guilty of five counts for luring girls as young as 14 into Epstein’s world for him to sexually abuse and is currently facing years behind bars when she is sentenced, at a date yet to be set. Epstein, who in addition to Prince Andrew counted former presidents Bill Clinton and Donald Trump in his circle, killed himself in a Manhattan jail about a month after his July 2019 arrest on sex-trafficking charges. Giuffre has claimed that Prince was “sweating profusely all over me” at a London nightclub on a night when they allegedly had a sexual encounter. Prince Andrew said in a disastrous BBC interview that Giuffre’s statement about his perspiration could not be true, claiming: “I have a peculiar medical condition which is that I don’t sweat or I didn’t sweat at the time.” Prince Andrew also maintained that on the evening cited by Giuffre, he went with his daughter, Beatrice, to a late-afternoon children’s party at a Pizza Express in Woking. After the party, Prince Andrew claims, he was at home with his children all night. As part of Giuffre’s suit, her legal team has requested documents that would prove whether or not Prince Andrew can sweat. Sigrid McCawley, one of Giuffre’s lawyers, said of Kaplan’s ruling: “Today’s decision by Judge Kaplan denying Prince Andrew’s effort to dismiss Virginia Giuffre’s case against him is another important step in Virginia’s heroic and determined pursuit of justice as a survivor of sex trafficking.” Shortly after Kaplan’s decision, a development emerged involving the juror in Maxwell’s criminal case who has caused a stir over discrepancies between a post-trial media interview about past sexual abuse and his disclosures during the jury screening process. A court filing revealed on Wednesday that this juror’s attorney asked for a copy of his completed screening questionnaire, where he was asked to provide answers about any history of abuse. Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlBoris Johnson’s authority was teetering on the brink of an abyss after he admitted attending a “bring your own booze” gathering in the Downing Street garden during the first lockdown – but insisted it “technically” broke no rules. Amid speculation that this scandal could be the one to undo him, Johnson apologised on Wednesday afternoon to the nation at prime minister’s questions. But was it enough to persuade rebellious Tory MPs? Some senior Conservatives have urged Johnson to resign. Among them is the chairman of the public affairs and constitutional affairs Committee and Tory MP for Hazel Grove, William Wragg, who said the prime minister’s position is now “untenable”. He told BBC Radio 4’s PM programme that: “A series of unforced errors are deeply damaging to the perception of the party.” Scottish Tory leader Douglas Ross also called for Johnson to stand down after his admission, saying his position was now “untenable”, and nearly two-thirds of Scottish Tory MSPs have publicly called for Johnson to quit. Speaking to reporters, Ross said: “I said, yesterday, if the prime minister attended this gathering, event in Downing Street on 20 May 2020, he could not continue as prime minister so, regretfully, I have to say his position is no longer tenable.” Others have been more forgiving. The deputy prime minister, Dominic Raab, said Johnson had given a “very clear account” of the events of 20 May 2020. He told the BBC: “He has been clear that he believed he was acting in accordance with the rules at the time but, of course, understands the perception of those that those in power are not following the rules that many others are required to, particularly those who have been through serious hardship or lost loved ones during this pandemic, and that’s why he’s apologised.” Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, wrote on Twitter that the “PM was right to personally apologise earlier”, with Michael Gove, secretary for levelling up, adding: “Nadine is right.” Christopher Chope, MP for Christchurch, appeared to reverse his earlier position on the debacle, which he had described as “dirty linen”, by praising Johnson’s “most abject and fulsome apology”. Chope told Sky News: I think it was a full apology rather than a partial one. And he took responsibility for what had happened, and I think most right-minded people will say we must accept that apology. Obviously it’s not the end of the matter because, as he pointed out, there is this inquiry going on and there will be a further opportunity for him to be subject to scrutiny when we know the results of that inquiry. In what appeared to be an attempted defence of the PM, Simon Hoare, MP for North Dorset, said he did not know if Johnson would survive. He told Sky: As I understand it, and this is a third-hand understanding, this was a party organised to say, in the first instance, ‘welcome back the prime minister’. He had been in hospital, I think I’ve got the timeline right, and recuperating at Chequers. It was also a way of saying thank you to Dominic Raab for holding the fort. So whether the prime minister knew it was taking place or whether everybody just jumped out of the shrubbery and said ‘Surprise’, I don’t know. Sir Roger Gale, MP for North Thanet, who is regarded as a senior backbencher, said it was clear Johnson misled parliament; politically, he was a “dead man walking”. Gale told BBC Radio 4’s World at One: Unfortunately, what the prime minister has said today leaves people like me in an impossible situation. We now know that the prime minister spent 25 minutes at what was quite clearly a party. That means that he misled the house. I fear that it is now going to have to be the work of the 1922 [Committee] to determine precisely how we proceed. If you look at the Twittersphere after prime minister’s question time today, it sounds to me I am afraid very much as though politically the prime minister is a dead man walking. The York Outer MP Julian Sturdy said Johnson’s claim he thought the gathering at Downing Street was work-related “will not wash with the British public”. In a statement to the Yorkshire Post he said: The fact is, that at a time when people were not allowed to attend the funeral of their loved ones or comfort their dying relatives, when fines were being issued for people meeting for a coffee in the park, Downing Street should not have been holding social events of any sort. Tory MP Neil Hudson said the prime minister’s apology was an “important step forward” but added: I will not defend the indefensible. The Penrith and the Border MP said he would await the result of an investigation by the civil service and potentially the Metropolitan police, saying there should be “serious consequences” if rules were broken. Also condemnatory was Ruth Davidson, the former leader of the Scottish Conservatives. On Twitter, she referred to a previous comment criticising the government’s circumlocutions around the lockdown parties scandal, and added: And I’m not convinced today drew a line under anything either. Dominic Cummings, Johnson’s former most-senior aide, who has become a staunch critic of his old boss, also used Twitter to give his insider’s perspective. The party took place two days before the Guardian and Daily Mirror Barnard Castle exposé that precipitated Cummings’ own downfall. He wrote: Whole point of why I &amp; other official told MR – WTF YOU DOING HOLDING A PARTY – was cos the invite = obv totally SOCIAL NOT WORK (UNlike all the mtngs in garden). No way ‘technically within rules’. [Shopping trolley] bullshit cos altern is admit he broke rules + resign. Not all Conservative MPs were so loquacious in their responses. One unnamed Tory, asked by a Sky News reporter to describe the revelations of PMQs, replied: Fucked.All 17 victims who died in the New York apartment fire tragedy on Sunday have been identified, with the devastating toll including eight children. The New York City medical examiner’s office reported that all the victims died of smoke inhalation and their deaths had been ruled accidental. Fire officials have determined that a malfunctioning electric space heater started the fire in the 19-story building in the Bronx on Sunday morning, amid freezing weather. Meanwhile, companies associated with the building’s ownership and city authorities have been accused by tenants of neglecting vital safety measures there for years. Although flames damaged only a small part of the building, smoke poured through the open doors of a 15th-floor apartment and turned stairwells – the only way to escape a building deemed too tall for external fire escape staircases – into dark, choking death traps. According to Daniel Nigro, New York City’s fire commissioner, some were unable to escape because of the smoke. Others became incapacitated as they tried to escape, as more than 200 firefighters struggled to bring residents down fire department ladders or the stairwells. Survivors described the terrible scene, with one comparing it to “a war zone”. Eight of the fatalities were children, including a two-year-old boy. Police have released their identities. The victims included seven women, Fatoumata Drammeh, 50, Foutmala Drammeh, 21, Nyumaaisha Drammeh, 19, Haja Dukureh, 37, Sera Janneh, 27, Fatoumata Tunkara, 43, and Isatou Jabbie, 31; two men, Haji Dukary, 49, and Hagi Jawara, 47; five boys, Muhammed Drammeh, 12, Mustapha Dukureh, 12, Seydou Toure, 12, Omar Jambang, six, and the youngest victim of the fire, Ousmane Konteh, two; and three girls, Fatoumata Dukureh, five, Mariam Dukureh, 11, and Haouwa Mahamadou, five. Dozens more residents have been hospitalized and at least 13 were still in critical condition on Wednesday morning. Also, the first court action was brought in relation to the tragedy when tenants filed a $3bn class action lawsuit against the building’s previous and current owners. The lawsuit filed on Tuesday by married couple Rosa Reyes and Felix Martinez, both tenants of the building, alleges that the landlords “had actual notice of defective conditions”. The couple is seeking $1bn in compensatory damages for alleged negligence and an additional $2bn in punitive damages on behalf of them and “all others similarly situated”. Another plaintiff, Jessika Valdez, told the New York Post that the door to her 18th-floor apartment “never closed on its own” during the 15 years that she has lived there. “We always had to pull it closed,” Valdez said, adding: “If you’re renting to me, it’s OK if you don’t have an emotional tie to me, but you have to protect your investment. I’m your investment.” In addition, a separate notice of claim was filed against New York City and various entities, including the department of buildings, department of housing, preservation and development, the former Mayor Bill de Blasio and the housing commissioner, Melanie La Rocca. The notice, which seeks $1bn each for everyone who joined the planned class action case, said the shutting devices, or “returns”, on self-closing apartment doors “become rusty over time and the springs on the door returns need to be replaced every time”. It went on to allege that city officials “failed in every way” to prevent the tragedy. The notice detailed more than two dozen complaints and violations cited against the building since 2014. According to records, the citations include vermin infestation and faulty elevators, despite the $25m in state loans for repairs. The authorities have been accused of knowing of defects for years and paying lip service to safety issues. According to Nigro, the building’s doors and reports of malfunctioning smoke alarms will be a key focus of the investigation. The NYC law department has issued a response to the lawsuits, saying: “This was a horrific tragedy and too many lives were lost. There is an active investigation into this tragic incident. We’ll review the claim.” Similarly, the Bronx Park Phase II Preservation, LLC, a consortium of owners, said, “We are devastated by this terrible tragedy and are cooperating fully with the fire department and other agencies as they continue to investigate.”The British Olympic Association will offer temporary phones to Team GB athletes and staff at next month’s Winter Olympics in Beijing after fears they could be spied on by the Chinese government. While the British delegation will not be banned from taking their own mobile devices, they have been warned against doing so by the BOA because it fears the authorities could install spyware to extract private information or track future activity. A BOA spokesperson said: “We’ve given athletes and staff practical advice so that they can make their own choice as to whether they take their personal devices to the Games, or not. Where they do not want to take their own equipment, we have provisioned temporary devices for them to use.” The Dutch Olympic Committee*Dutch Sports Federation (NOC*NSF) has gone a step further by telling its athletes not to bring their personal mobile phones or laptops because it anticipates China may carry out surveillance on electronic devices during the Games. The Dutch newspaper De Volkskrant said the NOC*NSF would give athletes and support staff phones and laptops which will be destroyed when they return home. NOC*NSF spokesperson Geert Slot declined to discuss specific cases but said cybersecurity was part of the risk assessment. “The importance of cybersecurity has grown over the years,” he said. “But China has completely closed off its internet, which makes it a specific case.” As at previous Olympics, Team GB athletes wanting to raise awareness of political issues during the event have been advised to discuss this with the BOA before doing so. However, athletes will be able to post on social media while in Beijing, with China allowing access to Twitter and Facebook for foreign athletes and journalists during the Games.Italian police have identified two men suspected of having vandalised the famed white limestone Scala dei Turchi (Stairway of the Turks) cliff in Sicily, which features prominently in the Inspector Montalbano books by the late author Andrea Camilleri. The cliff, shaped like a huge staircase jutting into the Mediterranean from the coast of Realmonte, was on Friday defaced with red iron oxide powder which left red stains running down the limestone. Sicily’s governor condemned the vandalism as a “cowardly gesture” against not only “an asset of rare beauty, but also the image of our island”. Police on Wednesday said that two men from Favara, a short distance from the site, were identified and reported to the authorities for “damaging a protected natural asset”. The prosecutor’s office of Agrigento, which led the investigation, said that after a series of searches in neighbouring villages the two men had been identified on surveillance cameras. The footage shows two men leaving a Ford truck pulling two large sacks containing red powder. Investigators recovered traces of red powder and gloves stained with the same substance in a shed near the residence of one of the men. One of the alleged perpetrators had previously been convicted of vandalising the Milan metro and the Valley of the Temples at Agrigento, as well as the Punta Bianca white cliff near the Scala dei Turchi. The motive for the vandalism is still unclear, but prosecutors believe that the gesture represents a sort of “challenge of authority”. A group of volunteers from the area spent the weekend scrubbing the stains off the cliff. The Scala dei Turchi was submitted as a candidate for Unesco world heritage status in 2019. However, the landmark was temporarily closed and seized by prosecutors in early 2020 after years of complaints about its poor preservation. Every year, the gigantic white limestone cliff, which drops steeply over the sea, attracts thousands of visitors from around the world. Its name originates from ancient raids on the coast by pirates, probably Saracens.Novak Djokovic could face a fine or even prison in Serbia after his admission that he broke isolation while he had Covid last month, lawyers have said, as the Serbian prime minister warned his behaviour appeared to be “a clear breach” of the rules. The 34-year-old Belgrade-born tennis player is chasing a record-breaking 21st grand slam victory at the Australian Open beginning on Monday, but could yet be deported by the government which is unhappy with his medical exemption from inoculation. Djokovic on Wednesday acknowledged that he knew he had tested positive when he attended a newspaper interview and photoshoot in the Serbian capital on 18 December, saying in a statement on social media he had made an “error of judgment”. The player also blamed “human error” by his support team for a mistake in his immigration paperwork, saying they had failed to declare that he had travelled outside Serbia – to Spain – in the two-week period before entering Australia. Lawyers in Serbia told local reporters that breaking the country’s strict isolation rules was an offence under article 248 of the criminal code, and subject to a fine or prison sentence of up to three years – although community service was more likely. Djokovic was freed from an immigration detention hotel in Melbourne on Monday after a judge ruled his treatment was unreasonable. The unvaccinated star is relying on a recent previous coronavirus infection for an exemption allowing him to play. In an affidavit to the court, Djokovic said he was “tested and diagnosed” as having contracted Covid on 16 December. In his statement on Wednesday, however, he said was not notified of his positive status until the following day. He said he was not aware he had tested positive until after a tennis event he attended in Belgrade on 17 December to present awards to children, but admitted he was aware of his status when he went to his tennis centre on 18 December for an interview and photoshoot for L’Equipe. Lawyers in Serbia said that as a major public figure, Djokovic, who is a national hero in his home country, risked an exemplary sanction if found guilty, but suggested he should in principle be able to negotiate a community service order. In the early stages of the pandemic, several Serbs who tested positive for Covid were handed jail sentences of up to three years up for not isolating for the obligatory 14 days, although more recent convictions have typically entailed fines of about 150,000 dinar (£1,060). The Serbian prime minister, Ana Brnabić, said Djokovic should explain what she called a grey area. “If you’re positive you have to isolate,” Brnabić told the BBC, adding that if the player had broken the rules she would have to consult “relevant authorities”. Brnabić said she did not know for sure “when he actually got the results”. She said while she disagreed with his stance on vaccination, Djokovic was “one of the great champions of Serbia” and she hoped he could play in the tournament. Serbian authorities and media have largely remained fiercely supportive of the player despite the latest revelations. Earlier this week, Brnabić told a pro-government paper she was “sleeping with my mobile phone” in case she got a call about the case. “It was really important for me to express concern over the issue. I have offered the service of the Serbian government if there is anything we can do. We have agreed to stay in communication with Australian representatives,” she said. Mainly pro-government Serbian newspapers have not so far investigated Djokovic’s movements in Serbia while he had Covid, or questioned apparent anomalies in his test certificate. Of 18 different articles about the story on the website of the tabloid Informer on Wednesday, none questioned the player’s version of events. In an op-ed article in the same paper, the deputy mayor of Belgrade, Goran Vesić, attacked the Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, who is still considering whether to exercise personal powers to again revoke the player’s visa. “No one had heard of a certain immigration minister in Australia, Alex Hawke – but the whole world has heard of Novak Djokovic,” Vesic wrote. “Well, the world finally found out who Mr Hawke is.” Hawke would be “anonymous had he not held his citizens in house arrest for almost two years, treating them like convicts,” Vesic continued. “The Serb opposition calls us, the ruling party, dictators – but trust me, neither the president or any one of us would ever annul a court decision.” Milivoje Pantovic is a producer with N1 Television in BelgradeRetailers’ trading reports will roll in for a while yet, so there’s still time for losers to reveal themselves, but it was hard on Wednesday to find anybody who was unhappy with their Christmas lot or who is panicking about the year ahead. Sainsbury’s produced a £60m upgrade to its profits forecast alongside the usual excited blah about the “lowest ever” Christmas dinner and the “biggest ever” new year. Omicron clearly diverted a few quid from pubs and restaurants into supermarkets’ tills but the numbers were still strong on their own account. Meanwhile, JD Sports went for a £65m upgrade after enjoying a boom and Dunelm, the soft furnishings group, said profits would be “materially ahead” of market expectations. Over at Whitbread (not a retailer but Christmas also matters for the owner of Premier Inn, Beefeater and Brewers Fayre) Omicron killed any chance of a profits surprise but the group said it traded “significantly ahead of the market” in the UK. What’s going on? Aren’t all these companies meant to be fretting about the cost-of-living squeeze on consumers, unresolved supply chain hassles and the arrival of inflation in their energy and wage bills? There was a bit of that, but the general tone was that companies expect to cope. Whitbread predicts inflation in its sector to average 7%-8%, adding £1.4bn to its cost base, but thinks it will be able to “largely offset” the pressures via cost savings, increases in room rates and the benefit of being a large business. The tale was similar at Dunelm: a mix of price rises and better sourcing will “largely mitigate the impact of inflation on commodity costs and freight rates”. The outlook wasn’t spelled out as clearly at Sainsbury’s, which is simultaneously trying to parade its Aldi price-matching credentials on 150 core products while also passing on cost pressures (such as 5.3% pay increase to base pay) where it can. It can count on its regular 2% annual saving from efficiency gains but can also, say analysts, expect the pricing climate to become easier in supermarket-land. That, at least, seems to be what Jefferies’ analysts mean by “a more rational industry structure in the face of building input inflation”. Discounters will have a “reducing appetite” for ploughing profits into lower prices and the private equity-owned players (Asda and Morrisons) “seem to be displaying a growing focus on profit preservation”. In ordinary English, profits margins won’t get whacked because prices will go up. From the point of view of shareholders, it all sounds reassuring, even if much hinges on whether consumers achieve wage increases to protect their disposable incomes. But, given the current strength in trading, one cannot be surprised that retailers think they stand a fair chance of making price rises stick. For the Bank of England, though, it’s another setback to 2021’s idea that the return of inflation would be “transitory”. In the retail and hotel sectors, that’s not how life looks at the start of 2022. According to the revised central banking script, inflation should peak at 6%-ish in the spring and then fall. Well, maybe. One can also see how pressures could linger, or take far longer to reverse. Boardrooms aren’t hiding the fact: they are consciously adjusting for an inflationary environment. Higher gas prices could extend beyond 2024 On a similar theme, Chris O’Shea, the chief executive of Centrica, the British Gas owner, is only making a safe prediction when he says gas prices could stay high for two years. For consumers, at least 12 months is virtually guaranteed already because of the backward-looking nature of the regulator Ofgem’s price-cap formula. The increase in the price cap in April, which seems likely to be set at about £2,000 versus £1,277 currently, captures wholesale prices that have rocketed since autumn. The following adjustment, to apply from October, will look at wholesale prices in the first half of this year, which futures markets say will remain high. Indeed, the current best guess is that £2,000 will be exceeded. Of course, the government and Ofgem can – and should – try to dampen the shock for consumers by various means, such as removing VAT, shunting green levies on to general taxation and deferring the costs of the many supplier failures. But ministers will presumably want to reimpose all those billing items as soon as wholesale prices fall. So, yes, two years is a reasonable horizon. But it could stretch a lot further.On the streets of Uxbridge and South Ruislip, where Boris Johnson has been MP since 2015, people expressed “disappointment” and called for the prime minister to face a police investigation and penalties for breaking lockdown rules. But should he quit? Not a chance. While most voters who spoke to the Guardian in the west London constituency expressed frustration and anger with actions they perceived as unfair, some regular Conservative voters said they would remain loyal to the prime minister, and others were sceptical about the alternatives. Stuart Horace, a 57-year-old IT professional, was dissatisfied with Johnson’s apology for attending a No 10 garden party on 20 May 2020 and thought he should pay the same fine as a member of the public caught breaching Covid rules, as should his principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds, whom he felt was most to blame given that he sent the invitation to about 100 staff. However, he did not consider the issue a deal-breaker for Johnson’s premiership, and said that he would vote for him again, since “many people” held illegal drinks parties during lockdown. He said: “Tony Blair sent the country to an illegal war for which we’re still picking up the bill, while Boris Johnson went to an illegal gathering with booze. Did Tony Blair resign?” Hayley Babb, a 36-year-old photography student, said she thought the apology was “another Boris cop-out” and that he would use the pandemic to deflect attention away from the possible breach of rules. “It’s do as I say, not as I do,” she said. She wanted to see him face a police investigation but thought this was unlikely to result in his resignation because he has “brass balls” and escaped earlier scandals unscathed. There was nobody she would especially want to take over, she added, since they are “all corrupt” and tend to come from wealthy backgrounds with a limited understanding of working-class people. Kevin Gibson, a 62-year-old project manager, said he was especially galled by the fact the party took place at the same time he had been unable to see his son, who was living in supported accommodation. “It’s not about Boris Johnson or left wing versus right wing. It’s about deceit,” he said. He voted for Johnson in the last election because of his stance on Brexit, and generally voted Conservative, but said he wouldn’t again. He viewed Labour and the Tories as “two sides of the same coin” and would opt for whichever party represented a protest vote instead. Shirley Clark, a retired administrator, had been suspicious of Johnson before the revelations and didn’t vote for him in the last election. “If the man can’t comb his hair, he can’t unscramble his brains.” But, she queried: “Who have we got who could take over?” Egle Sumskai, who is unemployed and aged 26, said the Downing Street party had changed her opinion of Johnson and she wouldn’t vote to return him as the constituency’s MP. “It’s not fair on all of us. I’m 100% sure he’s not the right person to lead the country.” Ali Taher, a 32-year-old retail worker, shared Sumskai’s sense of betrayal, and said he was “disappointed”. “Their real face is exposed. They are losing credibility,” he said. Taher was unable to vote during the last election and he said he was uncertain who he would vote for in future. “I like Boris Johnson’s character but not his policies. I feel that he divides rather than unites the nation. When it comes to real responsibilities and being prime minister, he doesn’t seem to take things seriously, especially in the last few years.” He is more interested in voting for a leftwing party, he said, but added that Keir Starmer “feels like a Tory in the closet”. However, several Conservative voters were grateful to Johnson for his work as a local MP. One man, who asked not to be named, gestured at the prosperous-looking high street. “Look how clean it is,” he said. His views were echoed by a property consultant who asked not to be named. He felt the Conservatives had helped him build a good life and enabled him to buy a house, and that journalists were “exaggerating” the parties. “They’re just sitting in the garden,” the 43-year-old said. He said he would vote Conservative again, and would like Rishi Sunak to be the next prime minister since the chancellor has performed well during the pandemic. Debbie Cusmans, a 57-year-old carer, said she had asked Johnson to help her fight an eviction notice, and he had done so. She voted for him last time, and would again. She brandished a copy of a newspaper with a picture of Johnson seated at a No 10 gathering with his wife, Carrie, and several colleagues. “You can’t call that a party,” she said, adding: “It’s a very difficult time to be prime minister.” • Join our journalists for a Guardian Live online event on the No 10 lockdown party and Boris Johnson’s future on Wednesday 19 January. Book hereFor LGBT+ Christians, 2021 provided two significant causes for celebration. In June, the Methodist church became the largest religious denomination in the UK to allow same-sex marriage. Soon after, the Anglican Church in Wales voted to introduce special blessings for same-sex married couples. Across the border in England, the bishop of Liverpool, the Right Rev Paul Bayes, hailed the Welsh move, saying: “I trust that my own church will follow this creative and gospel-inspired lead, and I hope that this will happen soon.” After more than a decade of bitter deadlock and hurtful division in the Church of England, there is a chance that this will be the year progress is made towards answering Bishop Bayes’ prayers. In April, a church-wide consultation on sexuality will come to an end, with its findings due to be published in the autumn under the title Listening to the Whole Church. The intention, according to the bishop of London, the Right Rev Sarah Mullally, is to find “a way forward for the church in relation to human identity, sexuality, relationships and marriage”. A commitment has been made to establishing a clear direction of travel at a General Synod in February 2023. This moment of reckoning was intended to come earlier, but the pandemic intervened. Opting to follow in the footsteps of Wales and Scotland (where the Episcopal Church allowed same-sex marriage back in 2017) would begin a healing process, after what the archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, has described as the “hurt and unnecessary suffering” caused to LGBT+ Christians by a protracted, tortured debate. Many believers have been made to feel like second-class members of the church. It is an absurdity that gay and lesbian English Anglicans should be obliged to travel to Cardiff or Edinburgh for a church blessing or wedding, and the requirement that gay Anglican clergy remain celibate in relationships has blighted lives and fostered an un-Christian culture of suspicion and surveillance. As senior clergy have argued, the church’s rigid stance on same-sex relationships is undermining its outreach efforts, particularly in relation to the young. Theological conservatives have argued that any change to traditional teaching on sexuality should be approved by the worldwide Anglican Communion, which has 85 million members. Given the strong opposition of almost all African Anglican churches to wider LGBT+ rights, this would in effect ensure the preservation of the status quo in perpetuity. But within the Communion, each national church is independent. As Bishop Mullally has clarified, the way forward “is a Church of England decision”. When the time comes to make that decision early next year, it will need to be taken in an atmosphere of mutual respect and compromise. The Church in Wales has agreed a “conscience clause” allowing individual clergy members to opt out of offering blessings to same-sex couples. But as the Church of England seeks to renew itself in the context of declining congregations, it should be bold in reading the signs of the times rather than rely on narrow readings of scripture. The gospels convey a message of loving inclusivity; England’s established church should reflect that.One of the architects of the UK’s updated sanctions legislation has called for the government and crime agencies to target the wealth of the Kazakhstani elite following the deaths of at least 164 people during unrest. Bill Browder, an American investor turned campaigner, said the British government could use anti-corruption legislation to target the rulers of Kazakhstan on the grounds of human rights abuses. “It could be imposed on Kazakhstan very easily, and it should be used much more broadly than it is currently being used,” he told British MPs on Wednesday. A report published last month by the thinktank Chatham House identified 34 UK properties bought by the Kazakh ruling elite from 1998 to 2002 at a cost of about £530m. Pressure is building on the government to use the tools at its disposal, including sanctions, property ownership registers and legal action to curb flows of money from Kazakhstan and other autocratic regimes. Protests over fuel prices in Kazakhstan developed last week into armed battles for control of vital infrastructure such as the airport in Almaty, the financial capital. The protests sparked a violent crackdown as well as external military intervention backed by Russia. Browder was speaking at an event held remotely by MPs on the all-party parliamentary group on anti-corruption and responsible tax alongside MPs including Labour’s Dame Margaret Hodge and the Conservatives’ Andrew Mitchell. All three played a large role in the UK’s introduction of legislation in 2017 giving crime agencies the power to target unexplained wealth. Browder was also instrumental in ensuring gross human rights violations were included in the offences covered by the Sanctions and Anti-Money Laundering Act 2018. The legislation was inspired by Sergei Magnitsky, a Russian lawyer and colleague of Browder who was killed in a Moscow prison after exposing an alleged fraud involving Kremlin officials. Both Hodge and Browder criticised the UK’s National Crime Agency (NCA), saying it has not done enough to target the illicit wealth of dictators and kleptocrats, or their families. The NCA’s approach was “lazy”, going after easy prosecutions rather than bigger targets, Browder said. An NCA spokesperson strongly denied this was the case. Hodge said the UK was failing to pursue sanctions against members of the Kazakh elite in part because of the NCA’s failure in 2020 to freeze the assets of the daughter and grandson of a former president of Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev. Nazarbayev officially stepped down in 2019, but he is widely seen to wield significant influence over the Kazakh government, although that could change following the unrest. On the failure to issue sanctions against Kazakh leaders, Hodge said: “I think they’re running scared because they lost the unexplained wealth order but of course they should use the sanctions regime against them. It’s outrageous.” MPs and campaigners have called for increased funding of crime agencies as well as other measures such as proper checks by the UK’s Companies House register and a register of beneficial ownership of property. Hodge told the Guardian that the UK’s efforts to prevent kleptocrats stashing wealth in the UK could fund themselves if the NCA were allowed to “take a slice of frozen assets to cover their costs”. She also said there should be a cost cap for agencies when prosecuting deep-pocketed wrongdoers in court. The NCA spokesperson said: “Tackling the flow of illicit finance into the UK is a top priority for the National Crime Agency. We will continue to use all the legislation at our disposal to pursue suspected illicit finance, and bring all the capabilities of UK law enforcement to bear against serious criminals and corrupt elites.”Once again the country finds itself paralysed by a crisis in the Conservative party. Tory MPs took a gamble on Boris Johnson’s personality in order to gain the benefit of his Brexit credentials. In 2019, Mr Johnson did lead his party to victory in the general election. But that bet has not paid off subsequently because of who he is: an incompetent rogue, disloyal to almost everyone but himself. His government has stumbled from crisis to crisis in recent months, wrecking its authority. Mr Johnson deals with scandals by hunkering down and waiting for the storm to blow itself out. That is the approach he adopted on Wednesday. After weeks of dodging questions, Mr Johnson offered an apology – and a defence – for spending 25 minutes at a boozy evening event in May 2020 for dozens of people in the Downing Street garden in breach of the law during the first Covid lockdown. However, the Tory leader used lawyerly phrasing to imply that he had, at the time, considered this to be work. This was not a plausible rebuttal, and will not wash with the public. Voters will surely only think that Mr Johnson was at an illegal No 10 garden party when their loved ones were dying alone in hospitals. The lockdown regulations were in place to protect the public and squash the spread of the virus in an unvaccinated population. There could not have been one rule for the public and another for the prime minister. However, voters have no immediate opportunity to evict Mr Johnson from Downing Street. If the prime minister’s apology is genuine, he should accept he broke the law. He almost certainly lied to parliament and deceived voters for weeks. There has to be a price. Labour and the Lib Dems have called for him to go. Mr Johnson is not someone given to resigning. The police could issue a fine. That would be a resigning matter for a prime minister. If Mr Johnson were secure in his job he might shrug it off. But he isn’t. Instead, the prime minister sought shelter behind the investigation by Sue Gray, a senior Cabinet Office official. This is perhaps because Ms Gray is unlikely to rule on Mr Johnson’s defence – that he “thought” the people drinking in No 10’s garden were at a work event. It is more likely that Ms Gray resigns because she thought Mr Johnson was not taking her inquiry seriously than the prime minister departs because of its findings. Mr Johnson can be turfed out of office by Tory MPs – and it is they who need an acceptable explanation for May 2020 to appease angry voters. The odds that Conservative backbenchers change their leader shorten as those of their re-election lengthen. While 15% of the parliamentary party could trigger a no-confidence vote in Mr Johnson, he will be safe – for 12 months – if he has 180 MPs backing him. Many are in open revolt. A few hours after his statement, Douglas Ross, leader of Scottish Conservatives, called for Mr Johnson to resign. A senior backbencher, William Wragg, followed suit. The irony is that Mr Johnson was elected to put an end to an era of political chaos that began with the 2016 referendum on EU membership. However, his shortcomings have ensured Tory rebellions will become part of political life. Factions now vie for party supremacy against a backdrop of post-pandemic rows over net zero and Brexit. Mr Johnson no doubt hopes to fight May’s local elections as Tory leader. But it is now clear that the prime minister grievously betrayed the trust of the nation at a time of national crisis. If he stays in Downing Street, it will only intensify the divisions in Britain over how to run the economy and manage the country.A high court judge’s ruling that the operation of a “VIP lane” for suppliers of personal protective equipment (PPE) during the coronavirus pandemic was illegal is the culmination of a fight for transparency dating from the early months of the pandemic. As a slew of companies with links to senior Tories secured large contracts to supply PPE in the early months of the pandemic, alarm bells began ringing among transparency activists and senior figures in the Labour party, who accused the government of cronyism. Jolyon Maugham, founder of Good Law Project (GLP), which, with EveryDoctor, brought the successful legal challenge to the government’s high priority lane, said his interest was piqued when, in May 2020, the government entered into a £108m PPE contract with PestFix, primarily a pest control business, with net assets of £18,000 at the time according to its accounts. As a consequence, he said GLP began to monitor the awarding of such contracts on the government’s website and “what we saw alarmed us”. Another contract was signed with Ayanda Capital, a London-based investment firm, whose contract, along with that of PestFix, was challenged by GLP. Maugham said one of the GLP lawyers spotted a tweet from Andrew Mills, an adviser to the international trade secretary (then Liz Truss), saying he was a senior board adviser to Ayanda, leading them to begin to join the dots “that there were political connections”. Explaining how GLP, previously best known for its Brexit cases challenging the prorogation of parliament and the government’s right to trigger article 50 without parliamentary approval, became involved, Maugham, a tax barrister and QC, said: “We were very interested in pandemic governance. You don’t need to be a lawyer to know that in times of national crisis, stuff needs to happen quickly and when stuff happens quickly there is, for perfectly understandable reasons, an enhanced prospect of it happening badly. But you’re interested in whether government is acting in ways that minimise misconduct, or – as with the VIP lane – institutionalises misconduct.” Separately from GLP, news organisations, including the Guardian, published articles about a host of contracts made directly with companies associated with Tories without tender, and not relating only to PPE. In May 2020, the Guardian revealed that the healthcare firm Randox, which employed the then Conservative politician Owen Paterson as a paid consultant, had been awarded a £133m contract to produce testing kits. The same month, the Guardian disclosed that state contracts worth more than £1bn had been awarded to private companies dealing with the coronavirus pandemic, without offering other firms the chance to bid. Details of another contract were exposed by the Guardian in July of the same year – an £840,000 contract to research public opinion about government policies awarded to Public First, owned by two long-term associates of Michael Gove and Dominic Cummings, without putting the work out for tender. Maugham said he sought legal advice on whether it would be possible to challenge some of the contracts but was told it would be very difficult. That changed in October 2020 when internal government documents were leaked to GLP showing the existence of the hitherto secret VIP lane. Nevertheless, Maugham said he initially struggled to get the press to publish details, because “it was so startling a disclosure that nobody would cover it. No one could quite believe what they were seeing.” The next month, the government spending watchdog, the National Audit Office (NAO), confirmed the existence of the channel, saying 493 suppliers had been referred to the scheme by a political or official contact. It said more than half (£10.5bn) of contracts relating to the pandemic up to that date had been awarded without competitive tender and companies in the VIP lane were 10 times more likely to land a contract that those outside it. With details of the scheme exposed, suddenly GLP’s prospects of a successful legal challenge improved, culminating in the judge’s ruling on Wednesday that the VIP lane was unlawful, although Mrs Justice O’Farrell concluded that even without it, PestFix and Ayanda would most likely have been awarded contracts. Maugham said the VIP lane “delivered preferential treatment to those placed on it predominantly by ministers and ministers’ offices. It was institutionalised favouritism.” He would now like to see a more thorough investigation, and cited another NAO report, published last year, which said: “The government counter-fraud function has assessed a high risk of fraud in the procurement of PPE.”English clubs due to play in France this weekend have given conflicting messages over fulfilling their fixtures but European rugby chiefs were on Wednesday night cautiously optimistic the matches will go ahead as planned. Newcastle, Sale and Bath are due to play in France but have expressed grave concerns over what they consider to be prohibitive travel restrictions. They would need to isolate for 48 hours on arrival and produce a negative test before leaving quarantine, raising the prospect of players or staff being stranded for 10 days. Organisers of the Champions and Challenge Cups have been working with the Ligue Nationale de Rugby in the hope of gaining confirmation that the French government’s rules would be relaxed in time for the three fixtures to take place. Even though confirmation had not arrived Sale expressed confidence their match at Clermont would go ahead on Sunday but Bath were adamant they would not travel to La Rochelle on Saturday without the requisite guarantees. Newcastle are planning for Friday’s match at Biarritz to go ahead and will travel that morning unless told otherwise. Despite the confusion, Sale’s confidence does chime with that of European Professional Club Rugby. Sale are due to travel on Saturday, returning on Sunday and their director of rugby, Alex Sanderson, struck a positive tone, revealing his South African players are also set to be granted the necessary visas to enter France. “We’re going, that’s what I’ve been informed,” said Sanderson. “My understanding is we don’t have to stay the 48 hours or PCR test, which was the risk because people would probably get trapped in France. We might still need a queen’s seal but all the indications are that it’s happening.” Bath’s director of rugby, Stuart Hooper, was more circumspect, insisting that if the 48-hour isolation period remains in place, his side will be staying put, mindful of how Munster, the Scarlets and Cardiff Blues were all recently stuck in South Africa. “It’s more about the testing in country. If you have to isolate for 48 hours it’s because you have to test out of it or stay isolating for 10 days,” he said. “That’s absolutely not a condition by which we’d travel to France, as you can be stuck there. We still don’t have absolute clarity on what we have to do. We hope to hear very soon about what’s required. I know EPCR are working hard on it.” Ultimately, the key issue appears to be when, rather than if, the French government announces a relaxation of its travel restrictions with the UK. Already the English clubs have been granted an exemption to travel to France as they are deemed to be “in pursuit of economic activity” and it has been widely reported the restrictions are set to be relaxed. It is unclear whether the necessary changes will come into force in time for this weekend’s fixtures, however. Meanwhile, Manu Tuilagi is expected to seek release from England’s pre-Six Nations training camp in Brighton in order to prove his fitness with Sale six days before the competition starts. Eddie Jones is set to name his squad for the Six Nations next Tuesday and England will convene on 24 January on the south coast. But Tuilagi, who has not appeared since sustaining a hamstring injury against South Africa in November, wants to prove his fitness against his old club, Leicester, later that week. “I need to speak to Eddie about this,” said Sanderson. “Eddie has first got to release him to play that game and I know [Manu] doesn’t want to go in without playing that game. I spoke to him today in the corridor and he said we’ll see how I feel after that game. Eddie is another person who said, look we’re going to manage him through this mentally and physically. He’s got to be right, feel like he’s right and that’ll be the discussion after that Leicester match.”Boris Johnson’s half-apology on Wednesday, for accidentally attending a party work event in his own garden, was aimed at buying him some time. But it is becoming increasingly clear that his party is running out of patience. Some backbenchers welcomed Johnson’s belated acknowledgment that he should have broken up the booze-fuelled gathering attended by up to 40 staff in the Downing Street garden on 20 May 2020, and suggested he had won himself the right to await civil servant Sue Gray’s inquiry findings. As one MP put it: “We want the Sue Gray report – it’s only the decent thing to let her actually do it. We shouldn’t pull the trigger on the guilty verdict until we’ve actually seen the report.” A junior minister agreed, saying Johnson had effectively “bet the farm” on the Gray report. “He’s done enough to win himself another week or two. If Gray doesn’t directly pin the blame on him, it will be framed by No 10 as exoneration,” they said. However, many others, publicly and privately, warned that even before Gray sets out the details of lockdown social events in black and white, Johnson’s authority is draining away. They must now decide whether the damage being done to the Conservative brand is so great that forcing a destabilising no confidence vote now is preferable to allowing him to continue in office. “Tory MPs will be thinking: ‘Before, he was a helium balloon that was lifting the party. Now, he’s an anchor dragging us down,’” said one senior Conservative. The Scottish Tory leader Douglas Ross became the first MP to break cover and call for Johnson to go, saying his position was “untenable” after he conceded attending the “bring your own booze” party during lockdown. Ross, who is also an MSP, and his Scottish colleagues have a clear political self-interest in distancing themselves from Johnson, who is anything but popular in Scotland. But MPs with English constituencies also publicly ridiculed Johnson’s insistence that he believed the bash described by his own principal private secretary as “socially distanced drinks” was a “work event”. William Wragg, who sits on the executive of the powerful backbench 1922 Committee, said he and colleagues were “frankly worn out from defending what is invariably indefensible”. Two MPs, including Ross, told the Guardian they had been moved to fire off letters to 1922 Committee chair, Sir Graham Brady, demanding a no-confidence vote which, if Johnson lost, would mark the end of his turbulent premiership. Another said there were “cliques” of MPs gathering, discussing whether to send in a batch of letters, pushing the number closer to the threshold of 54 to trigger a vote. Some fear the drip, drip of revelations about parties is only likely to continue in the coming weeks, making it all but impossible for Johnson to get on with governing. As well as judging whether he should remain prime minister, however, they must also consider the alternatives – and whether they would be capable of restoring Tory fortunes in the polls. It is unclear to say the least whether frontrunners Liz Truss or Rishi Sunak could bind together Johnson’s winning “get Brexit done” coalition of voters in northern “red wall” seats, and more traditional Tories. They may also be reluctant to inherit the crown ahead of what is likely to be a rocky period, with inflation running above 5%, energy bills rocketing and the Tories primed to lose a swath of seats in May’s local council elections. That may stay the hand of some of their supporters in penning letters to Brady. Some cabinet ministers loyally tweeted their support on Wednesday – but their backing appeared almost as carefully worded as Johnson’s Commons statement, with Sajid Javid, for example, saying Johnson was right to apologise, and “I completely understand why people feel let down”. Meanwhile, Johnson’s plan now appears to be to await the Gray inquiry report in the hope it gives him just enough wriggle-room to continue to claim he was not aware that Covid guidance was being broken. With some officials – including his principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds, the party invitation-sender, and director of communications, Jack Doyle – likely to have to go, he could then announce the major shake-up of his team MPs have been calling for since before Christmas. “Why throw bodies overboard when you can use them as human shields?” said one senior Tory. As the Omicron wave hopefully wanes, Johnson could then attempt the last resort of every embattled prime minister – a relaunch, shifting the narrative to what he claims is his government’s mission of “levelling up”. But as a dramatic day in Westminster drew to a close, it was very unclear whether his own backbenchers are willing to give him that opportunity. Join our journalists for a Guardian Live online event on the No 10 lockdown party and Boris Johnson’s future on Wednesday 19 January. Book herePrince Andrew faces the prospect of giving evidence in a high-profile trial after a New York judge refused to throw out a civil case over allegations he sexually assaulted Virginia Giuffre when she was 17 years old. Legal experts said the Duke of York has “no good options left” after he failed to have Giuffre’s case against him dismissed, with Manhattan federal court judge Lewis Kaplan rejecting his motion “in all respects”. The ruling could see Andrew, who strenuously denies the allegations, divulging aspects of his personal life in open court this autumn. One option of avoiding such a sensational trial would be for the duke to reach an out-of-court settlement with Giuffre, possibly costing him millions, though there are suggestions she would want her day in court. Such an agreement could cause monumental reputational damage for the monarchy, however, with the duke already forced to step back from public life. The news is a very unwelcome development for the royal family, coming just three days after full details of the celebrations for the Queen’s platinum jubilee in June were revealed. Buckingham Palace declined to comment, saying: “We would not comment on what is an ongoing legal matter.” In his 46-page detailed ruling, Kaplan rejected the argument put by Andrew’s legal team that Giuffre had waived her right to sue him under a previously secret $500,000 (£360,000) settlement she made with sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. Giuffre alleges Epstein trafficked her to have sex with several people, including Andrew. In the conclusion of his written ruling, Kaplan said: “For the foregoing reasons, defendant’s motion to dismiss the complaint or for a more definite statement is denied in all respects. “Given the court’s limited task of ruling on this motion, nothing in this opinion or previously in these proceedings properly may be construed as indicating a view with respect to the truth of the charges or counter-charges or as to the intention of the parties in entering into the 2009 agreement.” Outlining his reasons for denying the motion, Kaplan said the court was not able at this stage to consider the duke’s efforts to cast doubt on Giuffre’s claims or whether he was covered by the settlement agreement, suggesting these were issues for a trial. He said: “The 2009 agreement cannot be said to demonstrate, clearly and unambiguously, the parties intended the instrument ‘directly’, ‘primarily’, or ‘substantially’, to benefit Prince Andrew.” Giuffre’s lawyer David Boies said his client “wants to achieve justice” rather than focusing on any one person. Speaking to Sky News, he said: “She has been on a campaign to try and expose sex trafficking and the evils of sexual abuse – I think that is much more important than any individual involved in this. The key individuals are Jeffrey Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell. I think the participants in the sex trafficking are also people that need to be held to account. “How they will be held to account, I think will vary from person to person. What is justice in an individual case will vary but I think it is a combination of those things that she is seeking.” Andrew’s options now are stark and unattractive, according to legal observers. Nick Goldstone, head of disputes resolution at Ince, said: “The ruling dismissing Prince Andrew’s strike-out applications is very thorough and comprehensive. The applications appear to have done the prince more harm than good.” The duke can seek a settlement out of court, though a settlement with no admission of liability could be costly, and Giuffre may not wish to settle. He can also contest the case, but that means giving a deposition under oath – possibly giving oral evidence – during which he will be quizzed on highly personal matters. He can also default, effectively ignoring the court case, but that would lead to a finding against him. Media lawyer Mark Stephens, of Howard Kennedy, told the BBC: “Andrew’s got no good options now. He can’t make things better so, essentially, I think he’s either going to have to engage in the trial process or he’s going to have to settle, and that may well be his least worst option.” If he decides to contest, legal observers said the duke would be advised to testify, though he cannot be compelled to do so. If he were to decline, “from a presentational perspective, that would not look good”, said Goldstone. Andrew could file for a motion of reconsideration on Kaplan’s ruling, or he could take an appeal straight to the second circuit court of appeals. Any appeal would delay proceedings. The duke is in the process of selling his £18m Swiss ski chalet amid speculation he requires the money for legal fees. If the case proceeds to full trial, it could see him forced to call witnesses, which could include members of the royal family, in particular his daughter Princess Beatrice. He maintained in his disastrous 2019 BBC Newsnight interview that, on the evening cited by Giuffre, he went with Beatrice to a late-afternoon children’s party at a Pizza Express in Woking. After the party, he claims, he was at home with his children all night. The ruling deals yet another blow to the embattled prince, whose reputation and standing within the royal family has already been tarnished by his friendships with Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell. He withdrew from public duties soon after the Newsnight interview, which failed to draw a line under his relationship with Epstein, a convicted sex offender who counted former presidents Bill Clinton and Donald Trump in his circle. Epstein killed himself in a Manhattan jail after his July 2019 arrest on sex trafficking charges. Maxwell, 60, the daughter of the late British press titan Robert Maxwell, was found guilty of five counts for luring girls as young as 14 into Epstein’s world for him to sexually abuse. Giuffre has claimed that the prince was “sweating profusely all over me” at a London nightclub on a night when they allegedly had a sexual encounter. Andrew said in his BBC interview that Giuffre’s statement about his perspiration could not be true, claiming: “I have a peculiar medical condition which is that I don’t sweat or I didn’t sweat at the time.” As part of Giuffre’s suit, her legal team has requested documents that would prove whether or not Andrew can sweat.In Wendy Sherman, the Biden administration has sent its most experienced negotiator into the fray, in an attempt to fend off a Russian invasion of Ukraine and a new conflict in Europe. No one in government has spent more time in high-stakes talks with hostile states than the 72-year-old deputy secretary of state, who has represented the US at two rounds of critical discussions with Russia this week. She was part of an extraordinary mission 23 years ago, led by the former defence secretary William Perry, to try to do a deal with North Korea. For many North Koreans, it was the first time they had seen an American, and the regime went all-out to put on a show of a joyfully contented country. At one point, a bus stopped in front of the delegation, seemingly by chance, and its passengers poured out and went straight into a dance routine. “Everything was supposed to be ‘spontaneous’,” Sherman later told the Guardian. “And there was a cameraman following everything we did with a 1950s hand-cranked camera. It was all rather surreal. “When we wanted to talk, we walked outside, even knowing there might be bugs in the trees. When we wanted to get a message across and were not sure who we should be talking to, we would sit in a waiting room and speak, knowing we were being listened to.” Sherman did not set out to be a diplomat. She was an activist first, working as a social worker in Baltimore, trying to make affordable housing more available. After jobs as a staffer in Congress and the Democratic National Committee, she ran Emily’s List, an organisation committed to raising funds for pro-choice Democratic women’s candidates. That background combined with her deep involvement in negotiating the 2015 nuclear deal with Iran, have made her the subject of deep Republican suspicion. But her experience and cool demeanour won over enough Republicans to win Senate confirmation as deputy secretary of state, by 56 votes to 42. While the former secretary of state John Kerry would fly in at critical moments of the Iranian talks, it was Sherman who led the day-to-day negotiations for the US – a feat of stamina as the discussions frequently went deep into the night. Laura Rozen, who covered the Iran nuclear talks from beginning to end and who now writes the Diplomatic Substack newsletters, recalls a European diplomat observing that, while the Iranians got on better with Kerry, Sherman was seen as the more effective negotiator. “What I think about a lot, watching Sherman doing high-stakes [nuclear] diplomacy with Iran and now with Russia, is her mantra, that the skills are transferrable,” Rozen said. “She trained as a social worker and came into foreign policy through Democratic party politics … and now, as a 72-year-old grandmother, Sherman is working with her former Russian counterpart in the Iran nuclear deal talks [Russian Deputy FM Sergey Ryabkov], to see if the US/transatlantic alliance and Russia can agree on diplomatic solutions to avert war and preserve European peace and security.” The short silver hair and metal-rimmed glasses add to her reputation as a steely, no-nonsense negotiator, but her friend Douglas Rediker, an economist who was formerly the US representative on the executive board of the International Monetary Fund, insists that there is a softer side, that also enhances her skills as a negotiator. “It’s trite but she is tough as nails, she is smart as a whip and she is also enormously human,” Rediker said. “There are some people who are extremely tough and experienced to the point where they are so cynical, that they lose the element of humanity. “Wendy can act like and think like a person as well as someone simply espousing the mandate that she’s been given.”Permission to build a 51-storey skyscraper with a single fire escape for more than 400 flats is expected to be granted on Thursday, in a move safety campaigners described as “scary”. Plans for one of the UK’s tallest residential buildings will go before the London Borough of Tower Hamlets planning committee on Thursday evening with a recommendation from officials for approval. The Cuba Street tower, close to Canary Wharf, will have 655 bedrooms, with the highest close to 170 metres in the air – two-and-a-half times the height of Grenfell Tower. It features only a single staircase, which is allowed under building regulations if the strategy in a fire is to tell residents to stay put in their homes. All new apartment blocks above 11 metres must also be fitted with sprinklers. But fire safety experts warn it is inadequate because design features meant to keep people safe in their flats might fail, triggering an evacuation while firefighters are trying to use the same stairs in the opposite direction. The tower is being developed by Ballymore, and residents of another of the company’s nearby apartment complexes, New Providence Wharf (NPW), have also raised concerns about the design. Smoke clogged corridors at NPW during a serious fire in May, which injured three people. The London fire brigade discovered ventilation systems, the firefighter lift and door holders didn’t perform as expected. “It’s very scary,” said Natalie Carter, a resident at New Providence Wharf and part of the Tower Hamlets Justice for Leaseholders group. “If they do need to evacuate for any reason you are talking about doing that on the same staircase the firefighters would be using, it just seems absolutely bonkers.” Arnold Tarling, a chartered surveyor and fire safety expert, added: “It is utter madness that this is still allowed.” He recently inspected a newly built apartment tower in the same area of London and discovered serious failings that would mean residents might not be safe to stay in their flats in a fire. He said the worst-case scenario of having a single staircase was “another Bronx fire, another Grenfell, another Lakanal type fire”, references to blazes in social housing blocks last week in New York, in west London in 2017 and in south London in 2009 that together killed 89 people. Fire safety experts contacted by the Guardian said that second staircases reduce the area for saleable apartments and so limit profitability. The president of the Royal Institute of British Architects, Simon Allford, said public safety must be the fundamental concern of the government’s new building safety regulator. He called on it to set a new height threshold at which at least two staircases are required to provide for access for firefighters and residents’ evacuation. The international building code – which is adopted by many countries and US states but not the UK – requires that, from four storeys, residential blocks have at least two staircases. The latest 2019 version of UK guidance states simply that “appropriate means of escape in case of fire from the building … [must be] capable of being safely and effectively used at all material times”. “In my opinion you have to build in resilience,” said Russ Timpson, secretary of the Tall Building Fire Safety Network. “You have to have a plan A and a plan B because if stay-put doesn’t work, a simultaneous evacuation is an almost impossible challenge with a single staircase. Around the world firefighters talk about having one escape stair and one attack stair.” Asked about the single staircase, a Ballymore spokesperson said the project “will only move forward with the support of the London fire brigade and building control”. The Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said it is “reviewing the building regulations guidance, including what provision of escape routes is needed to ensure residents are safe in the event of a fire”. A spokesperson said: “We’re bringing in the biggest improvements to building safety in 40 years – with tougher regulations that will give more rights and protections for residents and make homes safer.” Building safety campaigners are also arguing Ballymore should invest first in fixing fire safety problems in existing blocks as part of the wider building safety crisis. On Monday, Michael Gove, the secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities, announced the government would legislate to force developers to pay to fix unsafe apartment blocks. The Treasury told Gove he “must prioritise safety over supply”. Ballymore said it has “committed significant investment towards covering the cost of cladding remediation, with works having been under way across our developments for some time, and are working to ensure leaseholders bear no cost”. • This article was amended on 20 January 2022. An earlier version said that two staircases are required by the international building code (IBC) in buildings over 128 metres. For residential blocks, the IBC requirement applies from the four-storey level (10-15 metres).Nursing and midwifery leaders have urged Sajid Javid to delay the introduction of compulsory Covid jabs for NHS staff and said the controversial policy amounted to “self-sabotage”. The plea from the Royal College of Nursing (RCN) and Royal College of Midwives (RCM) comes as NHS trusts in England prepare to start sending out dismissal letters from 3 February to any member of staff who has not had their first dose of a vaccine by then. They fear that the exodus of frontline personnel that mandatory vaccination is likely to trigger will make it even harder for NHS care providers to maintain normal care, given it would happen just as the service is grappling with record levels of staff sickness closely linked to the Omicron variant. The government’s own risk assessment of mandatory jabs published last November estimated that it could lead to the loss of 73,000 staff in a service that in England already has 93,000 vacancies. NHS bosses recently warned that that could make it unsafe and unviable to run entire units of hospitals, especially maternity units. “We are calling on the government to recognise this risk and delay a move, which by its own calculations looks set to backfire,” said Pat Cullen, the RCN’s general secretary and chief executive. “To dismiss valued nursing staff during this crisis would be an act of self-sabotage.” Cullen advised ministers to extend the deadline for staff to have two doses of vaccine, which is currently 31 March, so that trusts have more time to continue their efforts to persuade the still-unvaccinated to get jabbed, which has helped boost the overall immunisation rate in the NHS. “Encouraging people to get vaccinated is the best way to boost vaccine take-up. Nursing staff, who are well-placed to understand people’s concerns and are highly trusted by them, have led the Covid-19 vaccination programme and have a key role to play in addressing any concerns people may have about being vaccinated.” Gill Walton, the chief executive of the RCM, warned Javid that his insistence on mandatory vaccination has “opened a Pandora’s box of unforeseen consequences”. She said: “I appeal to the health secretary to reconsider his decision and to delay the implementation. Throughout the pandemic, maternity staff have fought to keep services open and to provide the best care to women and families. It has been unrelenting and so it’s no surprise that staff absence is currently at its highest in the pandemic so far. “Moving forward with mandatory vaccination could only see staffing levels fall further. The government has opened a Pandora’s box of unforeseen consequences – but there is an opportunity now to close it. We are urging Sajid Javid to do just that,” Walton added. “Levels of vaccination in the NHS are high and rising and we should be using discussion, persuasion and education to increase vaccination among NHS staff, not the hammer blow of mandating it.” Significantly, the NHS Confederation, which represents hospital trusts in England, made clear it believed that the policy is being introduced at undue haste and would deepen already major staffing problems. “NHS leaders support the requirement that staff who are in regular contact with patients be vaccinated against Covid-19”, said Danny Mortimer, its deputy chief executive. “Both the risks and consequences of a mandatory approach were highlighted by leaders at the time of consultation, and they would have preferred to have had longer to meet these requirements. “As the deadline approaches some frontline staff will have to leave their present roles if they continue to decline to be vaccinated. This will reduce frontline NHS staff numbers even further and lead to more gaps in capacity at a time of intense pressure and patient demand”, he added. However, the Department of Health and Social Care defended the policy. A spokesperson said: “NHS and care staff do amazing work and we are thankful to those who have chosen to get the vaccine. “Health and social care workers are responsible for looking after some of the most vulnerable people in society, many of whom are more likely to suffer serious health consequences if exposed to the virus. “This is about patient safety, and ensuring people in hospital or care have as much protection as possible. Vaccinations remain our best defence against Covid-19.”Good morning. The true picture of Omicron’s spread in Australia is becoming clearer as New South Wales joins other states in recording rapid tests results, Prince Andrew fails in his bid to have a sexual abuse lawsuit dismissed, and Novak Djokovic faces serious consequences for his actions after testing positive for Covid in December. The Omicron wave has been more damaging for business than lockdown, Melbourne business owners have calculated, with the absence of state or federal support exacerbating Covid-related staff shortages. On the retail and hospitality strip Chapel Street, 35% of the 2,200 staff employed have lost shifts while either sick or isolating, prompting business owners to call for a return of the $750-a-week disaster payments. Across the nation, businesses are temporarily closing as food shortages continue and music festivals are cancelled. Aged care providers have said family members have been providing critical care services due to staff shortages, with Covid outbreaks in at least 495 facilities nationally. Rates of hospitalisation have hit record highs, prompting doctors to encourage mild symptom sufferers to remain at home. It comes as NSW prepares for a huge jump in its Covid figures, with more than 50,000 positive rapid tests already registered after the online system was launched yesterday. Prince Andrew faces a damaging, high-profile court case, after a New York judge quashed his lawyers’ attempts to have Virginia Giuffre’s sexual abuse lawsuit against him thrown out. The Duke of York’s legal team had attempted to argue that a 2009 settlement between Giuffre and Jeffrey Epstein shielded the duke from the lawsuit, but judge Lewis Kaplan ruled the case against the prince could proceed. Analysts say it’s “a devastating blow” for the Duke of York, and by association, the royal family. Prince Andrew faces giving evidence and undergoing cross-examination over his association with convicted sex trafficker Ghislaine Maxwell and sex offender Epstein, unless an out-of-court settlement is reached. Novak Djokovic could face a fine or even prison in Serbia after his admission that he broke isolation while he had Covid last month, lawyers have said. The world No 1 male tennis player is still waiting for the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, to decide whether to deport him. Djokovic on Wednesday acknowledged that he attended a newspaper interview and photoshoot in Belgrade on 18 December, just after he was alerted to his positive Covid test. The player also blamed “human error” by his support team for a mistake in his immigration paperwork, in a statement which has raised further questions. Lawyers in Serbia told local reporters that breaking the country’s strict isolation rules was an offence and subject to a fine or prison sentence of up to three years – although community service was more likely. Australia Michaelia Cash’s department has defended religious schools’ right to sack teachers for their views on sexuality and appeared to confirm that safeguards for gay students will be delayed until after the religious discrimination bill. Former MP Tony Windsor has backed the request by traditional owners that the New South Wales government protect sacred sites on land sold back to farmers after a campaign by the Gomeroi people prevented Chinese mining company Shenhua from mining the property. A Perth magistrate has thrown out a case against an Extinction Rebellion activist, charged with aiding and abetting activists who used washable chalk to write messages on a suburban bridge. Human Rights Watch called the actions of police in the case “excessive and overzealous”. The world Boris Johnson is facing calls from his own party to step down as UK prime minister, after he admitted, via a carefully worded statement, to having attended a Downing Street party during lockdown, believing it was a “work event”. Nato’s secretary general has warned of “a real risk for a new armed conflict in Europe”, after talks between Russian, US, and Nato delegates ending without progress over the Ukraine crisis. EU dignitaries meanwhile have complained of being “deliberately excluded” from the talks. An 80-year-old Palestinian man, detained and handcuffed during an Israeli raid, has been found dead. The body of Omar Abdalmajeed As’ad was found with a plastic zip-tie still around one wrist, but the Israeli military says he was alive when their soldiers released him. Recommended reads “It’s almost impossible to crowbar other people into doing what we think they should.” Faced with three people locked into “or else” propositions, advice columnist Eleanor Gordon-Smith recommends turning the other cheek. “Sometimes the parts of our lives we mess up in are the ones where we never thought we could do well: ‘I’m just like this.’ It takes real energy and self possession to break irresponsible habits – I wonder if hearing ‘you are up to this task’ might fuel him more than ‘you aren’t and you should be’”. “When covering the economy at the moment, it is best to remember the old joke that if you’re not confused, it is because you’re not paying attention.” Between the pandemic madness, historic trend disruption, and partisan spin, it’s hard to make top or tail of most present economic indicators, Greg Jericho explains. “So how is the economy going? In reality we don’t really know – nothing is as it usually is, nor as we can expect it to be in the future.” “Amid a flurry of data breaches, password leaks and Malware text scams last year, many of us have become more aware of the need to secure our digital information.” So how to navigate endless, tedious requests for unique alphabetical and numerical combinations? As Rafqa Touma writes, it’s time to embrace the era of the password manager: “the trusty vault of codes long forgotten”. As Feather Thompson recounts, when her husband Merv’s scattered ashes kept washing back in at the beach “it was clear [he] didn’t want to go.” A sailor, and Thompson’s companion of 60 years, connection with the sea always brought back fond memories of Merv, she tells Christine Retschlag. Listen Revisited: the regent honeyeater’s quest for love. With only a few hundred left in the wild, researchers made a startling discovery about the regent honeyeater – it was mimicking other birds, but had forgotten its own song. On this episode of Full Story, environment reporter Graham Readfearn examines the campaign to help them sing again. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport It’s been a bruising Ashes schedule in which the walking wounded almost outnumber the fit. But as numerous Australians and Englishmen await nervous selection chats, as Geoff Lemon writes, headaches over Mitchell Starc’s selection lead the line. The African Cup of Nations has been engulfed by farce, with a Zambian referee incorrectly blowing full-time on a match between Tunisia and Mali, twice. Tunisia’s coach claims his players were already in post-match ice baths before being recalled to the pitch. Media roundup Archaeologists have handed down a scathing assessment of the heritage report filed as part of a $1bn proposal to raise the wall of Warragamba Dam, the Sydney Morning Herald reports, calling the work “manifestly inadequate” in meeting Aboriginal heritage expectations. A temporary relaxation of visa regulations will allow 400,000 foreign students to work extra hours, according to the Financial Review. The move is designed to help ease Covid-19 related labour shortages. And, the mastermind behind an alleged $150m phone text scam in the US has pleaded guilty as part of a plea deal that could see him serve his jail time in Australia, the West Australian writes. Coming up The draw for the Australian Open will be conducted on Thursday at 3pm, AEDT. The religious discrimination bill will go before a public hearing of the human rights committee. And if you’ve read this far … What’s the worst moment during a blind date you can remember? For one woman in China, a snap decision for the city of Zhengzhou to go into lockdown has meant her date has not yet ended. And while her daily video diaries have become viral sensations, the extra time together hasn’t seen love bloom, with the woman, Wang, describing her would-be paramour as “as mute as a wooden mannequin”, and his cooking skills as “mediocre”. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.