Britain’s retailers have said the soaring cost of living risks dragging down high street sales in 2022 after a bumper Christmas trading period and year of recovery in consumer spending. Sounding the alarm over the risks for the UK economy as whole, the British Retail Consortium said there were significant headwinds for the industry in 2022 from high inflation, rising energy bills and planned tax increases. In a joint report with the accountancy firm KPMG, the BRC said soaring living costs would erode households’ spending power and had the potential to weigh on retail sales after a strong festive season and a year of recovering ground that was lost during the first stage of the Covid-19 pandemic. According to the latest snapshot, total retail sales rose by 2.1% during the key month of December, compared with a year earlier, and were up by 4.6% compared with 2019, before the pandemic struck. Reflecting a stronger performance for the full year, as Britain’s economy recovered from repeated lockdowns, total sales grew by 9.9% compared with 2020, and by 6.6% compared with 2019. However, retail bosses said the emergence of Omicron and increasing pressure on household budgets could hit sales at the start of 2022. Helen Dickinson, chief executive of the BRC, said: “Retail faces significant headwinds in 2022, as consumer spending is held back by rising inflation, increasing energy bills, and April’s national insurance hike. “It will take continued agility and resilience if they are to battle the storm ahead, while also tackling issues from labour shortages to rising transport and logistics costs.” Boris Johnson is under growing pressure from his own MPs to take action over the crisis. Household utility bills are expected to rise sharply from April, when the energy regulator, Ofgem, lifts its consumer price cap after surging wholesale gas and electricity costs. Energy industry bosses have said prices could rise by more than 50%, or about £700 per year, in a “national crisis”. The increase will come in the same month as the government’s plan to raise national insurance by 1.25 percentage points is introduced. According to the report by BRC and KPMG, sales of clothing and jewellery continued to dominate Christmas gift buying, while spending on food and drink was solid despite concern over the impact of Omicron. Industry leaders said concerns about supply chain problems appeared to have been overcome as retailers “pulled out all the stops”. Dickinson said many people had chosen to shop online in December rather than travel to nearby high streets and shopping centres. Sales of loungewear were up as office staff returned to working from home and spending on formalwear dipped as Christmas parties were cancelled. Separate figures from Barclaycard showed consumer card spending grew 12.2% in December compared with the same period in 2019, boosted by supermarket purchases as consumers stocked up on festive food and drink. However, spending on hospitality and leisure slumped as festive gatherings were cancelled and more people isolated or chose to stay at home. Barclaycard, the UK’s biggest credit card provider, processing nearly half of all card transactions, said spending at restaurants decreased by 14.1% in December compared with the same month in 2019, and followed a 3.5% fall in November. Spending in bars, pubs and clubs in December rose 21.2%, down on the 35% increase in November, compared with the same months in 2019. Barclaycard said 43% of 2,000 people surveyed on behalf of the credit card provider expected high inflation to affect their household budgeting. “The wider economic picture is encouraging consumers to be more cautious with their discretionary spending,” it said.Steven Gerrard refused to blame a lengthy VAR call that led to an Aston Villa equaliser being ruled out for offside for his team’s elimination from the FA Cup by Manchester United on Monday night, with the manager instead urging his team to “flip” the result when hosting them in the Premier League on Saturday. Villa lost the third-round tie at Old Trafford 1-0 having conceded Scott McTominay’s early header but then dominated throughout. United also rode their luck as Villa had two goals ruled out in the second half. The latter was a relatively straightforward offside call against Danny Ings, who had played in Ollie Watkins to poke home from close range. However, the first was more debatable and involved a delay of more than three minutes with VAR calling on the referee, Michael Oliver, to make a judgment after Ings had scored from close range. Oliver consulted the pitchside monitor and eventually ruled that Villa’s midfielder Jacob Ramsey was offside and had impeded Edinson Cavani in the build-up. “The disappointment was that it took three and a half minutes to iron it out,” said Gerrard. “We had the momentum at the time and that three and a half minutes took a lot of the sting out of the game. But it’s not the reason we lost. We need to focus on other things, not just VAR going against us. The players have an opportunity to flip the mood, flip the feeling [on Saturday] – they have an opportunity at Villa Park to straighten that out.” Gerrard also brushed off being taunted throughout the tie by the Old Trafford crowd for being a former captain of Liverpool. “It was relatively quiet – I have been to noisier stadiums than this,” he said. “ It was a good Cup tie, a good atmosphere but in terms of what I got, water off a duck’s back.” Meanwhile United’s interim manager, Ralf Rangnick, defended Marcus Rashford, who performed poorly against Villa and has now gone 11 games without scoring, his worst run since the 2016-17 season. “He’s trying hard, done well in training in the last couple of days,” said the 63-year-old. “In the first half we found him quite often - the second half not as often and so we decided to make changes with Anthony Elanga and Jesse Lingard [coming on for Rashford and Bruno Fernandes].”The controversy surrounding the entry to Australia of Novak Djokovic for the Australian Open has been strange and wild. Since the Covid pandemic landed, Australia has positioned itself most extremely as a global outlier on border control. This has taken us to stranger legal places than most; stranger even than the migration law mashups that Tampa and 9/11 delivered some 20 years ago. What kind of democracy bans its own citizens from departing without specific approval by border control bureaucrats, never mind returning? One human cost has been families, lovers and friends split across internal borders that nobody had much considered since we became a federation, instead of a cluster of British colonies, well over a century ago. And Australians have become strangely hardened to stories about so many people across our diaspora similarly forbidden to reunite, stranded everywhere from Bangladesh to Brussels and Beijing. I thought we’d hit a new nadir in October when a Covid-positive man from New South Wales escaped quarantine detention in then Covid-zero Tasmania. Most of my home state was sent into snap lockdown, and a song went viral on social media calling for the offender’s lynching and anal rape. Many perversely enjoyed that spectacle – and political leaders didn’t hose down the hysteria. The Djokovic case ratcheted these unhealthy dynamics to the next level. The Belgrade factor didn’t help – my inbox filled with hate speech I haven’t seen directed against any people from the former Yugoslavia since the 1990s Balkan wars. Should I spell out that Djokovic is as beloved to most Serbs as Ash Barty is to most Australians – connected with pride in celebrating the best side of our complex national identity and healing some painful history? No point, I pressed delete. Waves of anti-Novak abuse stormed ahead, including smart-arse memes that made our Tassie jingle look gentle. All clearly fuelled by Australian frustrations caused by almost two years of on/off/on again lockdowns, terrible anxiety about the current Covid spread and lack of testing access, and no real idea about what will happen next for health support, food supplies and income security. Because Djokovic – like no small number of elite athletes internationally – refuses to consent to vaccination against Covid, he fast became the whipping boy for all of it. My love of tennis is only eclipsed by my fandom for the rule of law. Which doesn’t mean flinging around slogans like “rules are rules” then doing whatever plays to people’s basest instincts, politically and polemically. Within our nation and distinctive federation, the rule of law has been one of Australia’s better cultural assets, which is why so many people have emigrated here. I’m profoundly opposed to the way Australian governments since Tampa and 9/11 have demonised people legitimately seeking asylum, and locked them up in inhumane conditions – including the Park hotel in Melbourne, where Djokovic was detained, along with the Czech tennis player Renata Voracova, whose visa was also cancelled after the fact, and who left Australia on Saturday. I had quiet if anxious hopes that the federal court would step up in this profoundly important test case, which engages much bigger questions for Australians – including around the power dynamics between our executive and the judiciary – than anything about Djokovic and his plight. I wasn’t disappointed, despite the unforeseen difficulty of accessing the court’s livestreamed proceedings – mainly now available on YouTube, and way more interesting than Netflix. The mix of migration and administrative law in question – plus the “wriggly fish” of estoppel – is exceedingly complex, in a way few laypeople will appreciate, and that even most lawyers will struggle to understand. The unsensational and impressive spectacle of Judge Anthony Kelly in dialogue with counsel was calm, clear and mutually respectful. I certainly welcomed the judge’s release order, which was based on the legally “unreasonable” treatment of Djokovic by Australian Border Force officials in the early hours of Serbian Christmas Eve, last Thursday. The power ball has now passed to Australia’s immigration minister, who lawfully can cancel Djokovic’s legitimatised visa. If he does – in the lead-up to a pivotal Australian election, where spin doctors may have assumed that playing an anti-Serb, anti-elite and aggressively denialist card amid this government’s failures to contain Covid would be an easy point to score – Djokovic will be best out of Australia. Dr Natasha Cica is the director of change consultancy Kapacity.org. She formerly was a legal adviser to the Australian parliament on national security, immigration and human rightsThanks for following along – this blog is now closed. You can catch up with the latest coronavirus coverage here. We have also launched a new live news feed here with all the current developments. Here’s a quick rundown of all the latest headlines: Boris Johnson was accused on Monday night of an “utterly outrageous” breach of lockdown rules as a leaked email showed one of his top officials invited more than 100 Downing Street staff to a “bring your own booze” party during the first lockdown. The police are now investigating. Boris Johnson has ordered officials to examine plans to cut Covid isolation to five days in England as scientists urged caution over the lack of evidence to support a change. NHS England has struck a deal with private healthcare providers under which their hospitals will be ready to start treating NHS patients who cannot get the Covid or non-Covid care they need because their local NHS hospital is under too much pressure. Pfizer Inc chief executive Albert Bourla said on Monday that moving toward a redesigned Covid-19 vaccine that is specifically targeted to combat the Omicron variant is the “most likely scenario.” The small number of people in Italy’s population who refuse to be vaccinated against Covid-19 are largely responsible for the continued health crisis, prime minister Mario Draghi said on Monday. In the US, a new record has been set for the number of people admitted to hospital with Covid-19, with 132,646 currently on wards, according to Reuters. The latest figure, which comes as the highly contagious Omicron strain spreads across the country, surpassed the record of 132,051 set in January last year. Moderna has announced it expects record sales of about $18.5bn (£13.6bn) in contracts for its Covid vaccine in 2022. Novak Djokovic’s brother reportedly ended a press conference after questions about why the tennis ace appeared in public in Belgrade a day after he had tested positive for Covid-19. Emmanuel Macron has condemned protesters on the French overseas territory of Saint Pierre and Miquelon who pelted an MP with seaweed and dirt during a protest against vaccine passes. Stricter pandemic measures are to be introduced in Sweden in response to a rising number of Covid cases and pressure on hospitals, the prime minister has said. The prime minister of Spain, Pedro Sánchez, has called for European officials to consider ditching detailed pandemic tracking for Covid in favour of a flu-like monitoring system. The change would mean treating Covid-19 as an “endemic illness” rather than a pandemic, Sánchez said on Monday. He pointed out that deaths as a proportion of recorded cases has fallen since the pandemic began. France has announced an easing of Covid rules for schools as record-high case numbers shut down thousands of classes and sparked concern among parents and teachers. Prime minister Jean Castex told France 2 television on Monday that more than 10,000 classes - 2% of the total - had to be cancelled because of coronavirus outbreaks, but that the government would not “shut down the schools or the country”, Agence France-Presse reports. France on Monday reported more than 125,000 new coronavirus cases as the Omicron variant drives up daily infections to record highs. Under the first change, from Tuesday, parents will no longer be obliged to pick up their child immediately for Covid testing if he or she is a contact case of a virus sufferer. Home-testing will be deemed sufficient in such cases rather than testing at an officially approved site, with the parents signing a certificate to confirm the result. The test kits, available from pharmacies, will be free. Peru reported an all-time high 70,000 Covid-19 infections in the first week of January, a health official told reporters on Monday. Dante Cersso, a government health official, said the new weekly case count had exceeded the previous record of 67,107 cases during the second week of April of last year. At the time, Peru was going through a brutal second wave that left the country with the world’s worst per-capita death rate, according to Johns Hopkins University. About 0.5% of Peru’s population has died of Covid-19. Death counts have not spiked with the recent surge in cases, according to data from Peru’s Ministry of Health, Reuters reports. More than 65% of Peru’s population has received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine, according to Our World in Data. Peru is also offering booster shots to all adults three months after receiving their second shot. Samantha Lock back with you on the blog reporting to you from Sydney. Here’s a quick snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across Australia. Victoria recorded 37,944 new Covid-19 cases and 13 deaths while NSW recorded 25,870 new Covid-19 cases and 11 deaths. Novak Djokovic yesterday won an appeal against his visa cancellation after spending four days in an immigration detention centre. A wild 24 hours saw ecstatic Djokovic’s fans pepper-sprayed by police as they celebrated his release in Melbourne. But the victory comes with the threat that immigration minister Alex Hawke may revoke his entry visa for a second time, using powers granted by Australia’s Migration Act. Djokovic said he was “pleased” and “grateful” for the ruling, and was still determined to stay and compete at the Australian Open. Meanwhile, Australia passed the grim milestone of 1m active Covid-19 cases yesterday. There have been 250,000 Covid cases since Friday alone. Brazil reported 34,788 new cases in the past 24 hours and 110 deaths from Covid-19, the health ministry said on Monday. Infections are increasing in Brazil, with 32,954 new infections reported on average each day. According to the Reuters Covid-19 Tracker that is 43% of the country’s peak, the highest daily average reported on 23 June 2021. The South American country has now registered 22,558,695 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 620,091, according to ministry data. Israeli foreign minister Yair Lapid has tested positive for Covid-19, Israel’s Ynet news website reported on Monday. Lapid was in quarantine at home and was feeling well, the website reported. In a tweet, the minister said: “I feel great because I’m vaccinated. Go get vaccinated, put on a mask, [and] we’ll get through this together.” Several Israeli lawmakers have been infected with the virus over the past week, Haaretz reports, as the Omicron variant drives a surge in cases in the country. Lapid’s deputy, Idal Roll, is also in isolation after having tested positive last week. He was confirmed to have contracted the virus a few days after seen in footage at a New Year’s Eve party without a mask. From delayed ambulances to police shortages, Canadian public agencies hit hard by Covid-19 worker absences have cut back on service, rearranged staff or warned the public that emergency responses may be disrupted. Reuters reports: Over the weekend, paramedics in Toronto, Canada’s largest city, said there were briefly no ambulances available to respond to emergencies. The city said about 12.8% of its “essential and critical services” staff were off due to Covid-19 as of Monday. It is not unusual for ambulances to be tied up at any moment, city spokesperson Brad Ross said. But with workers sidelined by Covid-19 and stretched hospitals delaying ambulance offloading, it was becoming more common. Low-priority calls may be put off and some will go to the fire department, he said. Like much of the rest of the world, Canada is swamped by the fast-spreading Omicron variant. Earlier this month Canada broke its previous one-day record for the highest number of people hospitalised with Covid-19, at more than 4,100 nationally. Ontario regional transit operator Metrolinx cut its service by 15% as 20-30% of its staff were off work due to Cocid-19, spokesperson Anne Marie Aikins said. About 9% of Winnipeg Police Service staff were on leave due to Covid-19, and the police service said it had reallocated officers from specialised units such as gang enforcement to street patrol. The Atlantic city of Halifax cancelled bus and ferry trips due to Covid-19 absences. Pfizer Inc chief executive Albert Bourla said on Monday that moving toward a redesigned Covid-19 vaccine that is specifically targeted to combat the Omicron variant is the “most likely scenario.” Speaking at the J.P. Morgan Healthcare Conference, Bourla said Pfizer and partner BioNTech SE are working on both an Omicron-targeted vaccine variant as well as a shot that would include both the previous vaccine as well as vaccine targeted at the Omicron variant, Reuters reports. Bourla said the company could be ready to file for approval for a redesigned vaccine and start producing it as soon as March. People who have recovered from Covid in Germany will in future only be able to prove their status digitally with a QR code, the health ministers of the country’s federal states decided on Monday. The government’s health minister Karl Lauterbach has promised to implement this promptly, according to Saxony-Anhalt’s health minister and current chairwoman of the conference of health ministers Petra Grimm-Benne. The federal ministry of health is to create a corresponding legal basis “with which the obligation to exclusively present a digitally readable health record” becomes possible for access controls, for example for events or in restaurants. People would be able to store the relevant evidence in the country’s Covid warning app, the German press agency DPA reports. At their first regular conference this year, the health ministers also discussed a possible fourth vaccine as is currently being distributed in the Israeli population. Grimm-Benne said further scientific research was necessary before a decision can be made. White House spokesperson Jen Psaki said Americans should be able to order free, rapid Covid tests through a federal web site later this month. The White House is working closely with test manufacturers and expects to have all procurement contracts signed in the next two weeks, Reuters reports. The White House has pledged to make 500 million rapid, Covid tests available to all Americans in January. The Covid 19 Bereaved Families for Justice campaign have described Boris Johnson’s private secretary inviting over 100 Downing Street officials to a gathering in Number 10’s back garden while the UK was still in lockdown as “truly beyond belief”. Hannah Brady, a spokesperson for the group, said: My Dad died just four days before this email was sent out; he was only 55 and was a fit and healthy key worker. I’ve missed him every day since. Just like the rest of the country, my family had done everything we could to keep him and others safe during the lockdown. Those days will stay with me for the rest of my life, just like the families of the 353 people that died that day. My family couldn’t even get a hug from our friends. To think that whilst it was happening Boris Johnson was making the ‘most of the weather’ and throwing a party for 100 people, is truly beyond belief. Brady was one of five families involved in the campaign who met the prime minister last September. She added: At the time, everyone would have known that going to a party was wrong, so how can those running the country have thought it was OK? Could there be a more disgraceful example of ‘one rule for them, and another rule for the rest of us’? To make matters worse, in September last year I sat in that same garden, looked the prime minister in the eyes and told him how my dad had died. He told me he had ‘done everything he could’ to protect my Dad, knowing that he had partied in that same spot the very day that Dad’s death certificate was signed. It makes me feel sick to think about it. The small number of people in Italy’s population who refuse to be vaccinated against Covid-19 are largely responsible for the continued health crisis, prime minister Mario Draghi said on Monday. The government last week made vaccinations mandatory for everyone aged 50 and over, one of very few European countries to take such a step, in an attempt to ease pressure on hospitals as new cases surge, Reuters reports. Draghi told a news conference: We must never lose sight of the fact that most of the problems we have today are because there are non-vaccinated people. For the umpteenth time, I invite all those Italians who are not yet vaccinated to do so, and to get the third shot. Health minister Roberto Speranza said 89.4% of all those aged 12 and over had received at least one vaccine dose, adding that the unvaccinated accounted for two-thirds of all the Covid patients in intensive care units. Latest data released on Monday showed there were 1,606 people in intensive care with the virus, while the country reported 101,762 new cases and 227 additional deaths over the past 24 hours. On Monday, unvaccinated people were banned from entering bars and restaurants and from using public transport, in a further tightening of restrictions for this part of the population. Only those who have recently recovered from Covid will be exempted from the new rule. Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be taking over for the next few hours. If there’s anything you’d like to flag, feel free to get in touch, I’m on Twitter @JedySays or you can email me. Latest coronavirus-related headlines and developments from around the world include: One of the UK prime minister’s top officials invited staff to “socially distanced drinks in the No 10 garden” during May of the first lockdown. The email, from Martin Reynolds, the principal private secretary to Boris Johnson, invited just over 100 employees in No 10 at a time when social mixing was banned. A new record has been set for the number of people admitted to hospital with Covid-19 in the US, with 132,646 currently on wards, according to Reuters. The latest figure, which comes as the highly contagious Omicron strain spreads across the country, surpassed the record of 132,051 set in January last year. Pfizer is already manufacturing a Covid vaccine targeting the Omicron variant, which it expects to be ready to distribute by June, its chief executive, Albert Bourla, has said. “This vaccine will be ready in March,” Bourla told CNBC. “We [are] already starting manufacturing some of these quantities at risk.” Moderna has announced it expects record sales of about $18.5bn (£13.6bn) in contracts for its Covid vaccine in 2022. The US vaccine maker said it could also make about $3.5bn from potential additional purchases, including booster candidates updated for variants. The company in November said its sales could be in the range of $17bn to $22bn in 2022, according to Reuters. Novak Djokovic’s brother reportedly ended a press conference after questions about why the tennis ace appeared in public in Belgrade a day after he had tested positive for Covid-19. Djokovic has said he had Covid in December to justify an exemption allowing him to visit Australia for the Australian Open without taking a Covid vaccine. Emmanuel Macron has condemned protesters on the French overseas territory of Saint Pierre and Miquelon who pelted an MP with seaweed and dirt during a protest against vaccine passes. Stephane Claireaux, an MP from from Macron’s ruling party, was confronted on Sunday at his home on the windswept territory off the Canadian island of Newfoundland. Stricter pandemic measures are to be introduced in Sweden in response to a rising number of Covid cases and pressure on hospitals, the prime minister has said. “The situation has deteriorated, without doubt. The level of infections in Sweden is at a historically high level,” Magdalena Andersson told a news conference, according to Reuters. The prime minister of Spain, Pedro Sánchez, has called for European officials to consider ditching detailed pandemic tracking for Covid in favour of a flu-like monitoring system. The change would mean treating Covid-19 as an “endemic illness” rather than a pandemic, Sánchez said on Monday. He pointed out that deaths as a proportion of recorded cases has fallen since the pandemic began. Interested to read about what happened earlier? Take a look at our last summary of headlines, posted eight hours ago. That’s it from me, Damien Gayle, for today. Ciao! One of the UK prime minister’s top officials invited staff to “socially distanced drinks in the No 10 garden” during May of the first lockdown, a leaked email shows, writes Rowena Mason, the Guardian’s deputy political editor. The email, from Martin Reynolds, the principal private secretary to Boris Johnson, invited just over 100 employees in No 10 at a time when social mixing was banned apart from with one other person from another household outdoors. According to ITV News, it said: “Hi all, after what has been an incredibly busy period it would be nice to make the most of the lovely weather and have some socially distanced drinks in the No 10 garden this evening. Please join us from 6pm and bring your own booze!” Omicron has become the dominant strain of coronavirus in the Czech Republic, the country’s public health institute has said. According to the institute, Omicron had accounted for more than 50% of positive tests as of 8 January, with samples from mainly big cities on 9 January showing 79% of Covid-19 cases were the Omicron variant, Reuters reports. So far the pick-up in Omicron cases has not raised daily infection numbers significantly and the number of hospitalised people continues to decline as the previous wave of infections recedes. There were 2,229 people in hospital on Sunday, down form more than 7,000 in early December. In an effort to reduce the impact of rising numbers having to self-isolate, the government has been planning to allow people in critical professions, including the emergency services and workers in the health and energy sectors, to continue to work work even after a positive lateral flow test. It has also cut the length of quarantine and isolation to five days for people without symptoms. A new record has been set for the number of people admitted to hospital with Covid-19 in the US, with 132,646 currently on wards, according to a Reuters tally on Monday. The latest figure, which comes as the highly contagious Omicron strain spreads across the country, surpassed the record of 132,051 set in January last year. Hospital admissions have increased steadily since late-December, doubling in the last three weeks, as Omicron overtook Delta as the dominant variant in the US. The analysis found that Delaware, Illinois, Maine, Maryland, Missouri, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Vermont, Virginia, Washington DC, and Wisconsin have reported record levels of Covid-19 patients recently. A major UK broadcaster has been warned to take “greater care” after a medical expert falsely claimed on air that 90% of Covid patients in hospital had not been vaccinated. The claim by Dr Hilary Jones during a discussion on the ITV’s morning magazine programme Lorraine about the number of unvaccinated Covid-19 patients in hospital prompted 3,833 complaints from viewers. During the segment, broadcast on 6 December, Jones and the programme’s eponymous presenter, Lorraine Kelly, had been encouraging viewers to accept the offer of a coronavirus vaccination. “Those people who haven’t been vaccinated, we’d really love you to think again and be vaccinated because 90% of people in hospital are unvaccinated right now with Covid,” Jones said. A clarification was broadcast on the show two days later, explaining the statistic related to patients in intensive care units rather than the proportion of unvaccinated Covid-19 patients in hospital. On Monday, Ofcom, the media watchdog, said it would not be launching a formal investigation but have issued ITV with guidance. In a statement, Ofcom said: “This programme incorrectly referenced the proportion of unvaccinated Covid-19 patients in hospital. We have told ITV that greater care should be taken by trusted medical experts when presenting facts and figures on public health issues. “However, given official statistics and research have consistently shown that vaccination against Covid-19 offers greater protection against serious health consequences, we do not consider that the error was sufficient to materially mislead viewers on this main point of discussion.” Seventy-seven more people have died within 28 days catching Covid in the UK, as 142,224 more people tested positive for the virus, according to the latest statistics from the government. The seven-day figure for the number of deaths (1,330) was up 49.8%, but for infections (1,201,563) it was up 1%. The number of patients admitted to hospital was also on the rise, with the 15,890 over a seven-day period announced on Monday, up 43.3% on previous week. Just more than nine in 10 people in the country had received at least one dose of a coronavirus vaccine, according to the government’s data, with 83% having had a second dose and 62% having a third or booster dose. • This post was amended on 11 January 2022. The seven-day figure for infections was up 1%, not down 1% as an earlier version said. Covid-19 spurred wealthy motorists to buy more Rolls-Royces than ever before because it made them realise life was short, the luxury carmaker has said, writes Rob Davies for the Guardian business desk. As global cases escalated in 2021, Rolls-Royce Motor Cars, based in Goodwood, West Sussex, booked the highest annual sales in its 117-year history, selling 5,586 vehicles. The company’s chief executive, Torsten Müller-Ötvös, said the pandemic had led to customers, whose average age was 43, responding to the reminder of their own mortality by splashing out on luxury cars. “Many people witnessed people in their community dying from Covid and that made them think life can be short and you’d better live now rather than postpone until a later date,” said Müller-Ötvös. “That has helped Rolls-Royce.” A million people in India received a third dose of coronavirus vaccine on Monday, as the country rolled out boosters. Amid an eightfold rise in infections in 10 days, the government sent booster reminders to more than 10 million people who took a second dose of Covaxin or Covishield nine months ago. Only healthcare personnel, other frontline workers and people over 60 and suffering from other health conditions were eligible for what the government called a “precaution dose”. India has administered more than 1.5bn vaccine doses in total, among a population of 1.4bn. About 68% of the country’s 939 million adults have had two doses. There were 146 deaths reported on Monday, bringing the toll to 483,936 since the pandemic began in early 2020. Only the US and Brazil have recorded more deaths. Healthcare is a “moral obligation”, the pope has said, as he denounced the “baseless information” on which people are deciding to decline covid vaccines. In what the Associated Press described as his strongest words yet calling for people to take vaccines, Pope Francis said individuals had a responsibility to care for themselves and that this translated into “respect for the health of those around us”. “Health care is a moral obligation,” the agency quoted him as saying. Francis’s comments came during a speech to ambassadors accredited to the Holy See, an annual event in which he sets out the Vatican’s foreign policy goals for the year. Ideological divides were discouraging people from getting vaccinated, the pope said. “Frequently people let themselves be influenced by the ideology of the moment, often bolstered by baseless information or poorly documented facts,” he said, calling for the adoption of a “reality therapy” to correct this distortion. “Vaccines are not a magical means of healing, yet surely they represent, in addition to other treatments that need to be developed, the most reasonable solution for the prevention of the disease,” he added. Some Catholics, including some conservative US bishops and cardinals, have claimed vaccines based on research that used cells derived from aborted fetuses were immoral, and have refused to take them. The Vatican’s doctrine office, however, has said it is “morally acceptable” for Catholics to receive Covid-19 vaccines based on research that used cells derived from aborted fetuses. Pope Francis and Emeritus Pope Benedict XVI have been fully vaccinated with Pfizer-BioNTech shots, according to the Vatican. Pfizer is already manufacturing a Covid vaccine targeting the Omicron variant, which it expects to be ready to distribute by June, its chief executive, Albert Bourla, has said. “This vaccine will be ready in March,” Bourla told CNBC. “We [are] already starting manufacturing some of these quantities at risk.” The need for a Omicron-specific coronavirus vaccine has been questioned, not least by Anthony Fauci, the White House medical adviser, who has said booster doses of existing vaccines are sufficient to counter the variant. Nonetheless, Bourla said there were governments who wanted an updated vaccine as soon as possible. Bourla said: “The hope is that we will achieve something that will have way, way better protection particularly against infections, because the protection against the hospitalisations and the severe disease – it is reasonable right now, with the current vaccines as long as you are having let’s say the third dose.” The president of Mexico has told anyone in the country who has to symptoms to just assume they have Covid, as the number of confirmed cases jumped by 186% last week amid a scarcity of tests. Noting hospitalisations and deaths had not increased at the same rate, Andrés Manuel López Obrador claimed the Omicron variant was “a little Covid”. He advised Mexicans with symptoms to stay at home, take paracetamol and isolate, rather than going out and trying to find tests. López Obrador’s administration has not implemented mass testing, saying it a waste of money. He called on companies not to require Covid tests for employees. Mexico passed 300,000 test-confirmed coronavirus deaths last week, but so little testing is done in the country of 126 million that a government review of death certificates puts the real toll at almost 460,000. Kim Willsher, the Guardian’s Paris correspondent, has now filed on the pelting of a French MP with seaweed. Protesters opposed to Covid regulations pelted a French MP with seaweed and stones outside his home on the overseas territory of St-Pierre-et-Miquelon at the weekend, Willsher writes. Stéphane Claireaux, a member of the governing La République en Marche (LREM), said he had made an official police complaint after the attack, which fellow MPs described as a “lynching”. Claireaux said he had gone outside to speak to the protesters who were angry about the decision by local authorities to impose the “health pass”. When his wife joined him she was also attacked, he said. Novak Djokovic’s brother has reportedly ended a press conference after questions about why the tennis ace appeared in public in Belgrade a day after he had tested positive for Covid-19. Djokovic has said he had Covid in December to justify an exemption allowing him to visit Australia for the Australian Open without taking a Covid vaccine. He spent several days in immigration detention after his visa was cancelled at the Australian border. According to documents released on Saturday, as part of a legal challenge, Djokovic’s Covid-19 infection was recorded by the Institute of Public Health of Serbia on 16 December. It subsequently emerged that also on 16 December, Djokovic attended an event commemorating his own personal stamp in the Serbian capital. Pictures were also posted of Djokovic a day later at the Tennis Association of Belgrade for an award ceremony. On Monday, a judge quashed the visa cancellation and ordered the Australian government to pay legal costs and release the Serbian from detention within half an hour. The UK prime minister has said the government is “looking at the science” of moving to an isolation period of five days instead of seven for a positive Covid case, after calls to ease staffing shortages across the economy. Guardian Sport has obtained a fascinating transcript of Novak Djokovic’s interview with an official when he was stopped while entering Australia for the Australian Open last week. The exchanges at the airport when Djokovic landed in Melbourne on 6 January show how the world men’s tennis No 1 contended with the cancellation of his visa. INTERVIEWER: Are you vaccinated? DJOKOVIC: I am not vaccinated. Emmanuel Macron has condemned protesters on the French overseas territory of Saint Pierre and Miquelon who pelted an MP with seaweed and dirt during a protest against vaccine passes. Video circulating on social media showed Stephane Claireaux, an MP from from Macron’s ruling party, confronted on Sunday at his home on the windswept territory off the Canadian island of Newfoundland. Tensions over health measures have risen in France since Macron last week said he planned to “piss off” the unvaccinated until they accepted shots. On Monday, during a visit to Nice, in the south of France, he said the “intolerable” and “unacceptable” incident was part of “an intensification of violence” against elected officials, according to the French news agency AFP. The “passe sanitaire” (health pass) is due to be introduced in Saint Pierre and Miquelon shortly. It requires people to present proof of vaccination or a negative coronavirus test to enter public spaces like bars. Claireaux had earlier told the broadcaster France Info that he had been waiting for the demonstrators outside his home “so as to talk to them”. “There was a car loaded with seaweed … and people started chucking it at me. It was like being stoned. My wife came out to join me on the front step. I dodged a rock that missed our faces by fivecm,” he said. Claireaux added that he would be filing criminal charges against those responsible. “People are free to think that we’re not making the right decisions. We’re all getting death threats by email. At some point this has to stop,” he said. Christophe Castaner, leader of Macron’s party in parliament, told France Inter radio there had been 322 threats against MPs in 2021 – two-thirds of them against the ruling party. Moderna has announced it expects record sales of about $18.5bn (£13.6bn) in contracts for its Covid vaccine in 2022. The US vaccine maker said it could also make about $3.5bn from potential additional purchases, including booster candidates updated for variants. The company in November said its sales could be in the range of $17bn to $22bn in 2022, according to Reuters. Moderna said it was in active discussions for more Covid-19 vaccine contracts this year and that it was developing a booster vaccine candidate, called mRNA-1273.529, to target Omicron variant Booster doses of the company’s current Covid-19 vaccine, mRNA-1273, increased neutralising antibody levels against Omicron using doses at 50 micrograms and 100 micrograms, Moderna said. Indian states have reserved more than double the Covid hospital beds for children than recommended by federal experts out of fear of being under-prepared, government data shows. However, doctors say not many youngsters have needed critical care yet. The country’s health ministry also said on Monday that only 5% to 10% of all those people infected in India have sought hospitalisation, compared with 20% to 23% during the last major wave. Authorities say most people have shown no or mild symptoms and have recovered quickly at home. India reported 179,723 new cases on Monday, taking the total to 35.7 million, the highest in the world after the United States. Deaths rose by 146 to 483,936, only behind the tally of the United States and Brazil. A Covid spike has disrupted businesses in the Philippines, with banks, malls and airlines reducing operations and some schools suspending online classes due to staff sickness. The Philippines reported a record 33,169 new coronavirus infections on Monday, bringing its overall tally close to three million as the Omicron variant takes its toll, with the overpopulated capital Manila and surrounding provinces worst hit. Commercial airlines have cancelled more than a hundred domestic and international flights as cases surge, with airlines reporting infections among staff and lower demand due to uncertainty among travellers. The Southeast Asian nation was gradually easing restrictions late last year as vaccination rates rose and infection rates fell, but authorities were last week forced to tighten mobility curbs to contain a rapid spread. Pope Francis has said getting vaccinated against coronavirus is a “moral obligation” and denounced how naysayers had been swayed by “baseless information”. The Associated Press reported: Francis used some of his strongest words yet calling for people to get vaccinated in a speech to ambassadors accredited to the Holy See, an annual event in which he takes stock of the world and sets out the Vatican’s foreign policy goals for the year. Francis, 85, has generally shied away from speaking about vaccination as a “moral obligation”, though his Covid advisory body has referred to it as a “moral responsibility”. Rather, Francis has termed vaccination as “an act of love” and that refusing to get inoculated was “suicidal”. On Monday, he went a step further, saying that individuals had a responsibility to care for themselves “and this translates into respect for the health of those around us. Health care is a moral obligation”, he asserted. He lamented that, increasingly, ideological divides were discouraging people from getting vaccinated. Stricter pandemic measures are to be introduced in Sweden in response to a rising number of Covid cases and pressure on hospitals, the prime minister has said. “The situation has deteriorated, without doubt. The level of infections in Sweden is at a historically high level,” Magdalena Andersson told a news conference, according to Reuters. The new measures include a work from home mandate where possible and a cap on the number of people allowed at public events. Restaurants will have to close at 11pm and guests will have to be seated and in groups no bigger than eight people. Adults are also being asked to limit social contacts indoors. The measures will be evaluated after two weeks, but are expected to be in place for at least four weeks. The prime minister of Spain, Pedro Sánchez, has called for European officials to consider ditching detailed pandemic tracking for Covid in favour of a flu-like monitoring system. The change would mean treating Covid-19 as an “endemic illness” rather than a pandemic, Sánchez said on Monday. He pointed out that deaths as a proportion of recorded cases has fallen since the initial onset of the pandemic. The Associated Press quoted Sánchez telling Spanish radio: “I believe that we have the conditions for, with precaution, slowly, opening the debate at the technical level and at the level of health professionals, but also at the European level, to start evaluating the evolution of this disease with different parameters than we have until now.” Sánchez also announced that Spain is purchasing this month 344,000 pills of a Covid-19 antiviral drug developed by the US pharmaceutical firm Pfizer. Despite one of Europe’s most successful vaccination rollouts, with 81% of the country having received a full course of Covid vaccinations, Spain is grappling with an unprecedented surge of coronavirus infections. As schools reopen in one part of the world, they are closing in another. Schools across Nepal will close for nearly three weeks after a spike in coronavirus cases, a government spokesman said on Monday. Nepal reported 841 new cases on Sunday, the biggest single-day jump since September last year, taking its total to 832,589 since the pandemic began. Its death toll from the coronavirus is 11,604. Deepak Sharma, spokesperson for the education ministry, said schools would remain closed until 29 January, although a campaign to vaccinate children aged 12 to 17 at their schools would go ahead. “Schools must notify students about the time and date when they need to go to schools and receive the shots,” Sharma told Reuters. Nepal has provided two shots of Covid-19 vaccines to 36.7% of its population of 30 million since an inoculation drive began a year ago. Children in Uganda have finally begun returning to school, after nearly two years off. On Monday, the country ended 83 weeks of full or partial school closures, the longest anywhere in the world. Uganda first shut its schools in March 2020, after the first coronavirus case was recorded in Africa. Some classes were reopened to students in February 2021, but a total lockdown was imposed again in June. The shutdown affected more than 10 million students. Welcoming the reopening of Uganda’s schools, Save the Children warned that “lost learning may lead to high dropout rates in the coming weeks without urgent action”, including what it described as catch-up clubs. The aid group warned in a statement Monday of a wave of dropouts “as returning students who have fallen behind in their learning fear they have no chance of catching up”. According to the Associated Press, the school reopenings on Monday caused traffic congestion in some areas of the capital, Kampala. Students walked through the city’s streets carrying their mattresses on their backs, a back-to-boarding school phenomenon not witnessed here for nearly two years. But schools may yet close again, and soon, with infection numbers on the rise again in Uganda in recent days. Museveni has warned of a possible new lockdown if intensive care units reach 50% occupancy. Here is a brief round-up of the day’s top Covid news stories so far: Dr David Nabarro, the World Health Organization’s special envoy on Covid, said the virus is going to pose a very difficult situation for the next three months “at least” but “we can see the end in sight”. High levels of T-cells from common cold coronaviruses can provide protection against Covid, an Imperial College London study published on Monday has found, which could inform approaches for second-generation vaccines. The UK government is warning that almost all pregnant women admitted to hospital with Covid symptoms were unvaccinated in one analysis over several months last year, as it kicks off an advertising campaign encouraging expectant mothers to get boosted. Novak Djokovic has won a battle with the Australian government after a court quashed the decision to cancel his visa – but he may still yet lose the war. No sooner had federal circuit judge Anthony Kelly revealed the home affairs minister had agreed to settle the case, than the Australian government’s counsel warned the immigration minister could still decide to use a personal power to cancel Djokovic’s visa anew. In the UK, hospitals will be able to use spare capacity in the private sector under a deal struck with the NHS. Under the three-month agreement, private healthcare staff and facilities will be put on standby to support the NHS should hospital admissions or staff absences due to Covid threaten the provision of urgent care. India’s health ministry has said that only between five and 10% of Covid patients have needed hospitalisation this time around compared with 20-23% in the previous wave that peaked in May. China is battling to stamp out its first outbreak of the Omicron variant, only weeks before the Chinese new year and the Beijing Winter Olympics, with cases recorded in at least two distant provinces. The Spanish government is working on rules to limit the retail price of Covid antigen tests, prime minister Pedro Sánchez said on Monday, after shortages were reported in many pharmacies across the country last month. People self-testing for Covid should swab their throat as well as their nose when using rapid antigen kits to increase the chances of detecting the Omicron variant, a top Israeli health official said on Monday. Indonesian authorities have granted emergency authorisation to five different Covid vaccines as booster shots that will prioritise vulnerable groups. Two of New Zealand’s most prominent Covid-19 experts have warned that the country is unprepared to prevent the health system from being overloaded by an Omicron outbreak. US Democratic congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has announced she tested positive for Covid-19. Hungary’s government is considering the option of a fourth Covid-19 vaccine booster shot, Reuters is reporting. Israel could have up to nearly 40% of its population infected by Covid during the current wave, prime minister Naftali Bennett has said. I am now handing over the global coronavirus blog to my colleague Damien Gayle, who will be along shortly. He will be bringing you the latest Covid news from around the world for the next hour. China is battling to stamp out its first outbreak of the Omicron variant, just weeks before the Chinese new year and the Beijing Winter Olympics, with cases recorded in at least two distant provinces. On Monday, health authorities reported 97 new locally transmitted cases for the preceding 24 hours, across several cities. At least 30 cases were in Henan province, while 21 new cases were reported in the Tianjin district of Jinnan, including 15 children aged five to 15. At least two of the cases detected in Jinnan were reported as Omicron, the latest variant of Covid-19, which is many times more transmissible and is tearing through other countries around the world. In Anyang, Henan province, two Omicron cases were traced to a student who had arrived from Tianjin more than 300 miles (500km) away, officials said. There were 15 cases reported in Anyang for Monday but the breakdown of variant type was not disclosed. State media have described the outbreak as China’s “first real battle against Omicron”. High levels of T-cells from common cold coronaviruses can provide protection against Covid, an Imperial College London study published on Monday has found, which could inform approaches for second-generation vaccines. Reuters reported: Immunity against Covid is a complex picture, and while there is evidence of waning antibody levels six months after vaccination, T-cells are also believed to play a vital role in providing protection. The study, which began in September 2020, looked at levels of cross-reactive T-cells generated by previous common colds in 52 household contacts of positive Covid cases shortly after exposure, to see if they went on to develop infection. It found that the 26 who did not develop infection had significantly higher levels of those T-cells than people who did get infected. Imperial did not say how long protection from the T-cells would last. “We found that high levels of pre-existing T-cells, created by the body when infected with other human coronaviruses like the common cold, can protect against Covid-19 infection,” study author Dr Rhia Kundu said. The authors of the study, published in Nature Communications, said that the internal proteins of the Sars-CoV-2 virus which are targeted by the T-cells could offer an alternative target for vaccine makers. The Spanish government is working on rules to limit the retail price of Covid antigen tests, prime minister Pedro Sánchez said on Monday, after shortages were reported in many pharmacies across the country last month. “The debate we had before and during the Christmas season was the supply of tests, there was a bottleneck,” Sánchez said in an interview with Cadena SER radio station. “Now, we will get into the control of the prices of tests.” The higher price of antigen tests in Spain during the surge of the Omicron coronavirus variant and the scarcity of tests in pharmacies have raised protests from opposition politicians and consumer groups, many of whom are calling for their sale to be allowed in supermarkets. India’s health ministry has said that only between five and 10% of Covid patients have needed hospitalisation this time around compared with 20-23% in the previous wave that peaked in May. “The situation is dynamic and evolving, therefore, the need for hospitalisation may also change rapidly,” health secretary Rajesh Bhushan wrote in a letter to state authorities asking them to regularly review their requirements of healthcare workers. Novak Djokovic has won a battle with the Australian government after a court quashed the decision to cancel his visa – but he may still yet lose the war. No sooner had federal circuit judge Anthony Kelly revealed the home affairs minister had agreed to settle the case, than the Australian government’s counsel warned the immigration minister could still decide to use a personal power to cancel Djokovic’s visa anew. That means that Alex Hawke, one of the closest political allies of prime minister Scott Morrison, now has a momentous political decision to make: let Djokovic stay and play for a record 21st grand slam singles title; or deport him, which comes with a hefty three-year ban from re-entering Australia. The harsh border policies that have allowed Australian governments to detain asylum seekers indefinitely are now being directed at one unvaccinated man, who happens to be the world’s No 1 ranked male tennis player. Djokovic obtained an exemption on the basis he had recently contracted Covid-19, which the judge noted had satisfied a qualified physician and an independent panel set up by the Victorian government. But a delegate of the home affairs minister cancelled his visa on the basis the tennis star might pose a risk to public health. The government argues recently having Covid by itself does not justify an exemption, because Djokovic has recovered. Britain’s NHS is likely to be under real pressure for “the next two or three weeks, perhaps longer”, Michael Gove said. The cabinet minister told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: Our first responsibility at the moment must be to support the NHS, but you quite rightly legitimately ask if we get through – and at the moment I hope and pray that we will get through this difficult period – then there will be better times ahead. And I think one of the things that we do need to think about is how we live with Covid, how we live with this particular type of coronavirus. There are other coronaviruses which are endemic and with which we live, viruses tend to develop in a way whereby they become less harmful but more widespread. So, guided by the science, we can look to the progressive lifting of restrictions, and I think for all of us the sooner the better. But we’ve got to keep the NHS safe. Gove said the prime minister was right in his decision not to introduce extra restrictions. He said he had been at the “more cautious end” in the discussions. But he added that Boris Johnson had “argued publicly that we would be able to get through this with the booster campaign, so if more were required then we would be ready to put in additional measures”. “We always keep that under review but his judgment has been vindicated,” he said. People self-testing for Covid should swab their throat as well as their nose when using rapid antigen kits to increase the chances of detecting the Omicron variant, a top Israeli health official said on Monday. The recommendation goes against the advice of the US Food and Drug Administration, which has said manufacturers’ instructions should still be followed and that any incorrect use of throat swabs could pose a safety risk. On Israeli Army Radio, Sharon Alroy-Preis, Israel’s public health chief, said antigen tests, used widely in the country, are less sensitive than PCR tests in detecting illness. “In order to increase their sensitivity we will from now on recommend swabbing the throat and the nose. It’s not what the manufacturer instructs but we are instructing this,” she said. Dr David Nabarro, the World Health Organization’s special envoy on Covid, said the virus is going to pose a very difficult situation for the next three months “at least” but “we can see the end in sight”. He told Sky News: I’m afraid we are moving through the marathon but there’s no actual way to say that we’re at the end – we can see the end in sight, but we’re not there. And there’s going to be some bumps before we get there. And I can’t tell you how bad they’re going to be, but I can at least tell you what I’m expecting. First of all, this virus is continuing to evolve – we have Omicron but we’ll get more variants. Secondly, it really is affecting the whole world. And, whilst health services in western Europe are just about coping, in many other parts of the world, they are completely overwhelmed. And thirdly, it’s really clear that there’s no scope for major restrictions in any country, particularly poor countries. People have just got to keep working and so there are some very tough choices for politicians right now. It’s going to be difficult for the next three months at least. Asked about a suggestion that there could be coronavirus surges two or three times a year, he added: The way this virus is behaving, and has behaved really since we first met it, is that it builds up and then surges quite dramatically, and then it comes down again, and then surges again about every three or four months. It’s difficult to use past behaviour to predict the future. And I don’t like doing that too much. But I would agree that the pattern, I think, that is going to happen with this virus is continued surges, and living with Covid means being able to prepare for these surges and to react and really quickly when they occur. Life can go on, we can get the economy going again in many countries, but we just have to be really respectful of the virus and that means having really good plans in place for dealing with the surges. While all the focus in Australia has been on whether defending champion Novak Djokovic will compete at the Australian Open next week, another major name in the men’s draw is now in doubt. Nick Kyrgios is a huge doubt after contracting Covid just a week out from the season-opening major. Kyrgios pulled out of the Sydney Tennis Classic on Monday hours before his match against the Italian firebrand Fabio Fognini. The 26-year-old withdrew from the Melbourne Summer Set last week with a mystery illness that sparked his asthma. The world No 114 was cleared of Covid at the time, but on Monday confirmed he had contracted the virus. The Australian Open begins on 17 January, giving him a week to recover and be cleared to return. Back in the UK today, Graham Medley, professor of infectious disease modelling at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, has been asked whether the Omicron wave is over in London but not elsewhere. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: I think that at the moment the testing capacity issues, and Christmas and new year, mean that we can’t really rely on cases to tell us what’s going to happen exactly. At the moment we are seeing a relatively high number of admissions. How long that continues, whether that goes up or goes down, I think is unknown at the moment. He said the Omicron virus itself is “less severe” than Delta but it is “just as threatening” due to its transmissibility. Pressed on whether the nation was moving away from a situation where Covid was an “emergency”, Prof Medley added: I think that that transition is absolutely true. It can’t be an emergency forever. So at some point it will have to stop being an emergency but that is likely to be a phase out rather than an active point in time where somebody can declare the epidemic over. It’s going to fade out and disappear much more slowly than that, I think. Indonesian authorities have granted emergency authorisation to five different Covid vaccines as booster shots that will prioritise vulnerable groups. Penny Lukito, head of Indonesia’s Food and Drug Monitoring Agency, said Sinovac, Pfizer, AstraZeneca, Moderna and Zifivax vaccines would be distributed as a third vaccine shot in the country. Lukito added there are several additional vaccines that are currently in the process of clinical trials to obtain emergency use permits. “We need to give the booster vaccine to maintain vaccine efficacy against Covid-19 infection,” Lukito said at a news conference on Monday. The health ministry-run booster programme will begin on Wednesday and prioritise elderly and groups of immunocompromised individuals, according to a ministry statement. The government has distributed booster jabs to medical workers since July last year. Access to vaccines, masks and tests will help us make the awkward transition from pandemic to endemic, argue scientists Erin Mordecai and Mallory Harris. Read their full opinion piece here. The Philippines’ health ministry has reported 33,169 new coronavirus cases, marking the third straight day of record-high infections. In a bulletin, it said total cases had reached almost 3 million, while deaths were at 52,293, after confirming a further 145 deaths on Monday. The rising number of infections risked overwhelming the healthcare system, health undersecretary Maria Rosiario Vergeire told the ANC news channel, calling on symptomatic people to immediately isolate and get tested. The major port of Tianjin may be facing China’s first local outbreak of the Omicron variant of coronavirus, less than a month before the winter Olympics open in nearby Beijing. State broadcaster CCTV said the government has divided Tianjin and its 14 million residents into three levels of restrictions, starting with lockdown areas where people are not allowed to leave their homes at all. In control areas, each household is allowed to have one family member leave to buy groceries every other day, while in prevention areas, people must remain inside their immediate neighbourhoods. Buses and trains from Tianjin to Beijing have been suspended and people are being told not to leave the city unless they have urgent business, the Associated Press reported. The city began mass testing of all its residents on Sunday after a cluster of 20 children and adults tested positive for Covid, including at least two with the Omicron variant. A further 20 people tested positive on Sunday, bringing the total to 40. Officials said earlier that the virus has been circulating so the number of cases could rise. Healthcare and frontline workers, along with people aged 60 and above with health problems, queued today at vaccination centres across India to receive a third Covid jab. The doses, which India is calling a “precautionary” shot instead of a booster, were given as new confirmed coronavirus infections rocketed to over 179,000 on Monday, nearly an eightfold increase in a week. Hospitalisations, while still relatively low, are also beginning to rise in large, crowded cities such as New Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata, according to the Associated Press. It reported: India is better prepared now than it was last year when the delta variant overwhelmed hospitals. When cases spiked in March last year, not even 1% of its population of nearly 1.4 billion was fully vaccinated. India’s creaky medical infrastructure meant millions likely died. Since then, the government has bolstered healthcare, built oxygen plants and added beds to hospitals. About 47% of the population is now fully vaccinated and many have antibodies from previous infections. This may provide “hybrid immunity” – a combination of immunity from previous infections and vaccines – comparable to boosters, said Dr Chandrakant Lahariya, an Indian epidemiologist. Although the Omicron variant seems to cause less severe illness than the Delta variant, India’s massive population, crowded cities, and understaffed hospitals mean that health systems may still become strained. Elections may further spread the more infectious variant, allowing it to infect vulnerable people that previous variants didn’t reach. But the biggest fear is that hospitals will be overwhelmed because of sick medical personnel, said Dr Vineeta Bal, an immunologist at the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research in the city of Pune. “There would be beds [in hospitals] but no people to take care of individuals,” she said. Lateral flow tests in England will be free for “as long as we need”, Michael Gove has confirmed. The levelling up secretary told Sky News it was “impossible to predict” how long that would be. But he said: But it is the case that in this country lateral flow tests are free, unlike in many other jurisdictions. They’re a vital tool in making sure that we can curb the spread of the infection and also that people who are needed to isolate do so. We are moving to a situation – we’re not there yet – but we are moving to a situation where it is possible to say that we can live with Covid and that the pressure on the NHS and on vital public services is abating. But it’s absolutely vital to recognise that we are not there yet and as the health secretary has reminded us, there will be some difficult weeks ahead and that is why we all need to continue to test, continue – if we are positive – to isolate and continue broadly to support the NHS as it goes through a challenging period. But one in which the frontline professionals are doing an amazing job. There is still pressure on British hospitals and the country is not yet in a position to say it can live with Covid, senior minister Michael Gove said today. Asked how long rapid tests would be provided for free, Gove, who is housing minister, that they were a vital tool in curbing a pandemic that was not yet over. “We are moving to a situation where it is possible to say that we can live with Covid and that the pressure on the NHS and on vital public services is abating,” he told Sky News. “But it’s absolutely vital to recognise that we are not there yet … there will be some difficult weeks ahead.” Hello. Tom Ambrose here and I will be bringing you all the latest Covid news from around the world. We start with the news that, in the UK, hospitals will be able to use spare capacity in the private sector under a deal struck with the NHS. Under the three-month agreement, private healthcare staff and facilities will be put on standby to support the NHS should hospital admissions or staff absences due to Covid threaten the provision of urgent care. Patients that can be referred include some of those waiting for cancer surgery. The NHS has also been asked to look at using spare capacity in gyms and education centres to create “super-surge” wards on top of their usual surge capacity. Nightingale hubs are already being created in the grounds of some hospitals as part of a move to create up to 4,000 extra beds. Health and social care secretary Sajid Javid said: This agreement demonstrates the collaboration across our healthcare services to create an additional safeguard that ensures people can continue to get the care they need from our world-leading NHS, whenever they need it. The UK government is warning that almost all pregnant women admitted to hospital with Covid symptoms were unvaccinated in one analysis over several months last year, as it kicks off an advertising campaign encouraging expectant mothers to get boosted. An Australian court has quashed the decision to cancel Novak Djokovic’s visa last week, meaning the visa he came to Australia on stands, and he will be released from detention and get his passport and other personal effects back. China has detected more Omicron cases as cities tighten restrictions. Some of Thailand’s tourism hotspots will reopen to fully vaccinated international tourists from Tuesday, as the country tries to balance the risks posed by the Omicron variant with the need to boost the travel sector. Two of New Zealand’s most prominent Covid-19 experts have warned that the country is unprepared to prevent the health system from being overloaded by an Omicron outbreak. US Democratic congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has announced she tested positive for Covid-19. Germany will study how reliable rapid antigen tests are in detecting the Omicron variant of Covid-19, health minister Karl Lauterbach said on Sunday. Israel could have up to nearly 40% of its population infected by Covid during the current wave, prime minister Naftali Bennett has said. Downing Street is facing calls to ensure that Boris Johnson will be personally interviewed by the Sue Gray inquiry about alleged No 10 gatherings during the first lockdown, after it emerged he may have been present at a “bring your own booze” party. Hungary’s government is considering the option of a fourth Covid-19 vaccine booster shot, Reuters is reporting. The country’s daily tally of new Covid-19 infections could exceed 13,000 in the new wave of the pandemic, the minister for human resources reportedly told Inforadio on Monday morning. Judge Anthony Kelly has just read out a minute agreed to by both the government and Djokovic, where he quashes the decision to cancel Novak Djokovic’s visa, orders government to pay costs, and for Djokovic to be released from detention in 30 minutes with his passport and personal effects released to him. The minute notes Djokovic was allowed until 8.30am when he was originally detained to respond to the notification to cancel his visa, but the decision was made at 7.42am. It also found if the player had had more time he could have consulted wider and responded further than he was able to. Follow our live blog on the verdict here. Some lively scenes have emerged from Melbourne, Australia where Novak Djokovic is appealing in court against the cancellation of his Australian visa. Supporters continue to hold placards outside the immigration detention hotel where the tennis star is staying. Others have rallied outside the federal court of Australia where the athlete is in the midst of a legal battle over his visa to enter the country and play in the Australian Open later this month. More on the Novak Djokovic court appeal as the tennis star makes a bid to reinstate his Australian visa. The hearing is back underway in the federal circuit court after a long adjournment earlier today. About one hour ago a white van left the Park Hotel after Djokovic was allowed to move to another, unknown address, so he can watch the court proceedings remotely. Christopher Tran, counsel for the federal government, flagged that the injunction keeping Novak Djokovic in Australia is due to expire on Monday afternoon and Judge Anthony Kelly extended it to 8pm which means the hearing will be hopefully finalised today. The expedited hearing comes ahead of a looming Tennis Australia deadline of Tuesday for Djokovic to be included in the draw to play the Australian Open. Here’s a useful rundown of the first half of the hearing below. China has reported more cases of the Omicron variant on Monday, with authorities on high alert over flare-ups in major cities just weeks ahead of the Beijing Winter Olympics. Authorities are battling several outbreaks - including in Xi’an where 13 million city residents are currently in their third week of lockdown. Fears have also grown about a cluster of infections in the northern city of Tianjin, which was linked to two Omicron cases reported on Monday in the city of Anyang around 400 kilometres (250 miles) away, Agence France-Press reports. “The general public should not leave Tianjin unless essential to do so,” city officials said in a statement Sunday. Those who need to leave must obtain official permission and test negative for the virus within 48 hours of their departure, it added. Schools and university campuses have been closed, and trains into Beijing from Tianjin have been cancelled. Road checkpoints have been set up for vehicles entering the capital. Tianjin - just 150 kilometres from Beijing - has already ordered the testing of all 14 million residents. Another 21 cases were reported in the city Monday, although the variant of the virus wasn’t confirmed. Authorities in the city of Anyang in central Henan province also announced the testing of all residents - more than five million people - over the weekend. The city on Monday reported two Omicron cases linked to the Tianjin cluster. Henan reported 60 new cases Monday but did not break down the tally by variant. The provincial capital Zhengzhou has closed schools and kindergartens, and stopped restaurants from accepting dine-in customers. India reported 179,723 new Covid-19 infections on Monday, the highest figure since late May, health ministry data showed. The Asian nation also recorded another 146 deaths taking the death toll to 483,936 although many believe the actual number to be much higher. Some of Thailand’s tourism hotspots will reopen to fully vaccinated international tourists from Tuesday, as the country tries to balance the risks posed by the Omicron variant with the need to boost the travel sector. Tourists will be able to enter Krabi, Phang-Nga, Ko Samui, Ko Pha-ngan and Ko Tao, provided they stay at an approved hotel for at least seven days. Phuket reopened in July last year under a similar arrangement, which also requires tourists to be tested prior to and during their stay. Thailand’s tourism industry has been devastated by the pandemic. Almost 40 million foreigners arrived in Thailand in 2019, but visitor numbers fell to just 6.7 million in 2020 as Covid-19 halted international travel. The government previously eased entry requirements across the country last year in an attempt to boost the economy, but then suspended arrivals late in December in response to the emergence of the Omicron variant. To reduce infections, the government has also encouraged people to work from home, and has banned the consumption of alcohol in restaurants after 9pm in high risk areas, including the capital Bangkok. Thailand has vaccinated roughly 70% of the population. On Monday, 7,926 new cases and 13 deaths were reported. South Korea is reporting a daily rise of 3,007 new confirmed coronavirus cases and 34 deaths, according to data recently published by the Korea Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. A total of 86.4 % of the population have received at least one dose of a Covid vaccine and 83.9 % have received at least two doses. An alert reader has also shared their experience of living in South Korea throughout the pandemic. “We’ve had minimal disruption to our daily lives (bar wanting to travel abroad during vacation) the last two years, and still have low numbers,” English teacher Dominic Evans told the Guardian. “Everybody wears masks in public. Showing proof of vaccination is compulsory now for most places and vaccine uptake is shooting along. “The Korean situation shows you can diligently ‘live with Covid’, control the numbers, still have a normal daily life, and still have public services and day to day services running smoothly.” Germany is reporting a daily rise of 25,255 new confirmed coronavirus cases and 52 deaths, according to the Robert Koch Institute. Two of New Zealand’s most prominent Covid-19 experts have warned that the country is unprepared to prevent the health system from being overloaded by an Omicron outbreak, with likely fatal consequences. Otago University’s Dr Nick Wilson and Dr Michael Baker also said it was only a “matter of weeks” before the highly transmissible variant seeped into the community due to border failures. Wilson said that despite New Zealand’s high vaccination rates, the number of adults who had received a booster dose of the vaccine – essential for minimising the effects of Omicron – remains dangerously low, and noted that the vaccine rollout for children between five and 11 still had not begun. Read the full story here. China has reported 157 new confirmed coronavirus cases for 9 January, down slightly from 165 a day earlier, its health authority said on Monday. Of the new infections, 97 were locally transmitted, according to a statement by the National Health Commission, compared with 92 a day earlier. Most of the new local cases were in Henan, Tianjin and Shaanxi. According to Bloomberg, China saw its first community spread of the Omicron variant after two cases were detected in the port city of Tianjin and later confirmed by the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CCDCP). The news publication said the cases were known after a local branch of the CCDCP completed genome sequencing, citing a CCTV report. The infections were reported to be from the same transmission chain but officials have yet to establish if the strain is the same as imported Omicron cases reported earlier in Tianjin, according to the report. China also reported 42 new asymptomatic cases, which it classifies separately from confirmed cases, down from 46 a day earlier. There were no new deaths, leaving the death toll at 4,636. Mainland China had 103,776 confirmed cases as of 9 January. Djokovic’s counsel Nicholas Wood has said the delegate for the minister making the decision to cancel his visa has not provided evidence that previous infection from Covid-19 is not a valid reason for medical exemption from being vaccinated against Covid-19 prior to entering Australia. And in that case, the only evidence that can be relied upon is the Atagi guidelines, which did say vaccination can be deferred for up to six months from infection as a valid reason for a medical exemption. Djokovic’s visa was cancelled at 7.29am, and the tennis player was informed at 7.42am. He had been asking for until 8.30am to respond to the cancellation notice, and needed to speak to people. The government made the decision on the basis of what he had provided up to that point. The government suggested “a response” made from Djokovic counts as responding to the notice to cancel the visa, while Djokovic’s counsel argues that reading would change it from someone having a right to a response, to the delegate for the minister having discretion over how much or little of a response from someone counts in responding to the notice. In submissions, the government argued that to allow such extensions of time would amount to filibustering. Follow all the live updates here. Some more updates from Guardian reporter Josh Taylor who is currently watching Djokovic’s court appeal unfold. Djokovic’s counsel, Nicholas Wood, went through the process medical practitioners go through to register someone on the Australian Immunisation Register for people who register as not being able to get vaccinated against Covid-19 on medical grounds. Under “temporary vaccine exemption”, it allows people to tick a box for “acute major medical illness”, and then the guidelines refer to the Atagi advice document on major medical illnesses that mention having a PCR-confirmed Covid-19 infection in the past six months. “This is the critical Atagi document ... it is an eminently clear expression by Atagi ... that a valid reason for a temporary exemption for an acute major medical condition ... [includes a] PCR confirmed infection,” Wood said. He says this advice is unremarkable; someone who has recently had Covid-19 has some level of natural immunity from having had Covid-19. He said vaccination “is not advisable” and would have limited utility for someone who has recently had Covid-19, combined with the risk of an adverse effect. Those are his words. Tennis number one Novak Djokovic is currently appealing in court against the cancellation of his Australian visa ahead of the Australian Open. The hearing kicked off at 10am AEST in Melbourne, which was 11pm GMT or 6pm EST. The 34-year-old is being held at a quarantine hotel in Melbourne. Judge Anthony Kelly has noted that the ONLY ground the delegate relied on when deciding to cancel Djokovic’s visa is that: “the presence of its holder in Australia is or may be, or would or might be, a risk to: (i) the health, safety or good order of the Australian community or a segment of the Australian community”. Djokovic’s counsel Nicholas Wood notes in the request for declaration of vaccination, Djokovic claimed he cannot be vaccinated on medical grounds. When prompted to provide proof, Djokovic uploaded the medical exemption document from the CMO at Tennis Australia. Kelly said a “matter that has really preoccupied me” is the status attached to the Tennis Australia document, and questions why it was not accepted by the delegate making the decision on the visa: Here, a professor and an eminently qualified physician have produced and provided to the applicant a medical exemption. Further to that, that medical exemption and the basis on which it was given was separately given by a further independent expert specialist panel established by the Victorian state government and that document was in the hands of the delegate. The point I am agitated about is ‘what more could this man have done?’ Wood also accused the Australian government’s delegate of an “utter paucity of evidence” in the section of the notice in which they were required to explain why grounds to cancel the visa exist. Wood argued it is “manifestly incorrect” that the biosecurity determination requires both a declaration of an exemption and evidence of the exemption - only the former is required, Djokovic’s team argues. He also said the Department of Home Affairs, before [Djokovic] left, said Djokovic met the requirements for quarantine-free travel. He’s made the declaration, provided the evidence even though it was not required, and then he received [notice] from the Department of Home Affairs ... saying the application has been assessed and meets the required for quarantine-free travel.” Wood says any reasonable person would have considered he ticked every box. US Democratic congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez announced she tested positive for Covid-19. In a statement on Sunday evening, the office of the New York progressive said she was “experiencing symptoms and recovering at home”. “The congresswoman received her booster shot this fall and encourages everyone to get their booster and follow all Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidance”. The UK government is warning that almost all pregnant women admitted to hospital with Covid symptoms were unvaccinated in one analysis over several months last year, as it kicks off an advertising campaign encouraging expectant mothers to get boosted. The campaign is calling on pregnant women not to wait to get either their first, second or booster jab. It will highlight the risks of Covid-19 to mothers and babies, with testimonies of pregnant women who have had the vaccine to be broadcast on radio and social media. The government says it has been clear, along with medical experts and institutions, that Covid-19 vaccines are safe for pregnant women and have no impact on fertility. The Department of Health and Social Care cited statistics from the UK Obstetric Surveillance System which showed 96.3% of pregnant women admitted to hospital with Covid-19 symptoms between May and October were unvaccinated, a third of whom required respiratory support. About 20% of women admitted to hospital with the virus need to be delivered pre-term to help them recover, and 20% of their babies need care in the neonatal unit, the Department of Health and Social Care said. Read the full story here. Germany will study how reliable rapid antigen tests are in detecting the Omicron variant of Covid-19, health minister Karl Lauterbach said on Sunday. “We do not know exactly how well these tests work for Omicron,” Lauterbach said on public broadcasting channel ARD, adding the results of the assessment would become available within the next few weeks. It was clear, however, that “the alternative not to test at all ... would be far too dangerous,” said Lauterbach, a scientist and physician. Omicron now accounts for 44% of coronavirus infections in Germany, the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) for infectious disease said. On Sunday, RKI registered 36,552 newly reported Covid infections within 24 hours, three times the number a week earlier. Late last month, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) also released a statement saying rapid antigen tests appear less sensitive to Omicron than previous variants. “Early data suggests that antigen tests do detect the Omicron variant but may have reduced sensitivity,” the FDA said at the time. Israel could see up to nearly 40% of its population infected by Covid during the current wave, prime minister Naftali Bennett has said. Bennett described the Omicron variant as a “storm that is sweeping the world” in a series of tweets on Sunday: Information presented at the cabinet meeting indicates that here, in Israel, between two to four million citizens in total will be infected during this current wave. When standing in line it is difficult to see the successes and evaluation steps we have made, extremely important steps that will save lives. I understand the frustration, but ask you to be aware of that as well. A country of just 9.4 million, Israel has seen infections nearly quadruple over the past week compared to the previous week. The health ministry reported 17,518 new infections on Saturday. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog, ready to take you through all the Covid news this Monday. Let’s dive right in with the news that Israel could see up to nearly 40% of its population infected by Covid during the current wave, according to the latest data. “Information presented at the cabinet meeting indicates that here, in Israel, between two to four million citizens in total will be infected during this current wave,” prime minister Naftali Bennett said on Sunday in a series of tweets. A country of just 9.4 million, Israel has seen infections nearly quadruple over the past week compared to the previous week. The health ministry reported 17,518 new infections on Saturday. Germany has said it will launch a study into how reliable rapid antigen tests are in detecting the Omicron variant, health minister Karl Lauterbach announced on Sunday. “We do not know exactly how well these tests work for Omicron,” Lauterbach said in an interview with public broadcasting channel ARD, adding the results of the study would become available within the next few weeks. Late last month, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) also released a statement saying rapid antigen tests appear less sensitive to Omicron than previous variants. “Early data suggests that antigen tests do detect the Omicron variant but may have reduced sensitivity,” the FDA said at the time. Here is a recap of some of the main developments so far today. Europe: Greece sets 1 February deadline for booster jabs. Those who have not received their coronavirus booster jabs will be barred from most indoor venues. France should not impose mandatory vaccination and would not be the most efficient way to encourage people to get vaccinated, a government spokesperson said. More than 105,000 people took to the streets on Saturday in protest. Downing Street is facing calls to ensure that Boris Johnson will be personally interviewed by the Sue Gray inquiry about alleged No 10 gatherings during the first lockdown, after it emerged he may have been present at a “bring your own booze” party that month. Boris Johnson has been warned by a Conservative rebel ringleader he faces a massive revolt from his own MPs if he does not end all coronavirus restrictions this month. Germany will study how reliable rapid antigen tests are in detecting the fast-spreading Omicron variant, the health minister, Karl Lauterbach, said on Sunday. More than 150,000 people have died in the UK from coronavirus since the start of the pandemic. Covid should be treated as an endemic virus similar to flu, and ministers should end mass vaccination after the booster campaign, the former chairman of the UK’s vaccine taskforce has said. Lateral flow tests in the UK will remain free, education secretary Nadhim Zahawi insisted amid reports they could be scaled back despite soaring Covid cases. London’s public health chief said the Omicron variant “may have passed its peak” in the UK capital. The boss of one of London’s busiest hospitals has said he is worried about losing staff when new rules come in requiring them to be vaccinated, BBC News reports. Asia: The US and Japan have reached an agreement to keep American troops within their bases amid concerns over a surge in Covid cases that has been linked to US military bases. Three people were arrested for breaking India’s Covid measures after police raided a dog’s lavish birthday party in Gujarat’s Ahmedabad city. The Philippines reported a record number of daily infections with 28,707 new cases, up from 26,458 cases the previous day. Tianjin, a major Chinese port city near the capital Beijing, has begun mass-testing its 14 million residents after a cluster of 20 children and adults tested positive for Covid-19, including at least two with the Omicron variant. Africa: Africa has registered a total of more than 10m cases since the start of the pandemic, according to figures from the Africa Centres for Disease Control. South Africa, Morocco, Tunisia, Ethiopia and Libya are among the countries with the highest number of cases on the continent. Middle East: The dissident Iranian poet and filmmaker Baktash Abtin, 48, died after contracting Covid-19 in a hospital in Tehran after being released on a furlough from prison. Abtin was serving a six-year sentence for “anti-government propaganda” and “actions against national security”. Kuwait and Qatar reported record daily Covid cases over the weekend. Kuwait reported 2,999 new cases on Sunday and Qatar on Saturday reported 3,487 new cases. Americas: Brazil’s health regulator Anvisa asked president Jair Bolsonaro to retract statements he made criticising the Covid vaccination for children. If you have anything you would like to add please get in touch on Twitter or by email.That’s all from me tonight. Here’s what we covered: Clay Aiken is running for Congress again. The American Idol star is seeking a seat in a newly-drawn North Carolina district in an already-crowded race. The GOP is still contributing to Trump’s legal expenses, provoking ire among some donors who would rather see their dollars invested elsewhere. Civil rights groups - who were instrumental in getting out the vote in 2020 - are planning to boycott Biden’s voting rights speech in Atlanta. The move is meant to highlight frustrations that a voting rights plan hasn’t been passed yet. Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell is threatening to push through dozens of GOP bills if Democrats make any changes to the filibuster rule. The Red Cross has reported a dire shortage of blood donations that could have devastating consequences. The agency is urging healthy Americans to donate. Thanks for spending your Monday afternoon with us! The Red Cross is facing a blood crisis. Drives have been canceled, donors have stopped showing up, and with Covid surging across the US, the organization has struggled with staffing. In 2021, new donations were down 34% and shortages are imminent, CBS News reports. Some blood centers have less than a one-day supply left of certain blood types. “If the nation’s blood supply does not stabilize soon, life-saving blood may not be available for some patients when it is needed,” the agency said in a joint statement with America’s Blood Centers and the Association for the Advancement of Blood and Biotherapies. The shortage is the worst it’s been in over a decade and hospitals have already been forced to “defer patients from major surgery, including organ transplants” according to a statement posted on the agency’s website. Those interested in donating can schedule an appointment at https://www.redcrossblood.org/ or contact their local hospital. Sen. Mitch McConnell is preparing to propose and push-through dozens of GOP bills in direct response to Democrats’ plans to change the filibuster rule, the Wall Street Journal reports. The filibuster, which has set a sixty-vote threshold to get to a vote in the Senate, has been used by the minority party to block legislation including previous attempts to enact voting protections. “Since Sen. Schumer is hellbent on trying to break the Senate, Republicans will show how this reckless action would have immediate consequences,” the Senate Minority Leader said in a statement given to the WSJ. McConnell also posted about the issue on twitter, claiming that changing the rule would rob voters of representation. The threat comes packed with plans for bills that would prevent vaccine mandates in the private sector, block implementation of a fracking ban, and bar sanctuary cities from receiving federal funds. From the WSJ: Other GOP bills on Mr. McConnell’s list, which he thinks can garner 50 votes or more, would prevent the Internal Revenue Service from implementing the Biden administration’s proposal to require banks to send to more information about customers’ accounts to the IRS and prohibit elementary and high schools from using as much as $164 billion in unspent Covid-relief funds if they aren’t open for in-person learning. Using a Senate procedure known as Rule 14 to circumvent Democratic-controlled committees, Mr. McConnell plans by Monday night to start adding more than a dozen Republican bills to the legislative calendar.” Earlier on Monday, Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer began to rally votes for a possible change or abolishment of the filibuster next week. “If Republicans refuse to join us in a bipartisan spirit, if they continue to hijack the rules of the Senate to turn this chamber into a deep freezer,” Schumer said, “we’re going to consider the appropriate steps necessary to restore the Senate so we can pass these proposals and send them to the president’s desk.” Insurance companies will have to foot the bill for over-the-counter Covid tests starting on Jan 15, the Biden Administration announced today, enabling the roughly 150 million privately insured Americans to get them for free. This is all part of our overall strategy to ramp-up access to easy-to-use, at-home tests at no cost,” said HHS Secretary Xavier Becerra in a statement, adding that the half a billion at-home rapid tests will be purchased and provided for “Americans who need them,” made available later in the month. The new requirement will enable people with proof of private health coverage to get tests from some pharmacies and online retailers without any upfront costs or to file a claim for reimbursement. As Covid cases continue to surge across the country, the tests have become a vital — and costly — resource. A two-test pack can run anywhere from $14 to $34. Still, as demand spikes, they have become increasingly harder to find. While covering costs is a step that may help some check for Covid more easily and regularly it won’t do much for those encountering empty shelves. “If reimbursement exists but there aren’t tests to purchase,” Lindsey Dawson, an associate director at the Kaiser Family Foundation told the New York Times, “that doesn’t help an individual consumer.” Some civil rights groups are planning to boycott Biden’s voting rights speech in Atlanta tomorrow to protest what they see as a failure of the Administration to make significant moves on the issue. “It is very disappointing that we use our voice and our vote to elect the Democrats to handle this issue and it just hasn’t been given the priority that it should,” April England Albright, legal director for activist group Black Voters Matter, told Reuters. The organization and a coalition of others, including New Georgia Project Action Fund, the Asian American Advocacy Fund and the GALEO Impact Action Fund, were instrumental in getting out the vote for Democrats in 2020. But in a joint statement, the groups said the president’s visit meant little unless it included “an announcement of a finalized voting rights plan that will pass both chambers, not be stopped by the filibuster, and be signed into law”. The filibuster rule was utilized by Republicans to stop voting-rights legislation from getting a floor vote 4 times last year after the bills were introduced by Democrats. Some GOP donors are growing frustrated that the party continues to cover the legal bills for former president Donald Trump, ABC News reports. According to campaign finance records, The Republican National Committee spent close to $720,000 last October and November to pay law firms aiding Trump in numerous lawsuits. While it’s not unusual for political parties to doll out donor’s funds for legal costs related to presidential campaigns, this is different. From ABC: But experts say the GOP’s recent payments of Trump’s attorney fees after he left the White House, for investigations that are not relevant to the next presidential campaign, is a very unusual move that’s indicative of the ongoing influence that the former president has over the party. “Campaign finance law does not strictly prohibit a national party committee from paying for private legal expenses, but it is very rare for a party committee to use donor money in that way,” said Brendan Fischer, federal reforms director at nonpartisan government ethics group Campaign Legal Center.” Fischer continued saying that it’s unprecedented for the party to cover legal expenses that “arise out of an investigation into activity that preceded Trump’s time in the White House, and when Trump is sitting on millions of his own PAC funds”. In response, RNC spokesperson Emma Vaughn characterized the costs as political battles. “As a leader of our party, defending President Trump and his record of achievement is critical to the GOP,” Vaughn told ABC. “It is entirely appropriate for the RNC to continue assisting in fighting back against the Democrats’ never ending witch hunt and attacks on him.” The party has also taken on lawsuits they characterize as an “election integrity program” doubling down on a fabrication from the former president that voter fraud cost him the election. No evidence was ever found to validate those claims, but that hasn’t stopped Trump and his supports for continuing to spread misinformation. Even with the high costs, the GOP is sitting on a significant amount of cash. With big donors still in their camp, the RNC reportedly had more than $65 million in its coffers at the end of November. Hello readers! Gabrielle Canon here, taking over from the west coast. Clay Aiken — who came to fame in the early aughts after placing second on American Idol — is officially running for Congress. The self-described “loud and proud Democrat” shared the news in a twitter video posted today, where he sat on a stool and talked openly to would-be voters. Telling viewers that his life, these days, looks much more “like yours than Justin Bieber’s” Aiken outlined the reasons he is running, including health-care access, inclusion, climate change, and income equality. “North Carolina is where I discovered first that I had a voice — and it was a voice that could be used for more than singing” he says, adding that the state was once the progressive beacon in the south. “Back then the loudest voices in our government were progressives who made sure our state was moving forward. But then things changed.” Aiken is seeking a seat in a newly drawn district that includes areas represented by retiring Democrat David E. Price. “One of my first experiences in politics and government was asking Congressman Price to speak to my eighth grade class — an invitation he graciously accepted,” Aiken wrote on his website adding, “I’d be honored to take his place.” This is Aiken’s second try to represent the state, after losing to a Republican incumbent in 2014. The 2022 primary was recently postponed until May 17, according to the New York Times, which also reports that the new legislative districts are facing lawsuits from Democrats and voting-rights advocates. Aiken is entering a crowded field but has already gotten some high-profile vocal support. “My amazing friend @clayaiken is running for Congress in NC!” New York City Council Member, Erik Bottcher tweeted urging followers to donate to the campaign. “If elected he’ll be the first LGBTQ member of congress from the south.” Meghan McCain also shared Aiken’s campaign video, tweeting, “Congratulations on your campaign launch @clayaiken! We love you!” That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Gabrielle Canon, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: US and Russian diplomats held a day of negotiations in Geneva over the fate of Ukraine. The diplomats described the talks as “useful” and “very professional,” but officials did not achieve any major breakthroughs in the negotiations, amid fears of a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine. Democrats are looking to renew their efforts to pass a national voting rights bill, despite Republicans’ unified opposition to their proposals. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris will travel to Atlanta, Georgia, tomorrow to address “the urgent need to pass legislation to protect the constitutional right to vote and the integrity of our elections,” per the White House’s guidance on the trip. The Fulton county district attorney is moving toward a decision on whether Donald Trump should be charged for attempting to overturn Georgia’s 2020 election results. “I believe in 2022 a decision will be made in that case,” Fani Willis told the AP last week. “I certainly think that in the first half of the year that decisions will be made.” Willis and her team began their work after Trump pressured Georgia’s top election official to “find” enough votes to hand him a victory, even though three recounts confirmed the former president lost the state to Biden. Bernie Sanders accused the Democratic party of having “turned its back on the working class”. In an interview with the Guardian, the progressive senator said Democrats needed to make “a major course correction” in order to focus on fighting for working Americans and standing up to “powerful corporate interests”. Gabrielle will have more coming up, so stay tuned. For students across the US, the return from winter break has been marked by chaos and confusion as the Omicron variant has exacerbated staff shortages and sparked fierce debates about how to reopen classrooms safely. In Chicago, classes resumed and then were canceled abruptly last week as the teachers’ union and school district failed to agree on safety protocols, while teachers in San Francisco and other Bay Area schools staged a “sickout” to demand more N95 face masks, testing and paid sick leave for those who contract the coronavirus. For Los Angeles Unified – the second largest public school system in the US – classes are scheduled to resume on Tuesday, and educators, students, and parents alike are bracing for another winter of anxious uncertainty. Schools here are grappling with coronavirus conundrums that institutions across the country are facing – but on a huge scale. Vaccination rates continue to lag among children, and tests are in short supply. And all this comes as rates of Covid surge in the surrounding community, with about one in every five coronavirus tests in Los Angeles coming back positive. Read the Guardian’s full report: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has urged Americans to avoid travel to Canada due to the rising number of coronavirus cases in the neighboring country. Reuters reports: The CDC elevated its travel recommendation to ‘Level Four: Very High’ for Canada, telling Americans they should avoid travel to its northern neighbor. The CDC currently lists about 80 destinations worldwide at Level Four. It also raised the island of Curaçao to Level Four on Monday. The United States in November lifted restrictions at its land borders with Canada and Mexico for fully vaccinated foreign nationals, ending historic curbs on non-essential travelers in place since March 2020 to address the COVID-19 pandemic. Meanwhile, US coronavirus hospitalizations have hit a new record of 132,646, surpassing the country’s previous record set in January of last year. Mitt Romney came to the defense of fellow Republican senator Mike Rounds, after Donald Trump attacked him for acknowledging the former president lost the 2020 election. “Mike Rounds speaks truth knowing that our Republic depends upon it. Republicans like Govs Hutchinson, Baker &amp; Hogan; Sens McConnell, Thune &amp; Johnson; Bush &amp; Cheney; plus 60+ courts and even the right-leaning Wall Street Journal editorial page agree: Joe Biden won the election,” Romney said in a tweet. Romney’s tweet came a day after Rounds acknowledged the reality that Trump had lost the 2020 race, telling ABC News, “The election was fair, as fair as we’ve seen. We simply did not win the election, as Republicans, for the presidency.” In response, Trump released a statement accusing Rounds of being “woke,” saying he will never endorse the South Dakota senator again. “Is he crazy or just stupid?” Trump said. “Even though his election will not be coming up for 5 years, I will never endorse this jerk again.” White House press secretary Jen Psaki was asked about Democratic Senator Kyrsten Sinema’s opposition to amending the filibuster, which Republicans have repeatedly used to block voting rights bills. “I think that everyone is going to have to take a hard look at where they want to be at this moment in history, as we’re looking at efforts across the country to prevent people from being able to exercise their fundamental rights,” Psaki said. Because the Senate is evenly divided between the two parties, majority leader Chuck Schumer needs all 50 Democrats on board before he can move forward with changing the filibuster, so he will need to convince Sinema to support the proposal. A reporter asked Jen Psaki about whether Joe Biden believes he has the political influence to get a voting rights bill across the finish line, amid unified Republican opposition to Democrats’ proposals. “It’s a hard question to answer because really what we’re talking about is whether we can get enough votes in Congress to get this done,” the press secretary said. Psaki described access to the ballot box as a “fundamental right for all Americans,” noting that voting rights bills have historically attracted bipartisan support in Congress. “I think we would dispute the notion that the president hasn’t been active or vocal” on voting rights, Psaki said “He’s given a range of speeches. He’s advocated for voting rights to pass.” But the press secretary added that the White House understands advocates’ frustration about Democrats’ failure to get a voting rights bill passed as of now. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, is now holding her daily briefing with reporters, and she provided a preview of Joe Biden’s remarks in Atlanta tomorrow. The speech is focused on the need to pass national voting rights legislation, although Republicans have repeatedly blocked Democrats’ voting rights bills by invoking the Senate filibuster. Psaki said the president would use the Atlanta speech to underscore what is at stake in the fight for voting rights, but she acknowledged Biden will not be able to sign any bill until he has the votes in the Senate, which will almost certainly require amending the filibuster. Another House Democrat has announced his retirement, continuing a worrisome trend for the party as it braces for the possibility of widespread losses in the midterm elections. Ed Perlmutter, who has represented Colorado’s 7th Congressional District since 2007, said today that he will not seek reelection in November. “After much thought and consideration, I have decided not to run for reelection,” Perlmutter said in a statement announcing his decision. “I’ve never shied away from a challenge but it’s time for me to move on and explore other opportunities. There comes a time when you pass the torch to the next generation of leaders.” Perlmutter is the 26th House Democrat to announce he will not seek reelection, compared to just 12 House Republicans who have decided to leave the chamber. US and Russian diplomats have emerged from a day of negotiations in Geneva over the fate of Ukraine, describing the talks as “useful” and “very professional” – but also stressing they had not made progress towards resolving fundamental disagreements. The two sides largely spend the day’s talks presenting their points of view on the situation in Ukraine, currently hemmed in by some 100,000 Russian troops, and on European security in general, and deferred further debate on them to a meeting in Brussels on Wednesday between Russia and all Nato members. “We had useful discussion and exchanges today that will help inform our way forward,” Wendy Sherman, the deputy US secretary of state and leader of the delegation in Geneva, told reporters after the day of talks. Her Russian counterpart, Sergei Ryabkov, said: “The conversation was difficult, long, very professional, deep, concrete, without attempts to embellish or smooth over sharp corners.” “We have been left with the impression that the American side approached the Russian proposals very seriously, studied them in depth,” Ryabkov said. Here’s more from Luke Harding, our man in Kyiv: Planet-heating emissions roared back in the US in 2021, dashing hopes the pandemic would prove a watershed moment in greening American society and addressing the climate crisis, new figures show. Following the onset of the pandemic in 2020, millions of people switched to working from home, car and airplane travel plummeted and industrial output slowed. This led to a sharp drop in greenhouse gas emissions, spurring predictions that a newly shaped American economy would emerge to help banish the era of fossil fuels. These forecasts may well have been baseless, however, with new research showing US emissions rose by 6.2% last year, compared to 2020. While emissions were still 5% down from 2019, the jump in pollution as people returned to previous rhythms of life was greater than last year’s overall economic growth. Full story: As Reuters reported this morning, a New York man has been criminally charged for threatening to kill Donald Trump. According to a complaint unsealed on Monday, Thomas Welnicki of Rockaway Beach expressed interest in killing the then president in an interview with US Capitol police in July 2020 and in several calls to the Secret Service the following year. Trump was identified as “Individual-1” in the complaint, filed in Brooklyn federal court. A footnote said “Individual-1” was president from 20 January 2017 to 20 January 2021. According to the complaint, in one voicemail left with the Secret Service, Welnicki said he would “do anything I can to take out” Trump. “Oh yeah, that’s a threat to come and arrest me,” he was quoted as saying. “I will do anything I can to take out [Trump] and his 12 monkeys … if I had the opportunity to do it in Manhattan, that would be awesome … tomorrow [Trump] will be in Georgia, maybe I will.” The complaint said the “12 monkeys” were unnamed members of Congress who Welnicki believed supported Trump. It also said Welnicki believed there was a $350,000 reward available for killing Trump. Given the codename “Mogul” by the Secret Service, Trump was the subject of security scares. In June 2016, for example, a British man was arrested at a rally in Las Vegas after trying to steal a police officer’s gun. The man told police his aim had been to kill Trump, then a candidate for president. In March 2017, an intruder who said he hoped to speak to the president breached the White House walls via the US treasury next door. Here’s some further reading about the Trumps and the Secret Service: Here’s where the day stands so far: Democrats are looking to renew their efforts to pass a national voting rights bill, despite Republicans’ unified opposition to their proposals. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris will travel to Atlanta, Georgia, tomorrow to address “the urgent need to pass legislation to protect the constitutional right to vote and the integrity of our elections,” per the White House’s guidance on the trip. The Fulton county district attorney is moving toward a decision on whether Donald Trump should be charged for attempting to overturn Georgia’s 2020 election results. “I believe in 2022 a decision will be made in that case,” Fani Willis told the AP last week. “I certainly think that in the first half of the year that decisions will be made.” Willis and her team began their work after Trump pressured Georgia’s top election official to “find” enough votes to hand him a victory, even though three recounts confirmed the former president lost the state to Biden. Bernie Sanders accused the Democratic party of having “turned its back on the working class”. In an interview with the Guardian, the progressive senator said Democrats needed to make “a major course correction” in order to focus on fighting for working Americans and standing up to “powerful corporate interests”. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Joe Biden spoke today to Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed, as the country continues to suffer through a bloody civil war that has attracted international condemnation for alleged war crimes. “President Biden commended Prime Minister Abiy on the recent release of several political prisoners, and the two leaders discussed ways to accelerate dialogue toward a negotiated ceasefire, the urgency of improving humanitarian access across Ethiopia, and the need to address the human rights concerns of all affected Ethiopians, including concerns about detentions of Ethiopians under the state of emergency,” the White House said in a readout of the call. “President Biden expressed concern that the ongoing hostilities, including recent air strikes, continue to cause civilian casualties and suffering, and he reaffirmed the U.S. commitment to work alongside the African Union and regional partners to help Ethiopians peacefully resolve the conflict.” Over the weekend, an airstrike in Ethiopia’s northern region of Tigray killed 56 people and wounded many others, including children. The Ohio Republican Jim Jordan is the second sitting congressman to refuse a request for cooperation from the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack. In a Sunday night letter to the committee chair, Bennie Thompson of Mississippi, the Trump ally accused the panel of “an outrageous abuse” of its authority. He also claimed “an unprecedented and inappropriate demand to examine the basis for a colleague’s decision on a particular matter pending before the House of Representatives”. “This request is far outside the bounds of any legitimate inquiry,” he said, “violates core constitutional principles and would serve to further erode legislative norms.” Scott Perry of Pennsylvania, who was also closely involved in Donald Trump’s attempt to overturn his election defeat, has also refused to cooperate. Some North Carolina voters are pushing for Republican congressman Madison Cawthorn to be barred from seeking reelection because of his involvement in the rally that culminated in the January 6 insurrection. The AP reports: Lawyers filed a candidacy challenge of the Republican on behalf of 11 voters with the State Board of Elections, which oversees a process by which a candidate’s qualifications are scrutinized. The voters contend that Cawthorn, who formally filed as a candidate for the 13th District seat last month, can’t run because he fails to comply with an amendment in the U.S. Constitution ratified shortly after the Civil War. The 1868 amendment says no one can serve in Congress ‘who, having previously taken an oath, as a member of Congress . . . to support the Constitution of the United States, shall have engaged in insurrection or rebellion against the same.’ At the rally on January 6, Cawthorn addressed a crowd of Donald Trump’s supporters, praising their “courage” and criticizing Republicans who opposed efforts to overturn the results of the 2020 election. “The Democrats, with all the fraud they have done in this election, the Republicans, hiding and not fighting, they are trying to silence your voice,” Cawthorn told the crowd. “Make no mistake about it, they do not want you to be heard.” Symone Sanders, a former top adviser to Kamala Harris, is joining MSNBC as an anchor, the network announced this morning. According to MSNBC’s press release, Sanders will host MSNBC on the weekends and anchor “The Choice” on NBC’s streaming platform, Peacock. “Sanders will bring her expertise, spirited rhetoric and sharp political insight to MSNBC’s multi-platform channels,” the press release says. “Her program will explore issues at the intersection of politics, culture and race and break down how decisions made in Washington impact electorates, industries, and communities across the country. She will also interview law and policy makers, top government officials, scholars, and thought leaders.” The announcement comes one month after news broke that Sanders was leaving the Biden administration, amid a broader staff shake-up in Harris’ office. Sanders previously served as an adviser to Joe Biden during the 2020 campaign, and she was a spokesperson for Bernie Sanders during the 2016 campaign. Senator Bernie Sanders has called on Democrats to make “a major course correction” that focuses on fighting for America’s working class and standing up to “powerful corporate interests” because the Democrats’ legislative agenda is stalled and their party faces tough prospects in this November’s elections. The White House is likely to see his comments as a shot across the bow by the left wing of a party increasingly frustrated at how centrist Democrats have managed to scupper or delay huge chunks of Joe Biden’s domestic policy plans. In an interview with the Guardian, Sanders called on Biden and the Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, to push to hold votes on individual bills that would be a boon to working families, citing extending the child tax credit, cutting prescription drug prices and raising the federal hourly minimum wage to $15. “It is no great secret that the Republican party is winning more and more support from working people,” Sanders said. “It’s not because the Republican party has anything to say to them. It’s because in too many ways the Democratic party has turned its back on the working class.” Joe Biden has now arrived back at the White House after spending the weekend at Camp David. The president did not take any questions from reporters upon his arrival, although one journalist took the inventive approach of writing her question on a sheet of paper and displaying it for the president to read. Sadly, Biden did not take the bait. The Georgia prosecutor who is considering whether to charge Donald Trump for attempting to overturn Joe Biden’s victory in the state is looking to make a decision in the next few months. “I believe in 2022 a decision will be made in that case,” said Fani Willis, Fulton county district attorney, to the AP last week. “I certainly think that in the first half of the year that decisions will be made.” Willis and her team began their work after Trump pressured Georgia’s top election official to “find” enough votes to hand him a victory, even though three recounts confirmed the former president lost the state to Biden. The AP notes of Willis’ office: She’s assembled a team of fewer than 10 people — lawyers, investigators and a legal assistant — who are focused primarily on this case and can consult outside lawyers with particular expertise in certain areas of law, she said. ... Willis declined to speak about the specifics, but she confirmed that the investigation’s scope includes — but is not limited to — a Jan. 2, 2021, phone call between Trump and Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger, a November 2020 phone call between U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham and Raffensperger, the abrupt resignation of the U.S. attorney in Atlanta on Jan. 4, 2021, and comments made during December 2020 Georgia legislative committee hearings on the election. Both Joe Biden and Kamala Harris are scheduled to deliver remarks tomorrow, as the president and the vice-president travel to Atlanta to address the urgent need to pass national voting rights legislation. Biden selected Harris as the administration’s point person on voting rights last year, but Democrats have so far been unable to make substantial progress on the issue because of Senate Republicans’ filibustering. “Our democracy is being threatened by an attack on voting rights,” Harris said in a tweet this morning. “We must fight to save our democracy by fighting for the right for all people, whoever they vote for, to vote.” The Republican official who famously resisted Donald Trump’s attempt to overturn his election defeat in Georgia has said he will run for re-election on a platform of “integrity and truth”, against an opponent who as a churchman “should know better” than to advance the former president’s lies. Brad Raffensperger, the Georgia secretary of state, became a household name after he turned down Trump’s demand that he “find 11,780 votes, which is one more than we have [to get]” in order to overturn Joe Biden’s win in the southern state. It was the first victory by a Democrat in a presidential race in Georgia since 1992. This year, Raffensperger will run for re-election against Jody Hice, a pastor, US congressman and Trump acolyte. “Congressman Hice, he’s been in Congress for several years,” Raffensperger said on Sunday, on CBS’s Face the Nation. “He’s never done a single piece of election reform legislation. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Democrats are looking to renew their efforts to pass a national voting rights bill, despite Republicans’ unified opposition to the proposal. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris will both travel to Atlanta, Georgia, tomorrow to address “the urgent need to pass legislation to protect the constitutional right to vote and the integrity of our elections,” per the White House’s guidance on the trip. The state, which Biden narrowly won in 2020, has approved controversial voting restrictions since the election. Georgia will also be crucial for Democrats’ midterm efforts, as Senator Raphael Warnock seeks reelection and gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams once again attempts to defeat Republican Brian Kemp. Meanwhile, Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer has set a deadline of 17 January, Martin Luther King Jr Day, to vote on rule changes that would allow Democrats to pass voting rights bills. But unless those proposed rule changes can attract the support of centrist senators like Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, Republicans will once again be able to filibuster the bills, and Democrats will be right back where they started. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.San Francisco’s infamous Millennium Tower – a luxury condominium where star athletes and retired Google employees bought multimillion-dollar apartments before they realized it was sinking – is continuing to sink and tilt to the side by about 3in (7.5 cm) a year, according to the engineer responsible for fixing the troubled building. In a few years, if the tilting continues at the current rate, the 58-story luxury building could reach the point where the elevators and plumbing may no longer operate, said Ron Hamburger, the engineer. Millennium Tower opened to fanfare in 2009 and its more than 400 apartments quickly sold out, for a reported $750m in total. But by 2016, the building had sunk 16in (40 cm) into the soft soil and landfill of San Francisco’s dense financial district. The building’s ongoing tilt, which has continued despite a planned $100m fix, has drawn comparisons to the Leaning Tower of Pisa, and prompted a lawsuit by residents against the building’s developers and designers and rounds of recrimination between the developers and city officials. In early litigation, some residents argued that apartments that were once assessed at prices as high as $5.1m were now worth almost nothing. In 2020, a confidential settlement included a $100m scheme for fixing the building, and a plan to compensate homeowners in the building for estimated losses. But the sink-and-lean of the building has continued through the repair process. Work to reinforce the building’s foundation came to a halt last summer, after engineers discovered the building had sunk an additional inch in the months since the attempted repairs had begun. An inch of tilt at the foundation of the building translated into an additional 5in lean at the top of the high-rise, NBC Bay Area reported last summer, pushing the building’s total tilt at the time to 22in. Today, the building’s total tilt at the top is 26in, an increase of 10in since the “so-called fix” of the building began last year, NBC Bay Area reported. Hamburger told the San Francisco board of supervisors in an update hearing last week that the building remains safe and that installing 18 steel piles to bedrock is the best way to stop the tilting and possibly reverse some of it, KNTV-TV reported. “The building does continue to settle at a rate of about one-half inch per year and to tilt at a rate of about 3in per year,” he told supervisors last week. “It is doing this whether we are conducting work at the site or not.” High-profile residents have included the former San Francisco 49er Joe Montana, late venture capitalist Tom Perkins and San Francisco Giants outfielder Hunter Pence. The building’s perks included a wine cellar, film screening room and a button that promised to let residents summon “engineering” help within 15min.The latest allegations about lockdown-era gatherings at Downing Street have provoked a furious backlash on the front pages of Tuesday’s papers. The normally pro-Boris Johnson Express blasts a full-throated warning in its splash headline: “Enough Boris! You MUST end ‘partygate’ farce now”, it says, reflecting backbench Tory exasperation at the drip-drip of damaging reports about partying No 10 staffers. The Mail takes a similar line and says “Boris rocked by new party revelations”, ramming home the iniquity being felt by people throughout Britain with a subhead that reads: “Email proves key aide invited 100 Downing Street staff to party with PM – while public could only meet one person outdoors”. Others are more scathing with the i picking up on a particularly galling line from the leaked email invitation to the gathering on 20 May. “‘Bring your own booze’”. The same line is used by the Guardian as well with its lead story “Fury as email reveals No 10 ‘bring your own booze’ lockdown party”. The Mirror describes the email as “Invite to do what you like”, while the Metro goes with a play on words – “Downing it Street” – alongside a picture of Johnson quaffing a pint of beer. The coverage contrasts with that of the Times and Telegraph, neither of which choose to lead with the party revelations. The Times does have the story on its front page – “No10 celebrated ‘lovely weather’ with lockdown drinks party” – but leads on limits to sporting fixtures being eased. Ditto the Telegraph, which says “Johnson received invite to lockdown party” but leads on cabinet anger over misleading isolation guidance.If Ghislaine Maxwell is not granted a retrial in her Manhattan federal court sex trafficking case, prosecutors are prepared to drop pending perjury counts when she is sentenced, they said in a 10 January letter. Prosecutors said they were prepared to dismiss the perjury counts in an effort to bring swift closure for the victims and prevent them from being re-traumatized at a possible second trial. “In the event the defendant’s post-trial motions are denied, the government is prepared to dismiss the severed perjury counts at the time of sentencing, in light of the victims’ significant interests in bringing closure to this matter and avoiding the trauma of testifying again,” they said. Prosecutors also called for Maxwell’s sentencing to take place “approximately three to four months from today’s date”. Maxwell was convicted of five counts on 29 December for facilitating the late financier Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse of girls, some as young as 14. Maxwell’s defense team has called for a new trial following reports that a juror might not have disclosed past sexual abuse before his selection to the jury. The British socialite still faces two perjury counts for allegedly lying under oath during civil litigation that involved sexual misconduct claims against her. Judge Alison Nathan, who is presiding over Maxwell’s case, previously ruled that she would be tried separately for these perjury counts. Maxwell’s defense team has requested that Nathan postpone setting a schedule for sentencing, based on their position that “there is a compelling basis for the court to overturn Ms Maxwell’s conviction and grant her a new trial based on the disclosures of Juror #50 during deliberations,” the letter said. “The parties are currently briefing that issue. The defense therefore objects to setting a schedule for sentencing until this motion is resolved,” prosecutors also said in the scheduling letter, which set out both sides’ positions. “For the same reason, the defense intends to set forth in its moving papers the reasons why Ms Maxwell should not be forced to expend resources to brief other post-trial motions until after the court decides this motion.” The defense also contends that if Maxwell has to participate in pre-sentencing proceedings while awaiting a decision on her request for a new trial, it will “adversely impact her fifth amendment rights”. “Ms Maxwell will be forced into the position of not cooperating with the probation department’s investigation because any statement she makes to probation, and any documents she provides, may be used against her at her retrial,” the letter said of her lawyers’ position. Epstein, a convicted sex offender and mega-millionaire, counted Prince Andrew and former presidents Bill Clinton and Donald Trump as associates before killing himself in a New York jail in 2019, about one month after he was arrested for sex-trafficking.Over the past few weeks, holiday festivities have prised open the Covid floodgates. The Christmas season brought parties, festivals, family reunions with enthusiastic hugs, dinners, dancing and energetic karaoke sessions – an antidote to months of relentless doomscrolling and prolonged lockdowns – but Covid cases have now inevitably skyrocketed. Things have changed; we’re not in the same situation we were two years ago – 91% of the Australian population have had two jabs and nearly 3.9bn people have been fully vaccinated across the world. We know, definitively, that vaccination drastically reduces the risk of getting really sick or dying from Covid and we have effective, evidence based treatments for the virus. Whilst breakthrough infections in vaccinated people can cause severe illness, it’s incredibly unlikely. Fewer than 0.5% of people with Covid in Australia are admitted to hospital and Covid-related mortality is very, very low. Though you still don’t want Covid if you can avoid it, chances are you’ll be OK if you can’t. Still, many Australians are having difficulty coming to terms recognising that avoiding Covid is no longer a feasible long-term option. It’s hard to get your head around the psychological U-turn from Covid zero to Covid everywhere when we’ve been told to stay home for two years to avoid the killer virus at all costs. Covid has been demonised in Australia for so long, compounded by the prolonged premise of “Covid zero”, a concept that was hopelessly naive at best and a dangerous political fallacy at worst. Much has already been said of the tidal wave of Covid-related mental distress that has been flooding through our emergency departments over the past few months. Now we have the addition of new infection-related health anxieties looming large, exacerbated by difficulties accessing reliable guidance or timely tests. The vast majority of people don’t need to be in the ED and are safe to convalesce at home, sufficed with paracetamol and ibuprofen, plenty of fluids and a Netflix subscription, but reassurance is challenging after months of fear-mongering rhetoric. It also goes against every gut instinct as healthcare professionals to advise people to think twice about coming to the ED if they’re sick or worried, but we know when to worry about Covid now. The pressures of this virulent outbreak on the health system and the need to preserve our critical care capacity have proved to be an additional insult to years of injurious underfunding and insufficient resources. The recent implementation of at-home rapid antigen testing is a welcome, albeit late, development. RATs work by identifying Covid antigens, the foreign structures containing the virus that trigger the body’s immune response. If Covid antigens are present on a RAT swab, the liquid solution helps them stick to a specific chemical on the paper strip and generate a positive result. Viral loads peak around five to seven days after infection, which correlates with when you’re most likely to have symptoms and so when your RAT is most likely to be reliable. However, if you don’t have an especially high viral load or enough antigens, a RAT will be negative even if you are in the early stages of infection. The levels of detectable antigen also change over time so yesterday’s negative RAT doesn’t explain away today’s nasty headache or tomorrow’s annoying cough. Though a positive RAT reliably tells us everything we need to know, a negative RAT rules out nothing. Conversely, PCR (polymerase chain reaction) tests essentially copy-and-paste genetic material from your swab until there’s enough material to look for the specific sequence of the Covid-19 virus. When a PCR test identifies the presence of Covid, it’s almost certainly accurate and so it’s better at detecting early or asymptomatic Covid. A single PCR test requires significant manpower, however, and costs at least $100 – 10 times more than a RAT. Whilst the sensitivity of PCRs are invaluable if you require hospital care, it is galling to think of how the cost of millions of PCRs could have been better spent in this pandemic if we’d had enough RATs sooner. Millions of dollars could have been redirected to better supporting and protecting our frontline healthcare workers, towards lockdown related psychological support for young people or on longer term solutions to tackling endemic poverty. I worked through the first two waves of the pandemic in an inner city London hospital hit ferociously hard by Covid in 2020. Our circumstances were in no way unique in the NHS; our oxygen pressures ran precariously low, we were forced to invent ICU spaces in the most creative of corners and we ran relentless rounds of futile resuscitation every night. The youngest person to die in our hospital was in her late 20s, the same age as me, with no underlying medical conditions. I think about her occasionally when I’m prescribing a young homeless lady sotrovimab or showing an elderly gentleman how to book his booster, because it’s difficult to convey how lucky we are in Australia even in our current state of crisis. Less than two years ago we had no viable treatment options on the horizon, confirming Covid infection took a couple of days and we didn’t even know if vaccination was a true possibility. Now, in 2022, it might feel like the cloud of doom overhead will linger forever but things are changing – we’re vaccinated, population immunity is rising. We need to keep protecting our vulnerable communities and emergency resources and keep testing, keep our space and keep our masks on just a little while longer. Dr Sarah Simons is an emergency medicine registrar in Melbourne, AustraliaNestled between the natural splendour of the Blue Mountains and the rural New South Wales hub of Bathurst lies a small hamlet named Little Hartley. Passing through, a city driver might miss the quaint village, but ask any child who’s made the trek over the mountains and they’ll tell you the highlight of their trip: the lolly shop flanked by yellow VW beetles. The Lolly Bug has stood as a road trip institution since 2006, providing tens of thousands of day trip lovers and rural tourists travelling in both directions with coffee, a friendly chat, and the chance to browse their array of sweet treats. The roadside confectionery shop has suffered through bushfires and Covid health emergencies, and the management had been looking forward to starting the new year afresh. But less than a week into 2022, a lightning bolt set ablaze the roof of their pride and joy. “There was a crown of lightning all around the valley, and when I saw all this smoke coming from the Lolly Bug, my heart sank,” says a Hartley Rural Fire Service volunteer, Christina Allen. Before emergency services from Hartley, South Bowenfels, Mount Victoria and Lithgow could extinguish the blaze, it had gutted the heritage building, reducing mountains of confectionery to wads of molten sugar. First on the scene was senior deputy John Wilkinson of Hartley RFS. “When we got there it was really going,” he says. “Flames licking out of the doors, the windows, the roof. When we got inside, the ceiling started collapsing. A volunteer advanced firefighter, Corey Gurney, says: “The more we put out, the more smoke there was – the lollies and plastic from the packaging made it really toxic. “And we were short on crew because of the holidays.” The fire was contained in less than an hour before a new complication arose – the building was insulated with what appeared to be asbestos. “I knew when I saw the roof, and then the hazmat truck turned up – I knew if we didn’t get hosed down, we could be in trouble,” Wilkinson says. The combined fire services were able to avoid a chemical disaster and finished structurally salvaging the store by 4am on Saturday. The owner of the Lolly Bug, Sharon Tofler, got the call at 11.30pm on Friday night, a call no business owner ever expects to get: that their livelihood, the business their family have poured their souls into, was gone. “The firefighters said lightning hit the tree next to the place and then the whirlybird on top of the roof,” Tofler says. “Just pure disbelief. That’s what went through my head. How could this happen? We’re absolutely gutted.” In less than two hours, the candy cornucopia that had stood at the centre of Hartley’s community was reduced to ashes. Even as the firefighters worked to subdue the flames, they knew that inside the old milk bar, nothing had survived. “It’s an old building and there are no water mains here like there are in town,” the Lithgow RFS operational officer, Brett Taylor, told reporters. The Lolly Bug’s owners prided themselves on their selection, boasting at least 1,500 varieties of English sweets, US candies and Dutch liquorice, sold alongside chocolate and soft drink from across the globe, as well as a range of local fudges, baked goods and succulent oddities. “Every customer who walked through the door – young or old – would be surprised at the size of the shop and the range,” Tofler recounts with a smile. “I remember one person saying, ‘I think we’ve fallen down the rabbit hole!’” Hundreds of heartfelt posts began to flow online on Saturday morning as word filtered out. “My sons were there with friends a couple of days ago, absolutely loved it!” wrote a local business owner, Tarona Jones, of the Black Barn. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter “It was probably the highlight of their holiday. Our teenager purchased a kilo bag of chocolate bananas!” Now, where those goodies once lay on proud display, there remain only piles of sugary sludge and charred packaging. “We are awed by the response from everyone, the support and encouragement to get back up has made it that little bit easier to handle,” Tofler says of the community’s response. Roger Byrom is a freelance journalist from Oberon, NSWPoor access to testing and long delays in receiving results are compounding the challenges faced by regional and rural communities amid the Omicron wave of Covid-19, health professionals and local representatives say. Danica Leys, the chief executive of the Country Women’s Association of New South Wales, said while there were shortages of rapid antigen tests in metropolitan areas, they were not available at all in regional areas, in her experience. To get a test where she lives, Leys would have to drive an hour to Coonabarabran for a PCR test at a clinic which requires an advance booking and only operates one hour a day. A doctor in regional NSW, who asked not to be named, said the state’s testing system was overwhelmed and the officially reported infection figures could not be trusted. “I run a testing clinic in NSW and am still getting positive results from 4 January back from the lab. [We] can’t trust the NSW figures one jot. “There are no rapid antigen tests available at any pharmacies or local supermarkets. The numbers are misleading and unreliable. Covid is rampant in this area.” Peta Rutherford, the chief executive of the Rural Doctors’ Association of Australia, said regional and rural healthcare across most of the country was “under significant pressure”. She said cases were “fairly widespread” but even where there were not many cases, healthcare systems were “certainly feeling the strain of increased testing, whether that’s for people who are travelling, have been a close contact or workforce requirements for health or aged care”. Rutherford said rural towns did not have the mass testing clinics or the supplies of rapid antigen tests that cities have. The Department of Health has announced that close contacts deemed ineligible for a PCR test can be offered free rapid antigen tests through state testing clinics but Rutherford said the distribution of rapid tests in rural towns without a nearby state testing facility remained unresolved. Rutherford said as case numbers rose local healthcare professionals had to take on combined responsibilities of testing, vaccination and caring for Covid-19 patients. “The reality is the same workforce works across the hospital and the general practice environment in most of these towns,” she said. “When there’s pressure on one, that creates pressure on the other.” As Monday’s milestone of childhood vaccination eligibility coincided with eligibility for booster shots she said there was “a genuine capacity issue”. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter Roy Butler, the MP for Barwon which covers a vast stretch of NSW from Lightning Ridge to Broken Hill, said all of the 27 health facilities in his electorate were experiencing staffing problems with Warren, Bourke and Broken Hill “at the top of the list at the moment in terms of staffing challenges”. Butler said the pandemic had exposed the weaknesses and flaws in the regional health system, as hospitals including Bourke and Warren were under their critical staffing level before the pandemic. “It hit us at a time when our health services were already in deficit, already compromised.” With healthcare professionals having to isolate, some staff in western NSW have had to work double shifts of up to 18 hours. “The real worry is not only the issue around care and being able to care for people in our hospitals and the resources that takes, the other problem is that we’re going to end up doing damage to our staff and damage our healthcare workers at a time we can’t afford to damage our healthcare workers,” Butler said. He highlighted that it was difficult to attract and retain nurses and healthcare staff to work in rural Australian communities without the added pressures of Covid-19. “You can’t nibble around the edges to fix this … It needs a real think of how we attract, engage and retain health staff in the west. It needs massive systemic structural change.” Butler said the problem was especially pressing for communities in western NSW where there was an overrepresentation of people with co-morbidities and respiratory issues, which makes them especially vulnerable to the virus, including within Aboriginal communities. David Heffernan, the president of the NSW branch of the Pharmacy Guild, said an emerging concern was booster shot appointments having to be cancelled if the town’s only pharmacist had to isolate. Rutherford said others pressures for regional towns were coinciding with Covid-19 outbreaks, such as Queensland’s flooding. She said towns including Cherbourg were experiencing outbreaks while being cut off from nearby towns like Kingaroy, which residents relied on for medical services. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityQueensland health authorities have condemned reports of “pox parties” held by groups of unvaccinated residents on the Gold Coast, which has quickly become the epicentre of the state’s Omicron outbreak. On Monday another 23 people – enough to fill a separate ward – were admitted to hospital on the Gold Coast after contracting Covid-19. Half of intensive care patients in the region were unvaccinated. Reports of gatherings where people deliberately attempted to spread the virus, in the belief it would increase their immunity, were first reported by the Gold Coast Bulletin. The Queensland chief health officer, John Gerrard, said the notion was “utterly ridiculous”. “The best way to get immunity to this virus is through vaccination, not through these parties. “Please, please stop.” Queensland reported 20,566 new cases on Tuesday, though the total included some tests from private pathologists that would have otherwise been included in Monday’s numbers. A software issue that delayed the reporting of case numbers had since been rectified. There were now 109,524 active cases in Queensland – 502 patients were in hospital, 27 in ICU, and six on ventilators. One in four hospitalised patients were on the Gold Coast – where vaccination rates were marginally lower than the rest of Queensland. Six of the 11 patients in ICU on the Gold Coast were unvaccinated. “Gold Coast remains a hotspot, they had an additional 23 admissions to their wards yesterday … a typical hospital ward is somewhere between 20 to 30 patients,” Gerrard said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “I think the principal reason (for the Gold Coast outbreak) is the number of people travelling there from interstate. “You’ve had a lot of incursions and a lot of spot fires … just because their test was negative when they crossed over, they then became positive after they arrived. “The slightly lower vaccination rate … it’s not terrible on the Gold Coast … that contributes and also we have heard from the police repeatedly that mask wearing is poorer there.” Parts of the Gold Coast share some similarities with alternative lifestyle communities just across the border in northern New South Wales where vaccination rates are low. There also have been significant anti-lockdown protests in the city. As concern about the Gold Coast outbreak mounts, the city’s mayor, Tom Tate, has called for state health authorities to “let it rip”. In an opinion piece, published by the Gold Coast Bulletin on Monday, Tate said constant rule changes had tested the goodwill of the community. “Opening the border was always going to see Omicron sweep across the state,” Tate said. “The state claims it is all about slowing the spread. Why not let it spread rapidly so we reach the peak sooner, and our economy gets off life support faster?” Gerrard, who was not asked directly about Tate’s comments, made clear hospitals had plans in place to deal with the coming peak, expected in early February. Health workers were being called back from holidays to help the hospital system cope. “We had 502 people in Queensland hospital wards as of 7pm last night,” Gerrard said. “That is up from 419 the day before. “That is escalating fairly rapidly and that is what is expected. “Those numbers will become quite significant in the coming weeks until the beginning of February, and hopefully the mathematical modelling is correct, it will start to decline after that.”The US was battered by 20 separate billion-dollar climate and weather disasters in 2021, one of the most catastrophic climate years on record which led to at least 688 deaths, according to the annual report of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (Noaa). Damage from the year’s 20 most costly disasters, which included thousands of wildfires burning across western states, frigid temperatures and hail storms in Texas, tornadoes in the south-east, and tropical storms saturating the east coast, totaled around $145bn. This makes 2021 the third costliest extreme weather year on record, with four tropical storms – Elsa, Fred, Ida and Nicholas – accounting for just over half the total price tag. The deadly mega-disasters were scattered throughout 2021 and hit communities from coast to coast, starting with flash floods and bomb cyclones in California and ending with Colorado’s most destructive ever wildfire, which tore through almost 1,100 homes and 6,000 acres (2,400 hectares), causing more than $10bn of damage. Between 44% and 56% of the country was affected by drought during the course of 2021. Overall, the US saw its fourth-hottest year on record fueled by historic highs in December (beating 2015) that produced spring-like temperatures on parts of the east coast. Ten states – Alabama, Arkansas, Kansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas – also had their warmest December on record. Across the country, people of color and low-income communities are being disproportionately affected by the toll and trauma of extreme weather events, which in many cases are directly attributed to global heating caused by greenhouse gas emissions. Noaa’s report comes as Joe Biden attempts to resuscitate his Build Back Better bill which includes the country’s largest ever climate investment and without which experts say the US has no chance of meeting its pledge to cut greenhouse gas emissions to at least 50% below 2005 levels by 2030. The fossil-fuel friendly senator Joe Manchin’s opposition to the $1.75tn economic recovery and social welfare bill is holding up its passage through the Senate. Failure to take radical action to curtail greenhouse gases will probably take its toll on a growing number of Americans as the costs – human and economic – of extreme weather and climate disasters are already escalating. “The data highlights a worsening and undeniable trend that underscores the reality of how the climate crisis is already affecting every region of the country,” said Rachel Cleetus, policy director for the climate and energy program at the Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS). “We simply cannot adapt to runaway climate change … Fossil fuel companies and their allies shouldn’t be allowed to stand in the way of desperately needed climate action.” Disaster tracking by Noaa shows that the average number of annual billion-dollar events over the past five years was 17.2 compared with just 5.3 during the 1990s. The staggering costs from the mega-disasters between 2017 and 2021 totaled almost $750bn. Climate change has outpaced building regulations, which have played a significant role in the rising number and cost of mega-disasters, according to Adam Smith, an applied climatologist at Noaa. “Much of the growth has taken place in vulnerable areas like coasts, river floodplains and the wildland urban interface. Vulnerability is especially high where building codes are insufficient for reducing damage from extreme events,” Smith said. While the growing intensity and frequency of weather and climate disasters like extreme rainfall, extreme heat and drought are directly attributed to global heating, the links to tornadoes are still not fully understood Still, 2021 was a very active tornado year with a record-shattering 193 in December – nearly double the previous high of 97 in 2002. Another historic event was the mid-February freeze in Texas which left more than 200 dead and thousands without power and running water. Damages are estimated at $24bn, costing more than double the so-called storm of the century which stretched Canada to Honduras in March 1993.Tech platforms are being urged to make it easier for fake reviews to be removed amid fears they are harming small businesses online. Small business ombudsman Bruce Billson told a parliament committee that the online harms experienced by small businesses through fake reviews must be considered as part of the government’s social media inquiry. “Our office is particularly concerned by the posting of negative reviews that are not founded in real customer experiences (‘fake reviews’),” he said in a submission in the last week of December 2021. “These reviews damage business reputations and cause significant distress to staff and business owners,” he said. “Our office has assisted more than 30 businesses dealing with fake reviews in recent years.” Guardian Australia has previously reported how little recourse businesses can have when disgruntled customers, and even competitors, leave negative reviews on businesses on Google search and maps. Increasingly, businesses are launching defamation suits against Google in order to unmask anonymous reviewers to get them to remove the review. Last year, the county court of Victoria ordered a woman who left multiple negative Google reviews about Kew periodontist Dr Allison Dean to pay $170,000 in damages plus costs, for what the judge said was a “vendetta” against the specialist. In 2020, Google and Optus handed over information that revealed the identity of an anonymous negative reviewer on Melbourne dentist Dr Matthew Kabbabe’s page, after he took legal action. The case was subsequently settled. Billson said fake reviews are often given prominence on online platforms, and could contribute to a loss of sales over an extended period of time. “Further, as a small business owner’s identity is often intrinsically linked to their business, fake reviews contribute to mental health strains,” he said. Citing a Google move last year to remove fake one-star reviews for the Robinhood app during the peak of the GameStop share incident one year ago, Billson said such protection should also be offered to small businesses. “We recommend that digital platforms build out tools that prevent fake reviews as well as create a more accessible and transparent review system,” he said. “This should include giving small businesses more transparency on the evidence they need to provide a digital platform to have a fake review reviewed and removed,” he said. In the 2019 digital platforms report, released by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, it was recommended the government develop an external dispute resolutions scheme for issues with tech companies such as Google and Facebook. The government agreed to the recommendation, and flagged a trial of the scheme in 2020. However, to date there has been no pilot scheme. Billson said in his submission his office would be happy to provide insight “into the most effective management of small business disputes”. The social media inquiry was set up late last year to review “the range of online harms that may be faced by Australians on social media and other online platforms, including harmful content or harmful conduct”, the impact algorithms have, identity verification and age verification policies, online safety for children, and data collection. Palmer United Party MP Craig Kelly, who was permanently banned from Facebook and Instagram in April last year over posts promoting hydroxychloroquine and ivermectin and questioning the effectiveness of masks, is one of the members of the committee. The committee held two hearings just before Christmas, and submissions to the inquiry close on Wednesday.Final thoughts OK, so just count all those comments at the beginning of this live blog as simply foreshadowing to set up Georgia’s act of monumental revenge. For Georgia, it’s difficult to imagine a more satisfying way of going about winning it all than beating Alabama on the biggest possible stage. For its first three quarters, it wasn’t much of a game. Yet things turned after Bennett’s called-fumble. That felt like the turning point of the game at the time and it was, just it wasn’t for Alabama (to their misfortune). It felt like a collapse was imminent but—unlike in past meetings with the Crimson Tide—the Bulldogs stayed firm. That will do it for live coverage here at the Guardian. Thanks so much to everybody who followed along with us, especially those of you who contributed along the way. Ciao! And our Defensive Player of the Game is Lewis Cine, who did his part in keeping Alabama out of the end zone for most of the game. Stetson Bennett is, quite obviously, called Offensive Player of the Game. “I wasn’t going to be the reason that we lost this game,” he says. Quite the opposite, it turns out. Coach Kirby Smart accepts the trophy which he smooches. “I didn’t get a full taste,” he says, making it weird. The stage is being prepared for the trophy presentation here now. “This is the night for the Georgia Bulldogs, after a long, long wait.” Things have been so hectic that I’ve entirely memory-holed that entire World Series, but that is right isn’t it? Confetti covers Lucas Oil Stadium and, per custom here at the Guardian, we’ll stick around for the trophy presentation before putting an end to the college football season. A tearful Bennett is interviewed on the field. “As soon as he caught it, I just teared up,” he says about the game-sealed pick-six, which he apparently didn’t even watch to completion. Bryce Young and Stetson Bennett embrace on the field, a touching display of competitive respect from the two quarterbacks. Well that utterly pointless last minute took like ten minutes’ worth of actual time, but we’re finally there! The Georgia Bulldogs have won their first national championship since 1980 and, in doing so, get revenge on their arch-rivals! Georgia 33-18 Alabama, :46 Alabama still has 54 seconds to play with here but they are essentially mathematically eliminated. Forgive me for focusing on the hugs on the sidelines among the Georgia players. Georgia 33-18 Alabama, :54, 4th quarter On 1st &amp; 10, Young throws incomplete. On 2nd &amp; 10, Young throws incomplete. On 3rd &amp; 10, Young lets it fly one more time… And it’s picked off! It’s picked off! Kelee Ringo returns it for a 79-yard run that will seal this game! The Bulldogs kick the extra point, because the rules require they do so, but all that we’re talking about now is the ending point-differential. Georgia 26-18 Alabama, 1:28, 4th quarter On 1st &amp; 10, Robinson picks up a single yard. On 2nd &amp; 9, Young finds Latu for another first down. They are not going to go away quietly here. Georgia 26-18 Alabama, 2:30, 4th quarter Young finds Holden for a four-yard game. 2nd &amp; 6. Young finds Brooks for an additional yard. Georgia could basically end this with a stop here, but instead Young finds Robinson Jr who runs for 12 yards and a first down. Georgia 26-18 Alabama, 3:33, 4th quarter Bryce Young is out and he’s going to need to pull out some magic here, but Alabama can tie things up with a touchdown and a successful two-point conversion here. They will start at their own 25 after a touchback. Georgia 26-18 Alabama, 3:33, 4th quarter On 2nd &amp; 3, Cook nearly picks up the first down. He’s just short but it doesn’t matter, because Stetson passes to a ridiculously open Bowers who takes it into the end zone with ease. There’s a flag on the play, but it’s defensive pass interference so who cares? Georgia’s extra point is good. Georgia 19-18 Alabama, 4:05, 4th quarter On 1st &amp; 10, a teammate-aided White picks up seven yards while being utterly swarmed and Georgia takes a timeout. Georgia 19-18 Alabama, 4:51, 4th quarter On 1st &amp; 10, Bennett decides to throw for the first time this possession and he draws a key defensive pass interference call that gives them 15 yards and puts them at the Alabama 25. Georgia 19-18 Alabama, 5:13, 4th quarter White alone gets the next two carries, which equal to a first down that takes them to the Alabama 39. They are getting into field goal territory here. Georgia 19-18 Alabama, 6:29, 4th quarter The Boston Red Sox fan in me doesn’t like seeing 1918 up here on the scoreboard right now, so somebody better score quickly I don’t care who. Georgia is looking for a nice long drive, however. Cook and White combine for a first down that takes them nearly midfield. Georgia 19-18 Alabama, 7:17, 4th quarter Kearis Jackson makes a fair catch of the Alabama punt at the Georgia 38. Not terrible field position for the Bulldogs who can really put the Tide in a bind here. Georgia 19-18 Alabama, 7:17, 4th quarter After a touchback, Robinson is taken for a two-yard loss. Next play, Young throws incomplete. 3rd &amp; 12. Young’s pass bounces off of Slade Bolden’s hands and that’s an immediate three-and-out by Georgia’s defense. Wow. Well, it took us three whole quarters, but this turned out to be a pretty good game here. Now let’s see if Alabama can keep the pace going. Georgia 19-18 Alabama, 8:09, 4th quarter Another first down for Georgia with Bennett finds McIntosh for a ten-yard game. Unfortunately, he loses eight of those after a Dallas Turner sack 2nd &amp; 8, Bennett, sensing a possible penalty-assisted free play, heaves it to the end zone where it’s caught by Adonai Mitchell for a touchdown. Their two-point conversion, however, is similarly unsuccessful. Georgia 13-18 Alabama, 10:14, 4th quarter Great start from Georgia. On first down, Bennett finds Burton who picks up 18 yards and takes them to their own 43. Then, a defensive pass interference call gifts them an additional 15 yards and first down. They’re already at the Alabama 42. Georgia 13-18 Alabama, 10:14, 4th quarter We’ll see if Alabama’s decision to forgo the extra point in favor of the two-point conversion ends up hurting them. Georgia, meanwhile, have to be frustrated after that close call went against them. We’ll see if they are able to put it behind them. After a touchback, they start at their own 25. Georgia 13-18 Alabama, 10:14, 4th quarter Alabama has a 1st &amp; goal situation at the Georgia 6. Robinson Jr. picks up three yards but Young’s second down pass to Latu is broken up. On 3rd &amp; 2, Young finds Latu in the end zone and Alabama pulls ahead on their first touchdown of the game. Alabama decides to go for two here and it burns them, Bennett breaks free with a run but is taken down before he can convert. Still, huge shift here. Georgia 13-12 Alabama, 10:59, 4th quarter Robinson Jr. runs to the Georgia 12. Young takes a shot at the end zone on second down but it’s caught out of bounds. The good news, however, was that there’s a foul on the play. That’s brutal roughing-the-passer call on Georgia and now Alabama will have a fresh set of downs. Georgia 13-12 Alabama, 11:35, 4th quarter Oh we’re looking at a close-up of the Alabama receiver’s foot was just barely in-bounds, so this might be what they called it on the field: a fumble recovered by Alabama. Oh wow, yes, the officials say the fumble stands as well as the recovery via Brian Branch. Alabama is back in the red zone, at the 15-yard line, and has a second chance at a touchdown. Georgia 13-12 Alabama, 11:35, 4th quarter White picks up five yards on first down but then McConkey is tackled for a three-yard loss. On 3rd down, Bennett gets chased and throws the ball while being grabbed. It really looks like it’s out of bounds but it’s called a fumble on the field. The play is under review. Georgia 13-12 Alabama, 12:59, 4th quarter It feels like this Georgia possession could be the game, but I feel like I’ve said that about four different times in this liveblog, so who knows? Reichard’s kickoff is another touchback, so the Bulldogs will be at their own 25. Georgia 13-12 Alabama, 12:59, 4th quarter Young finds Hall for a massive 28-yard gain and it looks like Alabama’s determined to answer Georgia here. On their own 5, Young’s throw to Hall is complete. 2nd &amp; goal: Robinson Jr. gets them to the three-yard line. Crucial 3rd &amp; goal here… and a harassed Young throws it to the end zone to nobody in particular. Has the Georgia defense forced yet another field goal attempt? Yes as Saban doesn’t want to go for it this early. Instead, another Alabama field goal makes this a one-point game. Not ideal for Georgia, but it beats the alternative. Georgia 13-9 Alabama, 14:36, 4th quarter It’s always nice to start a quarter with a fresh set of downs. It’s aesthetically pleasing not to return from the break at a 2nd &amp; 7 or 3rd and long or whatever. Alabama likes it too. Young immediately finds Bolden for a seven-yard gain and, on second down, he finds Robinson Jr. for a first down AND a Georgia penalty brings them to their opponents’ 33. Georgia 13-9 Alabama, end of the 3rd quarter Robinson Jr. runs for an additional yard. 3rd &amp; 3, Young finds Holden for a ten-yard gain that gives them a first down, puts them at their own 42 and takes us to the end of the third quarter. Georgia 13-9 Alabama, 1:13, 3rd quarter Alabama starts at their own 25 after a touchback and Holden picks up six yards on first down. Can the Crimson Tide respond? Georgia 13-9 Alabama, 3:02, 3rd quarter That was a 67-yard run from Cook. On 1st 10, Bennett says he’ll take care of the ball himself, running for four yards. On 2nd &amp; 6, a facemask call on the defense makes it 1st &amp; goal at the Alabama 2. White runs in it and Georgia is in front! And the extra point is good! Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 3:02, 3rd quarter Okay, I’m calling this a momentum shift. Cook goes off on first down for Georgia who takes it from the Georgia 20 all the way to the Alabama 13! It looked like he was about to give us the game’s first touchdown right then and there. For the record, Georgia’s Jalen Carter is given credit for that huge block. Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 3:23, 3rd quarter This time around Georgia’s defense forces Robinson into a single-yard loss. The next pass, Young throws just a little too low for Brooks to scoop. 3rd &amp; 11. Young throws and almost finds Hall for what would have been a massive play. Okay, maybe I jinxed the Alabama offense. They have to settle for a field goal… and don’t even get that! The Bulldogs block it! Holy heck! Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 4:32, 3rd quarter Robinson Jr. fights for his life to squeeze out three additional yards. He then finishes the job by picking up a new first down on the next play. Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 5:33, 3rd quarter You’ll never guess who gets the ball for the next carry and picks up six yards on first down. That’s Brian Robinson Jr.? Alabama’s offense looks better this half. The commentators are crediting their offensive line and I’ll take their word for it. Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 6:01, 3rd quarter 1st &amp; 10. Young finds Holden for two yards then Robinson Jr. yet again for six. On 3rd and 2, a surprisingly open Robinson Jr. is able to make it to a first down before being tackled. He’s turning into the go-to guy this second half. Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 7:26, 3rd quarter Alabama calls Robinson Jr.’s number once again and he picks up eight yards. On 2nd &amp; 2, Young completes a pass to Traeshon Holden for three yards and a new first down. Young finds Holden and then Brooks to get to a 3rd &amp; 3 situation. Young finds Trey Sanders who looks like he’s going to be short until he falls down for a first. Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 10:22, 3rd quarter Robinson Jr. picks up a yard! They’re at their 3-yard line. He does better on the next play, breaking through the Georgia defense and hitting the 19-yard line before finally being halted. Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 11:03, 3rd quarter Camarda’s punt is downed at the Alabama 4. This might end up being a rare football game actually decided by the players’ feet. Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 11:12, 3rd quarter On 1st &amp; 10, a back-to-work Bennet throws incomplete to Bowers. That will make it 2nd &amp; 10. This time Bennett finds McIntosh who picks up a very difficult three yards. On 3rd &amp; 7, Bennett throws incomplete and never mind that thing I said about that interception being a huge shift in this game because it’s all for naught. Punting time again. Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 12:05, 3rd quarter Robinson Jr. picks up three yards. Oh, there’s a big play but it’s the wrong kind for Alabama! Young attempts to throw a bomb and it lands right in the hands of Georgia’s Christopher Smith at the Alabama 43. Huge, huge shift here. Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 12:46, 3rd quarter Bolden makes a fair catch of Camarda’s punt at the Alabama 7. That’s a lot of ground to make up on a day where big passing plays have been hard to come by. Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 12:46, 3rd quarter An intentional grounding call on Bennett crushes the Georgia drive before it even gets a chance to begin. Cook picks up 11 yards to reduce a 2nd &amp; 19 to a 3rd &amp; 8 but Bennett’s pass is incomplete. We’re going punting again! Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 14:33, 3rd quarter Georgia is starting at their own 25, where White picks up 11 yards on first down and then 18 yards on the next first down. Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 15:00, 3rd quarter And our second half starts with… a touchback. Par for the course. The science teacher roommate has peaced-out, not entirely unreasonably given that first half, so it’s just you and me for this second half, which should be kicking off shortly. Nevermind this is actually kind of a banger. I am a Swiftie and feel no pleasure in saying this. We are now being subjected to the world premiere of a Katy Perry video for reasons that will forever remain a mystery to me. Last night was the first time as a US sports fan that I ever rooted for a tie in my life and you know what? It changed my life. Maybe it’s time I started to look into the other kind of football as well. Halftime thoughts Well, the game really turned on the Jameson Williams injury. He will be out for the entire game, which anyone watching pretty much could have been guessed the second the injury occurred in real time. The other news has been the combination of offensive struggles/defensive excellence that has led this to be a showcase to the two kicking teams. One imagines that this will change in the second half, but who could have predicted that the first half would have been this free from fireworks? Halftime! And we have a 6-9 game where there hasn’t been a single touchdown. Just what one expected from the best two teams in college football, right? Georgia 6-9 Alabama, end of the first half. Great punt there from Alabama, which is a weird thing to type. White picks up 4 yards as the clock continues to tick. White picks up another yard and it looks like Georgia is playing this conservatively. Alabama calls a timeout with 22 seconds left in the half. When play resumes, it’s a 3rd &amp; 5 situation. White manages to pick up a first down but there’s not much time left here to do anything and everybody just waits around until the end of the first half. Given the score, that feels like an appropriate way to end the first two quarters of play. Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 1:40, 2nd quarter It’s a 3rd and 5 situation and it feels like a crucial one here as halftime looms. Young uncorks a rather great throw that Bolden nearly completes for a catch. Game of inches. Here comes the punt team again. Jackson makes a fair catch at the Georgia 10. Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 1:45, 2nd quarter Young throws to Agiye Hall who makes the catch and then smartly eludes the defense for a 24 yard gain that takes Alabama to the Georgia 43. Given a fresh set of downs, Robinson Jr. picks up two yards. 2nd &amp; 8. Young throws incomplete. Just like that, we get another third-down situation and… our first timeout of the game. This one’s courtesy of Georgia. Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 2:39, 2nd quarter After a touchback, Alabama starts at their own 25. Brian Robinson Jr. gets the ball first and he picks up three yards. 2nd &amp; 7. Young throws incomplete. 3rd &amp; 7. On the next play, an offsides penalty on Georgia turns it into a more manageable 3rd &amp; 2 situation. Georgia 6-9 Alabama, 3:09, 2nd quarter Dallas Turner sacks Bennett for a four-yard loss. Just like that, 1st and 10 has become 2nd &amp; 14. Make that 3rd and 14 after Bennett’s next throw lands incomplete. Bennett finds Kearis Jackson for an eight-yard gain that at least gives Georgia a chance for (you’ll never believe this) a field goal attempt. Podlesny’s 49-yarder looks like it’s going to curve away but it manages to hit the uprights to cut the Alabama lead to three. Georgia 3-9 Alabama, 5:11, 2nd quarter Bennett throws incomplete to Adonai Mitchell on 1st &amp; 10. 2nd &amp; 10, Bennett finds Bowers, who drags several defensive players with him, until he can get six yards. 3rd &amp; 4, Bennett finds Mitchell who picks up 11 yards. Georgia’s at the Alabama 34. Georgia 3-9 Alabama, 6:23, 2nd quarter Georgia has to feel good about its defense limiting Alabama to field goals, but it won’t matter if they can’t score themselves. Reichard’s kickoff isn’t great, it goes for 56 yards. They will start at their own 35. James Cook gets the first touch on this drive, picking up four yards. On the next down, Bennett connects with McIntosh for ten yards which means, obviously, a first down. Solid start, this. Georgia 3-9 Alabama, 7:07, 2nd quarter Robinson Jr gets it to the Georgia 6. Alabama is threatening for the game’s first touchdown… except Young throws incomplete and then gets sacked for a massive loss. 13 yards! Georgia holds Alabama to yet another field goal attempt. Reichard’s 37-yarder is good and Alabama at least pad their lead. Georgia 3-6 Alabama, 8:49, 2nd quarter Slade Bolden catches, fumbles and returns the resulting punt. Alabama start at their own 26. Young finds Ja’Corey Brooks for a five-yard gain. On the next play, Young finds Cameron Latu who just goes off and very nearly takes it all the way to the end zone before being brought down at the Georgia 8. Georgia 3-6 Alabama, 10:36, 2nd quarter After a false start penalty, Bennett throws incomplete to Pickens in a 1st &amp; 15 situation. Bennett throws complete to the wonderfully named Ladd McConkey for a three-yard gain. Bennett finds Cook, who gets 3 yards on 3rd down. Georgia, however, needed 12. Punt time, again. Georgia 3-6 Alabama, 11:12, 2nd quarter A penalty takes back yards on what would otherwise have been a huge return from Georgia, a 30-yard run from McIntosh. They will instead start at their own 20. It’s been a weird one: Georgia 3-6 Alabama, 11:46, 2nd quarter It’s hard to concentrate on the game after seeing something like that. Young finds Bolden for nine yards. Young throws incomplete on the next play. 3rd &amp; 1. Nope, false start on Alabama and that’s a five-yard penalty. 3rd &amp; 6. Young finds Bolden, but not for enough yards to get that first down. So, it’s time for another field goal. Reichard’s 45-yard attempt is good and Alabama takes the lead. Please please do not show that injury replay again, ESPN. They do, but at least it’s not a close-up. Georgia 3-3 Alabama, 12:28, 2nd quarter Camarda’s kickoff puts them at their own 25. Jameson Williams makes a huge first down catch on the 35 but immediately goes down on his own with a leg injury before being brought down. My science teacher roommate caught it on replay and her diagnosis is not great. Injury time-out, obviously. Georgia 3-3 Alabama, 12:35, 2nd quarter On 1st and goal, Cook gets pushed back a yard. On 2nd &amp; goal, Bennett throws incomplete. 3rd &amp; goal, Bennett runs for himself… and only picks up four yards. Nope, we will not be getting a touchdown here. Jack Podlesny’s 24-yard field goal is good and we’re tied at 3-3. Just like we all imagined we would be at this point in the game. Georgia 0-3 Alabama, 14:14, 2nd quarter On 2nd &amp; 14, Bennett finds Bowers for an additional five yards. Huge 3rd &amp; 9 situation here for both teams. Bennett finds Jermaine Burton for eight yards and we’re in a first-and-goal situation. May we actually have a touchdown in the first half here? Georgia 0-3 Alabama, end of the first quarter Well, that’s not super-great. Georgia gets a false start penalty to push them back to the 24-yard line. For the last play of the first quarter, White picks up a single yard. One quarter down, Alabama has a slim lead but the Bulldogs are seriously threatening. Georgia 0-3 Alabama, 1:06, 1st quarter FINALLY a big play. Bennett goes way downfield to find George Pickens all the way at the Alabama 29. That’s a 59-yard play. Bennett might be feeling it now, as he sees Brock Bowers for a third straight first down, a ten-yard completion that takes them to the Alabama 19. Georgia 0-3 Alabama, 2:29, 1st quarter Burnip’s punt is rather effective, pinning Georgia to its own eight-yard line. Zamir White gets four yards. That’s good. And then Georgia gets penalized for a facemask that pushes them back to their own four. On 1st &amp; 14, White runs for six yards. 2nd &amp; 8, Bennett finds Darnell Washington for nine yards, and hey that’s good for Georgia’s first down of the entire game. Georgia 0-3 Alabama, 3:33, 1st quarter Trey Sanders runs for four yards. So we have another 3rd down situation and… Young throws another one incomplete, meant for Jahleel Billingsley. I can’t believe we’re seeing the punt team yet again. Georgia 0-3 Alabama, 4:02, 1st quarter Alabama has its best field position of the game so far as they will start on their on their own 45. On first down, Young seems a bit confounded and throws it away. Georgia 0-3 Alabama, 4:18, 1st quarter Bennett hands it off on first down. James Cook gets a single yard. 2nd &amp; 9. Kenny McIntosh gets the ball next and he almost immediately gets tackled. 3rd &amp; 9. Georgia doesn’t want another three-and-out here, but that’s what they get here. Bennett runs for a bit, throws under duress and watches as the ball hits the ground. We’re getting yet another punt here. And there’s a flag on the punt… fair catch interference on Georgia that gives Alabama an additional 15 yards. Georgia 0-3 Alabama, 5:46, 1st quarter Kearis Jackson makes a fair catch of James Burnip’s punt and Georgia’s second chance will start at their own 25 on the other side of another slate of commercials. Georgia 0-3 Alabama, 6:28, 1st quarter Young finds Bolden on second down for a six-yard gain but on 3rd &amp; 3, Bolden gets tackled for a loss and there’s a three-and-out for Alabama. Here comes the punting team. Georgia 0-3 Alabama, 7:49, 1st quarter Young finds Williamson but for nada. On 2nd &amp; 10, however, Williams gets himself open for a 14-yard catch and a first down. Georgia 0-3 Alabama, 8:19, 1st quarter Bennett runs on the next play and just flat out drops the ball. Somehow nobody on Alabama’s defense manages to pick it up. There’s another delay of game penalty, this is on Georgia. Bennett’s next pass is incomplete and that will do it for Georgia’s first possession of the game. Jake Camarda comes in to punt, which is caught by Bolden at the Alabama 20. Georgia 0-3 Alabama, 9:09, 1st quarter Reichard’s kickoff hits the end zone for a touchback. Georgia start at their own 25 and… Alabama’s Christian Harris immediately sacks Georgia’s Stetson Bennett for a huge 14-yard loss. However, a delay-of-game penalty on the defense gives them an additional five yards. Still second down, however. Frank A. James offers some much-appreciated encouragement via email here: Play almost by play is good. Thank you. UGA ‘61 So far, an “almost play” was the most exciting one. Georgia 0-3 Alabama, 9:55, 1st quarter On 1st &amp; 10, Young’s throw is incomplete. Odd not to go to a running back there. Young throws again here, to Ja’Corey Brooks, which is good for five yards. However, the Alabama drive ends there at the Georgia 19 yard line. Decent job to hold Alabama to a field goal. Will Reichard’s 37-yard attempt is good and, hey, being up three is better than being down by at least six so that counts as a successful opening drive for them all things considered. Georgia 0-0 Alabama, 11:06, 1st quarter Young finds Bolden for another big gain, this one’s almost good for yet another first down. Trey Sanders runs to just pick it up. Georgia 0-0 Alabama, 11:37, 1st quarter Young throws incomplete to Cameron Latu on first down and targets him again in second down, a completion good for nine yards. They just need a single yard so Young hands it to Robinson Jr who gets two. Alabama’s at the Georgia 25. Georgia 0-0 Alabama, 13:18, 1st quarter Big break for Alabama. On 2nd &amp; 10, Young hands it off to Jameson Williams for 11 more yards and a first down. Georgia 0-0 Alabama, 13:23, 1st quarter Alabama QB Bryce Young connects with Slade Bolden for a 11 yard gain and a first down. On the next play, Young gets taken to the ground and it looks like Georgia recovers and takes it for a touchdown but the officials are going to double-check whether it was an incomplete pass or not. They rule... and it’s just an incomplete pass so there’s no touchdown and it’s just second down. Georgia 0-0 Alabama, 14:34, 1st quarter Alabama starts at their own 25 after the opening kick. Brian Robinson Jr. gets the ball for the first two carries which takes them to their 33. Coin toss Georgia calls tails. It’s tails. Georgia gets to decide, they decide to defer and get the ball to start the second half. As a Patriots fan, I must say that this is the right choice. National anthem Gospel singer Natalie Grant gives a country-tinged version of the Star-Spangled Banner that is way, way, way too showboat-y for my personal tastes. 4/10. Space Force flag sighting at the presentation of the flags! OK, we’re getting close to when opening kick is scheduled (the game is being broadcast on ESPN, for those wondering). In fact, we’re at the opening montage time here. We get a... marching band version of Men Without Hats’ “Safety Dance” here from what I can tell. That song does *not* mention the Crimson Tide to my knowledge. When we mention the changed playoff system, the NCAA adopted the four-game system just back in 2014. Already, however, there’s some talk about expanding the field to include 12 teams, but the sides are far apart in coming to an agreement. Given the way of all sports, it’s probably all but inevitable. Predictions Okay, the preamble probably tipped my hand just a tad bit. I believe that Alabama win this one but (because we have to make this interesting) Georgia will manage to at least temporarily take a lead relatively late in the game. My random stab at a final score: Alabama 30-27 Georgia. That’s just this take from someone who has admittingly been paying far more attention to the NFL than the college game over the last few months. I more than welcome your predictions, which you can email to hunter.felt.freelance@theguardian.com or tweet to @HunterFelt. These two teams are, um, not exactly fan favorites but then again, the schools that tend to make it to the championship game rarely are. The inevitable Steely Dan connection Have you ever wondered how exactly Steely Dan’s “Deacon Blues” came to mention the Alabama football team? Well, Mel Magazine’s Tim Grierson is here to tell you exactly how Donald Fagen and Walter Becker snuck in the “they call Alabama the Crimson Tide” line in one of their more despairing songs and how it then became an unlikely marching band staple in Alabama. Preamble Hello, welcome to the 2022 College Football Playoff national championship game between third-ranked Georgia and top-ranked Alabama. Longtime NCAA football fans will not be surprised that these are the final two teams standing. The two teams have a long-standing rivalry, although a mostly one-sided one. The last time Georgia beat Alabama was back in 2007 which was much longer ago than your brain probably thinks it was. So, Nick Saban’s Crimson Tide should be considered favorites here. Heck, as The Ringer’s Rodger Sherman points out, the Bulldogs’ Alabama envy even caused them to go out of their way to pluck from the Saban coaching tree, with Georgia head coach Kirby Smart being Saban’s former defensive coordinator. It’s tricky to shake the feeling that Georgia is stuck perennially playing catchup to modern college football’s juggernaut. Alabama already beat Georgia in the SEC championship game, a 41-24 shellacking of the highest order. The naysayers can point this out as a point towards Alabama, but the Bulldogs rallied back from that with a 34-11 win in the Orange Bowl and should be extra motivated. Meanwhile, the Crimson Tide indeed did roll over Cincinnati, 27-6. Georgia isn’t just playing for its first championship in over 40 years, they last won it all back in 1980, they are playing to get an extremely massive monkey off its back. Alabama, meanwhile, is here to prove that they’re still the most dominant team in the nation and win the first back-to-back championships in the current playoff era. If you’d like to participate in this live blog, feel free to send us your commentary. You can do so either via email (to hunter.felt.freelance@theguardian.com) or on Twitter (to @HunterFelt). Our game is scheduled to start at 8:00 pm EST, but we’ll be back with additional commentary before then heading up to opening kickoff. It’s the 2022 College Football Championship between Georgia and Alabama at Lucas Oil Stadium! Hunter will be here shortly. Here’s a look back at how Georgia and Alabama made it through to tonight’s championship game.The nation’s peak body for general practitioners has demanded the government “urgently repair” the children’s vaccine rollout, saying supply and delivery issues have left doctors working with “one arm tied behind their back”. Disability groups, meanwhile, say the failure to prioritise children with a disability, coupled with the current surge in demand, has created significant barriers for those most vulnerable to Covid-19. The Pharmacy Guild of Australia is also reporting that very high demand is putting “pressure on supplies” for its members and that “some pharmacies have reported deliveries being less than they ordered, or deliveries being delayed”. The rollout of the new paediatric Pfizer formula to 2.3 million children aged 5-11 began on Monday, amid frustrations from GPs about low dose allocations and notifications of delivery delays. The federal government has insisted there are no supply or delivery issues, that it is vaccinating at high rates, and that there is enough vaccine in Australia to ensure “every child who wants to be vaccinated can be vaccinated”. But Dr Karen Price, president of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners, told Guardian Australia on Tuesday she “can’t imagine” how children would receive their first dose before the school year began at the current pace. She said GPs could not obtain enough stock to meet demand and had had orders cancelled at the last minute. “Some practices have been allocated 50 or 100 doses a week when they have around 1,500 children on their books. It’s not hard to do the math and see we can’t keep up with demand,” Price said. “I have spoken with the health minister this morning to inform him of the challenges facing general practices. I was told any issues will be dealt with accordingly, and that GPs have already delivered 64% of the available childhood vaccinations yesterday.” The dose allocations have been particularly frustrating for families of children with a disability, often most at risk from Covid, who have not been prioritised, unlike the staged rollout of the adult jab last year. Children and Young People with Disability Australia chief executive Mary Sayers said she had repeatedly urged the government to put children with a disability at the “front of the queue” for receiving the vaccine. “We’ve heard really loud and clear from parents that they’re getting pretty frustrated with the hurdles in place when it comes to booking a vaccine for children, particularly for children with a disability,” Sayers told the Guardian. “There are a whole lot of challenges around GPs and pharmacists having supplies, so that they’re not being able to book an appointment.” Sayers is also frustrated by the lack of data on the vaccination of children with a disability, and met with the health department to lobby for an improved and streamlined process on Tuesday. “We’re entering our third year of this pandemic, yet it still doesn’t seem to be getting through that people with a disability need a really targeted and nuanced approach,” she said. “It’s not because they have a disability, it’s because they face additional barriers in our society for inclusion in vaccination programs.” The Pharmacy Guild of Australia also warned of significant strain on its members, brought by the children’s rollout and the cut of the minimum booster interval for adults from five months to four. “There has been very high demand for 5-11[-year-old] vaccinations since the program began this week,” national president, Prof Trent Twomey, told the Guardian. “This has put pressure on supplies and some pharmacies have reported deliveries being less than they order, or deliveries being delayed.” Supply is not the only issue facing the children’s vaccine rollout. The Guardian revealed last week that a “technical glitch” erroneously listed two vaccine hubs in New South Wales as available for children’s vaccinations on the state government’s vaccine booking website. The error was only discovered in the days before the children’s vaccine rollout commenced, causing last-minute mass cancellations for parents. Meanwhile, Price says reports have also emerged of shipments arriving with expired doses. The rollout involves roughly 8,000 providers, including 6,000 GPs and 2,000 pharmacies, and additional state and Commonwealth clinics and Indigenous health clinics. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On Sunday, the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said: “The fact that there are over 8,000 points of presence for children’s vaccination is designed to mean that there are multiple options over the course of the coming week. “And with 3m vaccines for 2.3 million, it’s enough to ensure that every child has the opportunity to be vaccinated. “Every child that wants to be vaccinated can be vaccinated, but the critical message is for people to look around and bookings are opening every day. So health.gov.au is the starting place [for] the eligibility checker, but also the states as well.” A spokesperson for Hunt said the government had delivered over 289,000 doses in the past 24 hours, the highest number since mid-October. “Australia’s front-line health workers are doing a fantastic job,” he said. “The Minister today confirmed 99% of ordered doses were delivered on time, with enough supply in the system to vaccinate children before school resumes.” “GP’s have delivered approximately 22,000 of the 35,000 children’s doses delivered to date with a total stock on hand for GP’s of over 433,000 children’s doses and over 835,000 children’s doses across all channels.” He said the 22,000 doses was 5% of the stock already delivered to GPs. The amount delivered would double again in coming days.As the grey sky darkens, waves of black, silhouetted fieldfares and starlings move through the air, some dropping to settle on the grass on the brooks. A lapwing loops in a figure of eight and lands among others huddling together beside one of the pools. The calls of Canada geese and whistles of teals and wigeons carry over the quietening marsh. I scan the fields with my telescope, watching the birds begin to settle down for the night. I pick up an upright shape sitting on a pile of mud. Refocusing, I see that it’s a female merlin. The small, brown bird of prey sits with its back to me, the cold wind picking at its feathers. It turns its head from side to side, watching the flocks of birds coming in to roost. It bends down and pulls at something at its feet. I’d seen a female merlin earlier in the afternoon – a dark arrowhead shape chasing the starlings across the brooks – and this is probably the same bird, feeding on a kill. It finishes its meal, stretches out its wings, shakes its head and begins to clean its talons with its beak. Our smallest birds of prey, merlins breed on northern uplands, but some come south for the winter. They can be hard to see on Sussex grasslands, the Downs or coastal marshes – and then only fleetingly as they briefly alight on a post, or dart low in pursuit of small birds – so I’m determined to watch this one as long as I can. The merlin preens, carefully running its beak through its wing feathers, pushing them back into place. It turns its head almost all the way round and stares directly at me. I remain completely still. It watches me for a while and then turns back. As the day becomes darker, the definition of the bird fades, its brown plumage merging with the muddy background. I’m about to move on when the merlin leans forward and stretches its wings again. It flaps once, twice. This time it pushes off, and I watch it fly away, across the marsh and towards the trees, where I lose sight of it in the gloom. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryStaff shortages during the current Omicron case surge are proving more disruptive than during the height of the Delta wave, Australia’s businesses warn as they plead for greater access to rapid antigen tests and a unified message from governments. An unofficial lockdown in Sydney and Melbourne has also hammered consumer confidence and spending as people stay at home rather than risk catching the virus. “This is an imperfect storm,” Damian Kelly, a spokesman for Business NSW, said. “At a time when businesses were hoping for a bumper summer, it’s been the reverse.” The secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Sally McManus, said the situation was worse than in early to mid-2020 when Covid first hit and lockdowns began. “Back then we did have supply chain issues, but nowhere near, and the reason is because of the number of people who are sick,” she said. “Never in our history have we had the hole in this number of workers at the same time sick – it’s a big, big crisis economically and obviously personally for everyone affected.” McManus wrote to Scott Morrison on Monday urging the prime minister to make rapid antigen tests free for all, extend paid pandemic leave that is currently limited to household contacts to all close contacts, upgrade work mask requirements and increase support payments to workers and businesses reeling from the burgeoning economic crisis. Requirements for workers to isolate amid a widespread surge in new Covid cases and the lack of available testing are forcing companies large and small to limit operations, while the latest consumer confidence data points to a chilling effect of the turmoil on consumer spending. Virgin Australia reportedly cut its January and February schedule by a quarter while Qantas has so far dodged any major impact other than cancelling some of its Jetstar flights during the first couple of weeks in January with the bulk of passengers rapidly reassigned seats. Inghams, Australia’s biggest chicken supplier, said staff shortages caused by the Omicron wave were causing shortages at customers that Guardian Australia has confirmed include KFC, which is having difficulty obtaining some types of fresh chicken pieces on the east coast. Visits to supermarkets reveal meat and some dairy products to be among the most affected if emptying shelves are any guide. Most dairy farms, for instance, can hold only about one or two days’ supply of milk, and have to dispose of the product if they can’t get it out the farm gate, the industry said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Alexi Boyd, the chief executive of the Council of Small Business Organisations Australia, said the shortage of workers was savaging the hospitality and retail sectors, including activities ranging from hair salons to live music and other entertainment events. Conditions were now akin to the depths of the Delta lockdowns in NSW and Victoria last year but without the same aid from governments. “The key differences, they were state-sanctioned and there was small business support in place or regardless of what the reason was,” Boyd said. “Now many of those support measures no longer exist but we’re essentially in a similar situation in that business cannot function for no fault of their own.” Boyd said the lack of rapid antigen tests and their costs was only one of the issues that governments should hurry up and fix. Another was a plea to the Morrison government to remove limitations on international students that still keep them from working more than 20 hours a week. “It should be lifted to up to 40 hours a week across the board,” she said. Also unlike during the Delta wave, communications from governments about what people in business should be doing has broken down. “There’s a disconnect between the information that’s been given broadly to the community and then how do small business distil that into what’s applicable and practical for their business,” Boyd said. “We’ve lost that.” McManus said that during previous waves “there was a sense that we’re all in this together”, but the failure of the Morrison government to plan for the reopening of the economy had destroyed this. “I believe that people feel as though we’re rudderless, like we’ve been left to fend for ourselves,” she said. “The level of incompetence and negligence is astounding.” She said jobseeker payments should be lifted back to the level it was in 2020 when the government paid a $550 a fortnight pandemic supplement and jobkeeper-style payments reintroduced, but with broader coverage that included casuals and visa workers. “It’s not as if we know that next week it’s getting better,” she said. “It’s not, it’s going to get worse and it’s going to get worse for weeks and that’s people once again left with nothing.” ANZ and Roy Morgan released their latest Australian Consumer Confidence survey on Tuesday, which indicated spenders’ optimism was down 2.2% compared to the final assessment last year taken a week before Christmas. The main drop came for “current economic conditions”, which fell 8.7% to its lowest level since the last week of September 2021 when the Delta lockdown ensnared about half of Australia’s population. “Future economic conditions”, though, gained 2.8%. David Plank, ANZ’s head of Australian economics, said the drop in sentiment was likely caused by the rapid rise of Omicron cases across Australia. Confidence fell in all the major capitals, with Adelaide faring the worst. “Over the decade from 2011 to 2020, consumer confidence has risen 2.6% on average in the first survey of January compared to the last prior to Christmas, Plank said. “So this result is even weaker than it seems. “The good news is that people are still relatively happy about their own financial circumstances,” Plank said. “This potentially sets things up for a rapid rebound once people are more confident about health outcomes.” Among those tracking consumer – and therefore, voter – confidence closely are federal politicians with an election due by 21 May. Jim Chalmers, Labor’s shadow treasurer, said: “Just a few weeks ago, Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg were talking about the ‘real momentum’ of the recovery but those gains have yet again been squandered. “The scale of this stuff-up is so big, and the consequences for ordinary Australians so bad, that all options should be up for discussion – but Scott Morrison always goes missing when workers and small businesses need him most,” Chalmers said. Frydenberg, the federal treasurer, said predicted consumer confidence would continue to be affected by the virus. “The spread of Omicron is a reminder that we are not out of this pandemic and that significant challenges to the economy remain,” he said. “Despite these challenges, the Australian economy has shown remarkable resilience in the face of the biggest economic shock since the Great Depression. To secure Australia’s economic recovery, we must continue to open safely, learn to live with the virus, and stick to our economic plan of growing the economy, getting more Australians into work and delivering lower taxes for households and small businesses.”Australia’s Omicron wave is placing “unprecedented” pressure on ambulance response times across the country, due to soaring demand for emergency healthcare coinciding with Covid isolation requirements sidelining hundreds of paramedics. With active infections of Covid-19 across the country exceeding 1 million, Ambulance Victoria issued a code red alert on Tuesday – the second time it has taken the extreme measure in a week – as it grapples with “extremely high demand for ambulances” in metropolitan Melbourne. “It is likely there will be a delay in an ambulance reaching you,” Ambulance Victoria said in a statement, also urging residents to contact other medical supports or visit their local GP “if their illness is not an emergency”. “Our priority is to provide care to Victorians who require life-saving assistance,” the statement said. Acknowledging the shortfall of paramedics in his state, the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, said that on Monday 442 ambulance staff were either isolating with Covid-19 or were close contacts. “I expect that number is in fact higher, and that does put great pressure on our system,” he said. “It’s not a matter of money or a matter of machines … it’s qualified staff, it’s people who provide healthcare.” Victoria’s code red declaration follows reports in recent days that surf lifesavers, students and volunteers were filling hundreds of paramedic shifts each week in the state. In New South Wales, ambulance services are also under severe strain. On Tuesday, NSW Ambulance apologised to a Sydney couple who said there were no ambulances immediately available to help their newborn baby who was not breathing. After the mother – who works as a midwife – gave birth unexpectedly in their Sydney home on the morning of 2 January, they realised their newborn son was not breathing. The couple said the ambulance service could not tell them how long it would be before an ambulance arrived, so they decided to drive to hospital instead, resuscitating the newborn on the way. The child entered neonatal intensive care and has since recovered. Guardian Australia understands it is common protocol for ambulance call centre operators to avoid offering callers an arrival time, however the organisation has said it is investigating “the circumstances surrounding this incident and a review is underway”. A NSW Ambulance spokesman told Guardian Australia that the seven-day rolling average for triple zero callouts is nearly 4,500 each day. He said that prior to the Omicron outbreak, daily call volume records had not exceeded 4,000. “The service is currently facing unprecedented demand,” he said. “All available operational staff have been surged.” In ambulance control centres, “50 extra call takers have been surged”, he said. “NSW Ambulance also recalled 11 emergency medical call takers who were sent to Victoria to assist in control centres there. “Our virtual clinical care centre has also been bolstered with 22 clinical support assistants commencing duties facilitating call backs to patients experiencing longer than usual delays. More staff will come on board this month.” NSW Ambulance experienced an all time peak in demand 1 January, when 5,120 triple zero calls were received, and the service has been urging residents to only call in emergencies.“Levelling up” was always a slippery slogan. If the civil war was Boris Johnson’s period of history, he might have shunned its potential association with the Levellers and the Diggers, who dug up the fences of enclosures for the landless to plough and sow. Their most famous digging, in the year of Charles I’s execution, was St George’s Hill in Weybridge, Surrey, now in a gated and guarded enclosure including a grand golf club where nearby house prices reach £5m. Stand there and ponder what levelling up can possibly mean to Surrey Tories and their MPs. It was a bold slogan to announce, in the context of a skyrocketing stock market and soaring UK house prices, which rose by 9.8% last year, the fastest rate since 2007. Meanwhile, workers were furloughed and food banks hard-pressed. This is the first postwar recession with rising property values, says the Resolution Foundation. This year, on 7 January, FTSE 100 chief executives had already earned more than the median pay for all full-time workers in the UK, according to The High Pay Centre. The latest ONS income inequality figures show that the gap between rich and poor in the UK has now grown to its widest in a decade. It has “steadily increased to 36.3%” according to the ONS, which measures inequality by the Gini coefficient, whereby 0% represents total equality and 100% represents total inequality. This is awkward for Johnson the Leveller: until now Tories could claim inequality had become no worse under their government. But here is the history: the much-maligned 1970s were the most equal time on record; in the 1980s, there was a meteoric rise in top pay and wealth soared, while the lowest salaries fell behind. That great gap never narrowed again. The richest 10% of the population now own 43% of wealth, leaving the entire bottom half just 9%. What was Leveller Johnson’s reaction to official figures revealing wealth gaps widening between north and south, old and young, white and other ethnicities? At PMQs last week he wrongly claimed that “inequality is down in this country”. He wants “levelling up” to be purely geographic to seduce red wallers, but he should be warned: the south-east’s median household wealth rose by 43% in 16 years, while it fell in the north-east. Whatever trinkets Michael Gove crafts to decorate his levelling up white paper this month, he and Johnson are unlikely to admit the mammoth endeavour it would take to shift the dial even slightly. Sunak has set aside just £4.8bn for the levelling-up agenda, which is a teaspoon to shift a slag heap. About £2tn was spent to level up East and West Germany – and they are still only 85% of the way there. Johnson’s cabinet is in undisciplined revolt. Jacob Rees-Mogg let it be known he led a protest against the national insurance rise and called for a cut in the civil service pay bill instead: “cut the bureaucrats” is the last refuge of dishonest politicians. Senior Tories call for the pensions triple lock to be restored. Behind them thundering hooves gallop after axing VAT and green taxes on energy bills. Insurrectionist Mark Harper, a former chief whip, says he will declare a leadership challenge if May’s local election results are bad. David Frost, the Brexit bruiser, brays for “free markets and low taxes”. The government is reportedly panicking at a “chicken run” of red wall Tory MPs defecting to Labour, for fear of losing their seats where Labour polls 16% ahead, a comically unlikely route to securing tax or green policy cuts those MPs want. The Tories are right to quake as the May elections near, when April really will be the cruellest month as households face the crunch of £1,200 in extra bills as council tax rises and 5 million social housing tenants face the highest rent rises in a decade. Meanwhile, wages and benefits fall behind. The hard truth is that there never was and never could be a Tory “levelling up”. There are good ways to ease the cost of living crisis, but none are Conservative ways. Any levelling must start with restoring the £20 a week removed from universal credit, but that’s unTory. Johnson’s government could impose a windfall tax on the six companies that made £16bn excess profits out of the pandemic, says Tax Justice UK. It could tax the excessive gains made by the bizarre increase in property values, says the Resolution Foundation. This weekend, the shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, advocate of wealth taxes, laid out Labour’s plan to cut £200 from all energy bills and £600 from those of the neediest households, paid for with a windfall on North Sea oil and gas profits. The BP CEO, Bernard Looney, unwisely said energy price rises had turned his company into a “cash machine”, while the North Sea company Serica promises its shareholders bumper returns. A revaluation of council tax to create a “proportional property tax” would help 75% of households, reports Fairer Share. Sunak could revive his dropped plan to lift capital gains tax from 20% to 25%, which would have brought in a handsome £14bn. These would be popular ways that could pay for stricken public services, but they aren’t Tory ways. The public never voted for this hard Brexit, this graveyard of trade deals with its colossal loss of 4% in GDP, depriving the Treasury of precious receipts. But the nature of this Tory cult decreed it. “There’s no point in saying you’re Conservative,” protests a senior Tory to PoliticsHome, “unless you cut taxes.” The axe is the emblem of this cultish Tory generation. When it comes to levelling up, the dishonest contradiction of Johnson’s cakeism has finally landed, jam side down. • This article was amended on 12 January 2022. The ONS figures are for income inequality, not wealth. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistLondon could become mired in gridlock because of a shift towards driving as a means of transport during the Covid pandemic, the city’s mayor, Sadiq Khan has said, warning that it risks creating a new health crisis from increased pollution. While levels of walking and cycling have risen in the capital, the overall proportion of people making sustainable journeys has fallen as a result of the collapse in numbers using public transport. Almost two years since the first lockdown, use of the tube is at 55% of pre-pandemic levels, and bus use is at 70%. In contrast, car use returned to close-to-normal levels during much of the second half of 2021. A comparison of all transport modes in London during 2020 showed that the proportion of journeys made by walking, cycling and public transport fell to an estimated 58.3%, as against 63.2% in 2019. This was despite a 9% increase in walking and cycling during 2020, with additional cycle routes and walking space provided. The number of miles being driven in the capital has increased markedly in recent years, despite statistics showing that more than a third of car trips in London could be made in under 25 minutes by walking, and that two-thirds could be cycled in less than 20 minutes. Between 2011 and 2019, the overall number of miles driven on London’s roads increased from 19.1bn to 22.6bn miles. In 2020 this fell only slightly, to 18.7bn miles, despite lockdowns. Khan said: “Whilst we have made huge strides in increasing walking and cycling in London throughout the pandemic, car use has remained consistently high. If we do not double down on our efforts to deliver a greener, more sustainable future we will replace one public health crisis with another – caused by filthy air and gridlocked roads. “The cost to both Londoners and the capital cannot be underestimated, with days wasted stuck in traffic, billions lost to the economy, and increased road danger and health impacts. Most traffic is caused simply by there being too great a demand for limited street space, meaning the only long-term solution can be to significantly reduce car use in favour of greener means of travel.” The expanded ultra-low emission zone has led to about 47,000 fewer older, more polluting vehicles driving within the capital’s north and circular roads – a 37% reduction from the two weeks before the scheme was introduced, the mayor’s office said. As part of measures to reduce congestion, Khan also said penalties for traffic offences on roads it manages would rise from £130 to £160 from Monday. Transport for London will also benefit slightly from the increased revenue, with the capital’s finances under severe strain as a result of people making fewer tube journeys. It netted about £18m from penalty charge notices in 2018, suggesting the rise could increase annual income by about £4m. Khan has overseen the construction of a series of new cycling and walking schemes, and has consistently pushed for a greater focus on active travel. However, critics have argued that his message is undermined in part by support for the new Silvertown tunnel in east London, the first new road link planned across the Thames for 30 years.The pandemic has been awash with slogans, but in recent weeks, two have been repeated with increasing frequency: “Variants will evolve to be milder” and “Covid will become endemic”. Yet experts warn that neither of these things can be taken for granted. Those stating that viruses become less deadly over time often cite influenza. Both of the flu viruses responsible for the 1918 Spanish flu and 2009 swine flu pandemics eventually evolved to become less dangerous. However, the 1918 virus is thought to have become more deadly before it became milder. And other viruses, such as Ebola, have become more dangerous over time. “It’s a fallacy that viruses or pathogens become milder. If a virus can continue to be transmitted and cause lots of disease, it will,” said Prof David Robertson, head of viral genomics and bioinformatics at the University of Glasgow’s Centre for Virus Research. Viruses aim to create as many copies of themselves and spread as widely as possible. Although it is not always in their best interests to kill their hosts, so long as they are transmitted before this happens, it doesn’t matter. Sars-CoV-2 doesn’t kill people during the period when it is most infectious; people tend to die two to three weeks after becoming ill. Provided it does not evolve to make people so ill that they do not, or cannot, mix with other people while they are infectious, the virus doesn’t care if there are some casualties along the way. Neither is it clear that Sars-CoV-2 is becoming progressively milder. Omicron appears to be less severe than the Alpha or Delta variants – but both of these variants caused more severe illness than the original Wuhan strain. Importantly, viral evolution is not a one-way street: Omicron did not evolve from Delta, and Delta didn’t evolve from Alpha – it is more random and unpredictable than that. “These [variants of concern] are not going one from the other, and so if that pattern continues, and another variant pops out in six months, it could be worse,” said Robertson. “It’s important not to assume that there’s some inevitability for Omicron to be the end of Sars-CoV-2’s evolution.” There is a possibility that Omicron is so transmissible that it has hit a ceiling whereby future variants will struggle to outcompete it. But just a few months ago, people were saying the same thing about Delta. Also, Omicron is likely to keep evolving. “What might play out is that as Omicron infects so many people, it’s harder for that first Omicron [variant] to continue to be as successful, and so that creates a space for a virus that’s better at evading the immune response,” Robertson said. What about the idea that Sars-CoV-2 could become endemic? Politicians tend to use this as a proxy for getting on with our lives and forgetting that Covid-19 exists. What endemic actually means is a disease that’s consistently present, but where rates of infection are predictable and not spiralling out of control “Smallpox was endemic, polio is endemic, Lassa fever is endemic, and malaria is endemic,” said Stephen Griffin, associate professor of virology at the University of Leeds. “Measles and mumps are endemic, but dependent on vaccination. Endemic does not mean that something loses its teeth at all.” As more and more people develop immunity to Sars-CoV-2, or recover from infection, the virus may become less likely to trigger severe disease. But it could then evolve again. The good news is that this becomes less likely the more of the world’s population is vaccinated – because the fewer people who are infected, the fewer chances the virus has to evolve – but we’re not close to that yet. Even in the UK, there are large numbers of unvaccinated individuals, and it’s unclear how long the protection from boosters will last. “The idea that we will achieve endemicity anytime soon also seems a little bit counter to the fact that we’ve just had several weeks of massively explosive exponential growth, and prior to that, we were still seeing exponential growth of Delta,” Griffin said. Transforming Covid into a disease that we can truly live with requires more than a national vaccination campaign and wishful thinking; it requires a global effort to improve surveillance for new variants, and supporting countries to tackle outbreaks at source when they emerge. It also requires greater investment in air purification and ventilation to reduce transmission within our own borders, if we’re mixing indoors. Everyone hopes that the coronavirus will evolve to become milder, and that Covid becomes endemic – or rather, manageable enough not to blight our daily lives. But these are hopes, not facts, and repeating these mantras won’t make them happen any faster.The House of Lords commissioners for standards are considering a complaint against the Conservative peer Michelle Mone, relating to the PPE business awarded £203m government contracts after she referred it to the Cabinet Office in May 2020. The Labour peer George Foulkes complained to the commissioners on 6 January after the Guardian reported that leaked files appear to suggest Mone and her husband, the Isle of Man-based financier Douglas Barrowman, were secretly involved in the company, PPE Medpro. After the company was awarded contracts in May and June 2020, Mone and Barrowman have consistently denied any “role or function” in PPE Medpro. Lawyers for Mone, who ran the lingerie company Ultimo before David Cameron made her a peer in 2015, have said she “was not connected to PPE Medpro in any capacity”. The fact that Mone referred the company to the office of Theodore Agnew, her fellow Conservative peer who was responsible for procurement during the Covid pandemic, was only disclosed by the government in November 2021 following a freedom of information request pursued by the Good Law Project. Foulkes, a Labour MP from 1979 to 2005 and former Scotland minister in Tony Blair’s government, asked the commissioners to investigate whether Mone may have breached the Lords code of conduct. “I am concerned that Baroness Mone has not registered her interest in PPE Medpro and also that her action appears to bring the house into disrepute,” he wrote. Foulkes told the Guardian: “If Baroness Mone and her husband were involved in the company then it appears to me that she should have registered that as an interest, and she may have breached the rules against lobbying when she referred the company to the government. And with this conduct and her denials in relation to the company, she may have brought the house into disrepute, so I believe the commissioner should investigate.” On Monday, the commissioner confirmed that the complaint was being assessed. “I can confirm that a complaint has been received and the commissioner is currently undertaking an initial assessment of that complaint,” a Lords spokesperson said. “If he decides to open a formal investigation that will be published on the commissioners’ website.” The Conservative MP Kevin Hollinrake also said the commissioners should consider investigating Mone. “The code of conduct is quite clear that peers must not seek to profit from membership of the house, yet the public record shows that Lady Mone made the initial referral through parliamentary channels, and evidence that she pursued and promoted their application, and that there are connections between her, her husband and the company concerned,” Hollinrake said. “The House of Lords commissioner for standards should consider investigating the matter to establish whether any rules have been broken.” Mone’s representatives declined to comment on the complaint. Previously they have said she had no interest in PPE Medpro, and denied any wrongdoing. “The reason why no interest in PPE Medpro appears in Baroness Mone’s register of interests is because no such interest exists,” her lawyer said in December 2020. Barrowman’s lawyers have repeatedly distanced him from PPE Medpro, saying he was not an investor, director or shareholder. They have said the Guardian’s reporting amounted to “clutching at straws” and was “largely incorrect”. Mone’s lawyers have said the Guardian’s reporting is “grounded entirely on supposition and speculation and not based on accuracy”, adding: “She is under no obligation to say anything to you.”A wealthy Roman trading town, whose inhabitants adorned themselves with jewellery and ate from fine pottery, has been discovered half a metre below the surface of a remote field in Northamptonshire. A 10-metre-wide Roman road, domestic and industrial buildings, more than 300 coins and at least four wells have been unearthed at the site, where 80 archaeologists have been working for the past 12 months. The field, on the Northamptonshire-Oxfordshire border, lies on the route of the HS2 rail network under construction between London and Birmingham. It is one of more than 100 archaeological sites that have been examined along the route since 2018, and among the most significant findings to date. The site near Chipping Warden, known as Blackgrounds after its dense black soil that has helped preserve the Roman remains, was used for pasture until the archaeological dig began. “When the land became used for grazing, the soil effectively sealed what was beneath,” said James West, of Mola Headland Infrastructure, which has managed the excavation. The presence of an archaeological site in the area has been known since the 18th century, but the findings during the dig surpassed experts’ expectations. “This is certainly one of the most impressive sites [we have] discovered while working on the HS2 scheme,” said West. “Uncovering such a well-preserved and large Roman road, as well as so many high-quality finds, has been extraordinary and tells us so much about the people who lived here. The site really does have the potential to transform our understanding of the Roman landscape in the region and beyond.” An iron age village, formed of more than 30 roundhouses, stood on the site at the time of the Roman invasion in AD43. During the period of the Roman occupation, which lasted until AD410, the settlement expanded and became more prosperous. New stone buildings were constructed in distinct domestic, agricultural and industrial areas of the settlement. In the latter, archaeologists have uncovered evidence of workshops and kilns, where activities such as metalwork, bread-making and pottery took place. The main road – which West described as “a Roman dual carriageway” – indicates that the town was a trading hub, with carts coming and going to load and unload goods. Most Roman roads were 4-5 metres wide, “so this is really impressive”. The nearby River Cherwell was another trading route to and from the settlement. “At its height, there would have been hundreds of people living in the town. It was a very significant settlement,” said West. The “Romanisation” of the inhabitants included adapting to Roman customs, products and building techniques. Their growing affluence is indicated by the number of Roman coins and scale weights discovered, a sign of considerable commercial activity. One scale weight is decorated with the image of a female deity. “It’s pretty as well as functional, suggesting a high-status owner,” said West. Jewellery with delicate decoration, glass vessels and fine Samian pottery that was imported from Gaul have also been pulled out of the black earth. Evidence of cosmetics has been identified from traces of the mineral galena – lead sulphide – which was crushed and mixed with oil for use as makeup. Half a set of shackles was unearthed, thought to suggest criminal activity or slave labour. More than 1,000 archaeologists have worked along the HS2 route between London and the West Midlands over the past three years. Last October, Roman statues of a man, woman and child were uncovered at an abandoned medieval church on the HS2 route in Stoke Mandeville, Buckinghamshire. They were described by the lead archaeologist at the site as “utterly astounding”. At Saint James’s Garden near Euston station in central London, more than 50,000 skeletons were exhumed from a burial ground. In Birmingham, more than 6,500 skeletons were uncovered from an 18th-century cemetery. Mike Court, the lead archaeologist for HS2, said: “As we near the end of our archaeological field work between London and Birmingham, we have made some unprecedented discoveries. “The opportunity to carefully examine a site such as Blackgrounds, and map out a long history of the site, brought to life through artefacts, building remains and roads, has enabled us to provide a more in-depth understanding of what life was like in rural south Northamptonshire in the iron and Roman ages.” • This article was amended on 11 January 2022. The Roman invasion of Britain began in AD43, not “43BC” as an earlier version said.One evening towards the end of 2003, Chloe Sells was entering the J-Bar in Aspen, Colorado, in search of a late night drink, when an older woman approached her. As Sells recalls in her new photobook, Hot Damn!: “She looked me up and down and said, ‘We’re looking for some help for Hunter. Are you a night owl? Would you be interested?’” Hunter, as every local knew, was Hunter S Thompson, the celebrated creator of “gonzo” journalism, and the town’s most infamous resident. The woman was his wife, Anita. “It took me only a moment,” Sells says, “to answer ‘Yes’ to everything.” Sells ended up working as Thompson’s personal assistant for just over a year, doing “anything and everything that needed doing”. Her typical working hours were 11pm until dawn, and her tasks included preparing his often elaborate dinners to order (microwave turkey dinner with soup, chutney, peanut butter and salsa), reading his prose back to him while he shouted instructions (“Louder, louder, slower, slower”) and dealing with his increasingly frequent bouts of explosive anger at his publishers, editors, acolytes and the world in general. “I was in my late 20s in full rock’n’roll mode, young and bulletproof,” she says. “I’d grown up in Aspen in a pretty wild, bohemian family and I knew nothing that Hunter did could bother me. In fact, the only thing that got to me was the cigarette smoke. There was so much of it.” Sells’ father had been a hippy in his youth, opening one of Colorado’s earliest “head shops” in nearby Boulder, selling drug paraphernalia. Just like Thompson, he had relocated to the mountains in Aspen in the late 60s to escape the pressures of the straight life. In the decades that followed, though, the town became a hangout for the privileged and the famous, drawn by its breathtaking Rocky Mountains, winter sports, libertarian politics and abundant availability of cocaine. “You could trek and ski by day and do shitloads of coke at night,” says Sells, laughing. “There were dealers and busts – and mountains’ worth of cocaine that was regularly flown in on Cessnas.” By the 1990s, Aspen had become a realtor’s dream, drawing A-list celebrities including Goldie Hawn and Sylvester Stallone, as well as younger acolytes of Thompson’s including Johnny Depp, who played his alter ego – Raoul Duke – in the film version of the writer’s most famous book, Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas. “You’d suddenly see famous people everywhere,” says Sells, “but the prevailing attitude in Aspen is not to stare or make a big deal out of it.” At Owl Farm, Thompson’s compound in Woody Creek, she realised early on that her irascible employer demanded not just her unyielding attention, but also constant intellectual stimulation into the early hours. “I decided early on never to get wasted with him,” she says proudly. “I stayed straight throughout my time there. I’d seen the scorn he reserved for those who turned up to pay homage to him, got completely stoned and started acting stupid. They were never welcomed back.” For all his volatile unpredictability, Sells describes Thompson as “essentially an old-fashioned southern gentleman”, whose fits of anger were often immediately followed by heartfelt contrition. Once, having taunted her with the news that Taschen was publishing a book of his photographs, he immediately felt guilty and granted her free rein to photograph the interiors and contents of Owl Farm, the one part of his life that had not been extensively documented. She immediately took him up on his offer. The negatives from that time languished in storage for 10 years, while Sells’ work moved from straight documentary towards a vividly experimental approach close to pure abstraction – swirls and patterns of colour deftly applied to her landscapes in the darkroom. Something of a bohemian herself, Sells has lived for over 20 years between London and Botswana, where her late husband Peter Sandenbergh ran a safari camp business. Her previous book, Flamingo, was shot on the Makgadikgadi Salt Pans in the desolate heart of the Kalahari Desert. In 2016, Peter died of cancer and, soon after, she found out that she was pregnant from the IVF treatment they had undergone while he was ill. “Suddenly, my partner was gone and I was pregnant and trying to figure out what to do and how to be an artist,” she says. “That’s when I thought, ‘Let’s just dust off those old negatives from Aspen.’” Unsurprisingly, Hot Damn! – which took five years to complete to her satisfaction – is a more hybrid work than her previous series. Sells originally shot Thompson’s living quarters and possessions in a fly-on-the-wall documentary style that captures all the hovering chaos of a life lived on the edge: his cluttered writing desk, piles of unfinished manuscripts, various stuffed and mounted birds and animals, guns, ephemera from his writing career, his collections of hats and his electric typewriter, plus endless Post-it notes with often extravagant titles – Sodomized at the Airport, Olympic Disaster in Utah, The Wisdom of Nashville and the Violence of Jack Nicholson. Pure gonzo, in fact. More intriguing are the dreamily psychedelic images that punctuate the book, creating a narrative that shifts constantly from the visceral to the woozily disorienting – not unlike, one imagines, day-to-day life in Woody Creek. “I don’t make documentary work any more,” Sells says, “and to be honest, I looked at some of the pictures and thought they were a bit boring. I started using the Japanese and Italian marbling techniques I had studied to push the boundaries a bit. It took a few years before it really started to sing, but I think it offers this emotive quality that gets closer to what the ride was like – the speed, the intensity, the pressure of working with Hunter, but also the strange intimacy. It points to his legacy, but also to the spirit of my own creativity.” Much to Thompson’s annoyance, Sells departed Woody Creek for the last time in January 2005, having decided to travel to Thailand to document the aftermath of the Indian Ocean tsunami. A few weeks later, on 20 February, her father called her to break the news that Thompson had died from a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head. “My legs buckled and I fell to my knees,” she says, lapsing into silence for a few moments. “It’s not that I didn’t see it coming, because he spoke about it a lot. His health was giving out and he was in constant chronic pain. His body was degenerating and his mind was not as sharp. Basically, he was not having fun. Plus, he had this Hemingway crush.” Hemingway had taken his life with a double-barrelled shotgun in 1961. Sells remembers one early-hours conversation, when Thompson told her mysteriously that he had his death taken care of. “In my head, I was thinking, ‘How is that even possible?’ Then a few days later, I was like, ‘OK, that’s what was going to happen.’ But it never occurred to me it would happen on my watch. That I was so close to it is what was really shocking.” How does Sells think back on her time at Woody Creek? “With gratitude,” she says. “Hunter was a handful: he lived to break the rules. That was his thing. But he was also inspiring and invigorating to be around, because he was just so sharp and smart. He would have had serious fun taking down Trump, that’s for sure. But underneath it all, he was an old school gentleman. He couldn’t help it, even amid all the rants and the bad behaviour. He was someone who would stand up when a lady entered the room.” She pauses for a second. “That’s if he was capable of standing up.” Hot Damn! by Chloe Sells is published by Gost Books. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.When it comes to predicting flooding, it isn’t just the amount of rain that matters, but also where the excess rain can be stored – if the earth is already saturated the rain has nowhere to go, and flooding follows on. Scientists are now taking advantage of the fact that saturated earth has a greater gravitational pull, and that satellites can monitor the changes in saturation from day to day. Prof Shin-Chan Han, from the University of Newcastle in Australia, and colleagues measure changes in the Earth’s gravity by monitoring micrometre changes in distance between the two Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment Follow-On (GRACE-FO) satellites. When the satellites approach an area with higher gravitational pull (such as a saturated groundwater reservoir) the lead satellite is tugged forward, increasing the gap between the satellites. Shortly afterwards the tail satellite is also pulled forward, shortening the distance between the satellites. By regularly measuring the change in distance between the satellites Han and his colleagues were able to demonstrate that the devastating floods experienced in eastern Australia in March 2021 were preceded by a rapid recharge of groundwater the week before the rains. Their findings, published in Earth and Space Science, have the potential to dramatically improve our ability to prepare for floods.Rules of the Game 9pm, BBC One “There is nothing happy or healthy about this place.” So says a fed-up employee in this four-part drama about sexual politics in the workplace. After no-nonsense COO Sam (Maxine Peake) witnesses a grisly death at her office, she is forced to look back at the company’s internal goings-on – starting with the day HR director Maya (Rakhee Thakrar) rattled a few cages when she started her role. Hollie Richardson Digging for Britain 8pm, BBC Two Prof Alice Roberts’ archaeology show has quietly become a beloved BBC staple. Fans get three episodes to conclude the series this week, which include a mysterious mound in Cambridge thought to be an iron age hillfort, a whole Roman town beneath Somerset (where not every mystery is so aged), and a 3,000-year-old bronze age coffin in a Roman fort on Hadrian’s Wall. What will Roberts and her team unearth? Jack Seale Craig Charles: UFO Conspiracies 9pm, Sky History Craig Charles unpicking UFO conspiracy theories: what’s not to love about this documentary? From a “specially created UFO investigation hub”, Charles is joined by astrophysicist and space journalist Sarah Cruddas – together they dig deep into recent UFO sightings with the help of witnesses and experts (our host is deadly serious). Top entertainment. HR Charlotte Church’s Dream Build 9pm, Really What happened when Charlotte Church spent her life savings (£1.5m to be exact) on a Welsh mansion that once belonged to Laura Ashley? We’re about to find out, as Church moves her family into Rhydoldog House while tasked with renovating it within a year. Addictive, in a sort of “nosy neighbour” way. HR Toast of Tinseltown 10pm, BBC Two Matt Berry’s preposterous ham returns – and Toast thinks a relocation to Los Angeles (where his reputation doesn’t precede him) is just the ticket. Can he convince Dwight Diﬀerence he is the right British actor for his new movie before he is attacked by a man in an Ashes to Ashes costume at a Bowie-themed party? Ali Catterall The Language of Love 10pm, Channel 4 Davina McCall’s dating series which aims to defy language barriers continues. Tonight, a misunderstanding brings one of the British women to tears, national seduction techniques are exchanged and a revelation causes controversy. HRAn inmate gave birth to a stillborn baby in shocking circumstances in a prison toilet without specialist medical assistance or pain relief, an investigation by the Prisons and Probation Ombudsman (PPO) has found. A prison nurse who did not respond to three emergency calls from a prison officer to come to the woman’s aid when she developed agonising stomach cramps has been referred to the Nursing and Midwifery Council. Louise Powell, 31, was unaware that she was pregnant and did not believe she could be due to not having relationships with men. She gave birth on a prison toilet on 18 June 2020 at HMP &amp; YOI Styal in Cheshire. She previously said she believed her baby girl could have survived had she had more timely and appropriate medical intervention. Her lawyer said they had obtained expert evidence that also suggested that the baby, who Powell named Brooke, may have survived had things been handled differently. The report is the second by the PPO in six months to investigate the death of a baby in prison. While Tuesday’s report found that there had not been failures before the day Powell gave birth, the ombudsman, Sue McAllister, found there were missed opportunities to establish that she needed urgent clinical attention in the hours beforehand. Powell was in prison for the first time after being sentenced to eight months in March 2020 after admitting common assault, racially aggravated harassment and criminal damage. McAllister said she suffered a “terrifying, painful and traumatic experience” and that “even at a distance this is a deeply sad and distressing case”. “It’s not safe to have pregnant women in prison, we are just treated like a number,” Powell told the Guardian in a previous interview. “I can’t grieve for my baby yet because there are still things I don’t know, like why an ambulance wasn’t called. I want to get justice for Brooke and I decided to go public in the hope that things will change and pregnant women will stop being imprisoned.” The investigation found that a prison supervising officer made three calls to the duty nurse, raising concerns about Powell during a period of two hours from shortly before 7pm on 18 June. The nurse did not come to see Powell, made inadequate reference to her medical file, and concluded incorrectly that she was bleeding and suffering severe stomach pain as a result of a painful period. “Regardless of the cause, it is not acceptable that anyone should be in unexplained acute pain for several hours without proper assessment or consideration of pain relief,” said McAllister. She added that had the situation been assessed properly, Powell might have given birth in hospital instead of on a prison toilet attended by untrained staff. The report found that all the other staff who tried to help Powell and her baby during and after the delivery acted with humanity and to the best of their abilities. The report recommends that women are offered a pregnancy test at the initial and secondary health assessments after arriving at prison. It also recommends that nurses in women’s prisons should have training in recognising early labour, and that all staff in women’s prisons need to know what to do in the event of an unexpected birth. The Prison Service and the NHS have accepted the ombudsman’s recommendations and produced an action plan setting out how they will be implemented. The prisons minister, Victoria Atkins, said: “We have already implemented the report’s recommendations and important improvements have been made to the care received by pregnant women in custody. We are also looking at how we can better screen for pregnancy in jails so no woman falls through the cracks.” Powell’s solicitor, Jane Ryan of Bhatt Murphy, said: “There were multiple missed opportunities to help Louise. There was no system in place to recognise unexpected birth at the time. It is inhumane to leave a woman howling in pain unaided and forced to give birth in a toilet.” Kirsty Kitchen of Birth Companions said: “We cannot go on pretending that the prison system will ever be a safe or appropriate place to give birth.” She called on the government to reinstate its early-release scheme for eligible pregnant women and those in mother and baby units. Janey Starling, co-director of Level Up, who is campaigning for an end to the imprisonment of pregnant women and new mothers, said: “The only way to keep mothers and babies safe in future is to keep them in their communities.”In the final months of Robert Durst’s life, it seemed as if the walls were at last closing in on the disgraced multimillionaire and real estate heir. He was sentenced to life in prison for the murder of a longtime friend in September, and shortly after, New York officials charged him with the murder of his missing first wife. But his death in a California hospital on Monday has upended the cases against the 78-year-old. The murder case over the death of his ex-wife Kathleen McCormack Durst will come to a halt and, thanks to a legal technicality, the murder conviction for the killing of his friend Susan Berman will soon be voided. Authorities believe Durst was behind three killings in three states over four decades, as highlighted in the 2015 HBO documentary series The Jinx: The Life and Deaths of Robert Durst. But despite a jury finding Durst guilty last fall of murdering Berman, a friend and confidante, California law mandates that if a defendant dies while a case is under appeal, as is the situation with Durst’s case, then the conviction is vacated, said Neama Rahmani, a former federal prosecutor not involved with the case. “As the law is right now, Durst’s conviction will be vacated and it’s like it never happened,” Rahmani said. “This is such a unique case. It’s really unprecedented that someone can be involved in three different murders in three states and escape justice.” Meanwhile, the case against Durst over his wife’s death can no longer proceed, because officials cannot prosecute a dead man. That means those charges against Durst will have to be dismissed, Rahmani said. “After 40 years spent seeking justice for her death, I know how upsetting this news must be for Kathleen Durst’s family,” the Westchester county district attorney, Mimi Rocah, said in a statement. “We had hoped to allow them the opportunity to see Mr Durst finally face charges for Kathleen’s murder because we know that all families never stop wanting closure, justice and accountability.” Durst was convicted of murdering Berman in September 2020. Prosecutors say he shot her at point-blank range in her home to prevent her from telling police what she knew about McCormack’s disappearance. At the trial Berman, a journalist, was described as an “an extraordinary human being” and loyal friend who cared deeply for others. “It’s a shame when anybody loses their life. However, it’s important to keep in mind that Bob Durst lived to be 78 years old, decades longer than two of his victims,” said John Lewin, the LA county deputy district attorney who prosecuted Durst for Berman’s murder, in a statement. “To the end he was hostile, unrepentant, and unremorseful. My thoughts and sympathies lie with his victims.” At the time of his death, New York prosecutors were preparing to request Durst be transferred to the state to face charges in the death of his ex-wife McCormack, who disappeared in 1982 and whose body was never found. The DA’s office plans to share more information about the McCormack case at a press conference in the coming days, Rocah said. Until last year, Durst, who denied killing McCormack, had never been charged in connection with her disappearance despite multiple efforts to close the case over the decades. Authorities reopened the case in 1999, searching a lake and the couple’s home. McCormack’s family has been critical of officials for not acting sooner. A lawyer for McCormack’s family has said the investigation into the case is ongoing. “Although Robert Durst has died, the ongoing investigation into those who helped him cover up her murder continues. On January 31, 2022, the 40th anniversary of Kathie’s murder, we will provide a further update. In the interim, please say a prayer for Kathie and his other victims,” said Robert Abrams. At the time she disappeared, McCormack was a medical student, who was preparing to become a pediatrician. Her family says Durst was abusive, and that McCormack had previously required treatment in a hospital for injuries he caused. Authorities sought to put Durst behind bars for years for his role in crimes that officials believe date back to the disappearance and probable murder of McCormack. Rocah reopened the case in May, shortly after she took office as the district attorney. But the Westchester county district attorney’s office has long faced criticism for waiting so long to file charges against Durst for McCormack’s killing, Rahmani added. “No one was willing to prosecute and try the case. Unfortunately, because of this long delay Kathie Durst and her family will never receive the criminal justice that she deserves,” Rahmani said. The Jinx, which thrust the multimillionaire into the spotlight, chronicled McCormack’s disappearance, Berman’s murder and the 2001 death of Durst’s neighbor, Morris Black, in Galveston, Texas, where Durst was hiding out while disguised as a deaf-mute woman. He was arrested for Berman’s murder on the eve of the airing of the last episode of the series, in which Durst appeared to confess to the killings, saying to himself, “What the hell did I do? … Killed them all, of course.” Durst avoided a murder conviction for the death of Black, but spent three years in prison for related charges, including evidence tampering for dismembering Black’s body.Back in the wild old days, my best buddy and I used to call going out “looking for trouble”. We weren’t hoping for a punch-up or a little light robbery, but a spontaneous adventure involving music, strangers or just the city at night. All that spur-of-the-moment fun has taken quite a beating since the pandemic began, for many millions of us. First came the lockdowns, social distancing and closed venues, then the cautious reopening when even a trip to the pub or an art gallery had to be booked weeks in advance. And now, just when it seemed the world was finally getting back to normal, Omicron has come wielding its everything’s-off-again sledgehammer, crushing all those dreams of nights out, holidays and raucous parties. Not only does it seem foolish to plan anything, but after two years of frustration and self-restraint, it’s hard to summon up the enthusiasm to do anything off the cuff. And that’s quite a loss. While we often think anticipation is half the fun, in 2016 researchers from two US universities found that people enjoyed activities more when they were impromptu. Scheduling a coffee break or a movie, for instance, made them feel “less free-flowing and more work-like”, wrote the authors. As Jane Austen put it 200 years ago in Emma: “Why not seize the pleasure at once? – How often is happiness destroyed by preparation, foolish preparation!” Masks don’t help, says Edward Slingerland, a philosophy professor at the University of British Columbia and the author of Trying Not to Try. “It’s difficult to get into any kind of relaxed, spontaneous rhythm when you can’t see the other person’s facial expressions. Our in-person interactions have been drained of the subtle facial cues that we normally use to tell if the other person is enjoying themselves or if a comment is landing the right way.” This renders even those precious interactions with strangers when out in the world so much harder. Video calls are equally unconducive. “You’re not in the same room. There’s often a subtle time delay that may not seem like very much, but it’s hard for people to know when you’re done talking, when it’s OK for me to start. It’s impossible to relax into natural, really positive social interactions that have spontaneity to them.” The good news is that, as counterintuitive as it sounds, you can work at being more spontaneous. For his book, Slingerland looked at how ancient Chinese thinkers tackled the problem. “It involved things like ritual activities, meditation, breathing practices or just trying to trick your mind into forgetting that you’re trying to be spontaneous.” Because, he explains, if you put your mind to the problem directly, you’re activating the part of the brain you need to shut down – the cognitive control areas. The key is relaxation, not striving. Slingerland isn’t suggesting we moderns start doing Confucian rituals, but, he says, “there’s a very similar function served by doing things like weeding the garden, or going for a walk – using your body in a way where you’re interacting with the natural world”. The early Chinese word for the state these activities bring on is wuwei. “I translate it as ‘effortless actions’,” he says. “A state where you lose a sense of yourself as an agent, and you get absorbed in what you’re doing.” Some modern thinkers might equate this sort of state with “flow”, while there are obvious comparisons, too, with mindfulness. “Look at the sunlight on trees and hear birds and you get absorbed in something bigger than yourself,” says Slingerland. “That takes you out of your head and allows you to relax.” This isn’t just about enjoying a good night out. We also need spontaneity to embrace change, says the clinical psychologist and writer Linda Blair. “And change is necessary for progress of any sort. Spontaneity makes us happier, too.” In 2016, a team of Austrian and Italian researchers found that people with less spontaneity in their lives experienced greater “psychological suffering”. The best way forward at the moment, says Blair, “is to turn things on their head and instead of talking about trying to be spontaneous, you say: ‘There is no other way to be right now.’” Now is the time for seizing the day and moving with your heart, or your gut. “You want to go to your favourite restaurant?” asks Blair. “Don’t plan it – go there today, while it’s still open.” She points out that disrupting routines can help to free the mind. This could mean switching off your mental autopilot and thinking about what you really feel like for breakfast today. Another spontaneity starter, she says, is having a backwards day. “That’s a lot of fun, especially with kids. Start your day with dinner, say – anything that shakes up the triggers that keep us doing the same things.” Triggers are things that keep us acting automatically. The cookie jar that makes us think we’re hungry. The phone ping that takes us into a rabbit hole and delays making lunch by 45 minutes. Triggers are not spontaneity’s friends. So Blair’s top tip for starting the day free of our inner naysayers and triggers is to write down all your thoughts first thing in the morning, before you do anything else. This process is called the Morning Pages and was devised by the writer Julia Cameron, originally as part of what she called the Artist’s Way – a method for unblocking creativity. “The best way to be spontaneous,” says Blair, “is to clear out the rubbish that mentally clogs you up every day. You get up in the morning and you write anything, whatever is going through your head, even if it’s: ‘Why am I doing this?’” Cameron prescribes three A4 pages, but if that puts you off, Blair says you’ll still benefit from just writing until you run out, “or for five minutes”. Don’t let time pressures stop you. “One person I know gets up at four o’clock to do it, so that the kids can’t possibly bother her,” says Blair. “It is important to have your own time, and to look at what comes out as potential to do things in a new way.” Not only does this boost your propensity for spontaneity for the rest of the day, says Blair, but it often generates spontaneous ideas. “It suddenly awakens you, so for example, you have a dream that you write down about having seen somebody you realise you haven’t been in touch with for ages. So you now call them or email them.” Joe Oliver is a clinical psychologist who specialises in acceptance and commitment therapy – a mindfulness-based behavioural therapy – and has some good solutions if you’ve lost your spontaneity. So many of his clients have a sense of malaise just now, partly from general pandemic pressures, but also, he says, from “the lack of fun that’s available to them. And fun comes so much from spontaneity – doing things and not thinking too much about it, connecting with people, doing an activity and being allowed to take it in unexpected directions.” One of the barriers, he says, “is people wanting to stay in their comfort zones, where it’s safe, predictable, ordered and people know how things are going to go”. The comfort zone can be useful – especially at the moment, when we need to keep safe, but there’s a danger of talking ourselves out of adventuring. “Overthinking is an absolute classic one,” says Oliver. “Getting entangled with worry about the future: it’s going to be terrible, it’s not going to work out, it won’t be fun, it’s going to have bad consequences, you won’t be safe. And when people get caught up with those thoughts, of course, they do that natural thing of retreating into their comfort zone. Or they ruminate a lot.” Part of the problem is living not in the present, but in the past or the future, thinking: “What about the times it hasn’t worked?” says Oliver. But understanding that this is going on is the first step to recovering spontaneity. He reminds clients: “There’s good evidence that unplanned-for opportunities support wellbeing and mental health.” Next time you catch yourself chickening out of doing something on the spur of the moment, he suggests overruling your critical brain and telling yourself: “I’m doing this because it’s good for me. And I like it. It’s fun. Let’s persist through this initial anxiety and see what comes afterwards.” Mindfulness will help you enjoy the moment you’re in, Oliver says, but “it doesn’t have to be a full-on meditative practice”. Just “anchor into your feet, notice your breath for 10 seconds, roll your shoulders back, drop your arms and spend some time coming down into your body”. Catch those limiting thoughts that tell you we can’t draw/skateboard/jog in the rain, he says, but don’t try to argue with them. If you challenge the thoughts, it creates “a bit of a tussle and can inadvertently give those thoughts a bit more power”. Instead, try thinking: “There are those thoughts again,” or even thank them for their feedback – after all, they’re only trying to keep us safe. Oliver’s other tricks include taking turns with a friend or partner to suggest new things to do, “to build in randomness. I’ve got a favourite pub but my partner often wants to go somewhere else, not in my comfort zone. Sometimes, in the interest of spontaneity, we say to the other: ‘OK, you decide.’ Or sometimes we come up with a couple of pubs and flip a coin.” Because, while your instincts might tell you to stay in your comfort zone, there’s actually no way of foretelling which option will result in the most fun on any given day. “As Daniel Gilbert at Harvard has shown us so well,” says Blair, “we don’t accurately estimate what the future is going to be like. We usually think it’s going to be better than it is. And we don’t accurately estimate what the past was like, either. We are hard on ourselves and overly critical about what happened – or we romanticise it. But now … you can be happy right now.” She says her patients often tell her about a recurring pain that keeps them up at night because it’s so bad. But when she asks them how it is right now, they say: “What, the pain? Oh, it’s not too bad.” Again with the living in the future and the past. “Coming to the now,” says Blair, “things are usually OK.” And here, Austen bears repeating: “Seize the pleasure at once.”Edmond Rostand’s Cyrano de Bergerac is never far away. In February Martin Crimp’s radical adaptation, starring James McAvoy, returns to London, then tours to Glasgow and New York. Then follows the release of Joe Wright’s new movie, with Peter Dinklage in the lead. Although in both cases the actors eschew prosthetic adornments, you could say that the noses generally have it since Rostand’s “comédie héroïque” has been in regular revival since its 1897 premiere. I’ve seen close to a dozen productions over the past half-century and it’s been the source of multiple movies, at least three musicals and an opera. There was also in 2015 a gender-swapped version known as CyranA. So why does it endure? At its premiere, it was seen as a revolt against the prevailing naturalist drama. As Graham Robb has pointed out, it also had a topical resonance, coming at the time of the Dreyfus affair (the scandal in which army captain Alfred Dreyfus was convicted of treason): “the soft-hearted slasher was everybody’s hero – a man with alien features who suffered for his virtues but represented the society Dreyfus was supposed to have betrayed”. But there are other reasons for its continued popularity: it has a glorious theatricality, glittering poetry and boasts a big star part that has attracted actors as various as Ralph Richardson, Derek Jacobi and Antony Sher on stage and José Ferrer, Steve Martin and Gérard Depardieu on screen. But I suspect there are deeper reasons for its survival. Since Cyrano lends his poetic genius to a dim-witted rival allowing him to woo the woman Cyrano himself loves, it is one of the great dramas of heroic self-sacrifice. It is a theme that never loses its popularity: contemporary with Cyrano was Sir John Martin-Harvey’s The Only Way, based on Dickens’s A Tale of Two Cities. Henry James pointed out in 1901, discussing Rostand in The Scenic Art, that the novel “lives its hour mainly under favour of the romantic prejudice”. But while being shamelessly romantic, Rostand’s play is also a study of a fiercely independent spirit. Rostand’s Cyrano hates hypocrisy, defies authority and when he says – in Anthony Burgess’s translation – “You’ve no idea how bracing it is to go marching upright against a volley of venom”, I am reminded of Alceste in Molière’s The Misanthrope in his self-lacerating honesty. Mention of Burgess raises the eternal question of how to render Rostand’s poetry. Seeing the play in French in 1898, Max Beerbohm wrote that “to translate it into English were a terrible imposition to set any one” and even Henry James, who admired Rostand, wrote of “his merciless virtuosity of expression”. I’ve come across versions by Brian Hooker, Patrick Garland and Christopher Fry but Burgess’s, with its eclectic mix of rhyme, rhetoric and quasi-Joycean puns, finds a way to match Rostand’s virtuosity while Crimp clearly demonstrates that the play is also about the dangerous lure of language. In the introduction to his translation, Burgess makes the pragmatic point that a play’s first duty is “to feed the actors” and I’m struck by how various are the Cyranos I have seen. Edward Woodward, who played it for the National in 1970, offered us a moody introvert but one a little lacking in panache. By contrast Robert Lindsay, who donned the nose in a West End production in 1992, was all vigorous swash and buckle, putting one in mind of the screen heroics of Douglas Fairbanks. But, alongside McAvoy who offers a fierce, proud, free-thinking Cyrano in black leather, the two performances I remember best come from different RSC productions. Derek Jacobi played the role, with Sinéad Cusack as Roxane and Pete Postlethwaite as a versifying pastry cook, in Terry Hands’s 1983 production and it remains one of his finest hours. Jacobi had the right swagger and impetuosity but there was also a sweet-souled sadness to his performance. Asked if he had ever read Don Quixote, Jacobi replied “Read it? I’ve practically lived it” and there was something about his falling inflection that suggested a whole world of spiritual desolation. Antony Sher was Cyrano in Gregory Doran’s 1997 production and brought something entirely different to the part. Sher specialised in playing solitary outsiders and his Cyrano was a small, faintly bookish man who was aware of his own absurdity and who even donned specs to pen a love-letter to Roxane: a tiny touch echoed by Mark Rylance in Jerusalem when he too put on glasses as if to belie his character’s alleged wildness. Oscar Wilde said there are as many Hamlets as there are actors and much the same is true of Cyrano. But Jamie Lloyd, director of the current revival, hit a nerve when he said “the reason the play has endured is that we all have an insecurity, something we’re battling with”. Different actors may put more or less stress on Cyrano’s swordsmanship and showmanship but underneath this is a play about self-sacrifice and solitude, which is, perhaps, the real reason it has lasted for well over a century and in many different cultures. Jamie Lloyd’s production of Cyrano de Bergerac is at the Harold Pinter theatre, London, 3 February-12 March; the Theatre Royal Glasgow, 18-26 March; and at Brooklyn Academy of Music, New York, 5 April-22 MayThe latest stage of the vaccine rollout began on Monday, offering the new Pfizer paediatric formula to children aged 5-11. The federal government says it has enough supply to vaccinate all children with a first dose by early February, as school returns. But initial reports of problems have already emerged. General practitioners say they have not received nearly enough doses to vaccinate child patients attached to their clinics. Deliveries have already been pushed back due to “unprecedented demand” and booking systems have suffered glitches in New South Wales and Victoria, causing cancellations and a frantic scramble from some parents to rebook. Some have reported immense difficulties finding a booking, either at GPs or state government clinics. We want to hear about your experience of trying to get children vaccinated. We plan to collate some of your experiences in a story we will publish. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.“Thinking of Melville, thinking of Poe, thinking of Mark Twain and Vachel Lindsay, thinking of Jack London and Tom Wolfe, one begins to feel there is almost no way of becoming a creative writer in America without being a loser.” So declared the great Nelson Algren, gutter bard and patron saint of Chicago letters, a man who recognized the quiet dignity of loserdom and accepted more than a little of it for himself. He rose to the top of the literary demimonde during the 40s and 50s on his writing about societal cast-offs, rough-edged characters based on the people he met in dank bars, back rooms and street corners. In training his focus on those most preferred not to think about, Algren found a bruised nobility in the down-but-not-out subjects who considered him one of their own and became a national name for it. As his celebrity declined and his output waned, however, his legacy has somewhat diminished in comparison with that of peers like mutual admirer and friend Ernest Hemingway. That’s where Michael Caplan, director of the new documentary Algren, hopes to come in. After more than a decade spent on a production interrupted by disappearing and reappearing funds, the professor/film-maker has completed his tribute to the enduring brilliance of a larger-than-life literary luminary. Caplan had a fortuitous encounter with cult-legend photographer Art Shay in 2008, who suggested that he take up Algren for a future project and offered a massive cache of up-close-and-personal photos as its basis. A completed cut screened for hometown audiences at the Chicago international film festival in 2014, only to gather dust on Caplan’s shelf for the rest of the decade, until the immobility of the pandemic lockdown compelled him to take action. He sculpted a fresh edit and with this week’s long-awaited digital release, he’ll make his bid to restore Algren’s name to the top of the writerly firmament. “I encountered Algren first through a used copy of Man with the Golden Arm, which I read in my early 20s and I was just blown away by it,” Caplan tells the Guardian over the phone from his home in the Windy City. “I’m from Chicago, I grew up in Chicago in a very middle-class working neighborhood by the steel mills. I knew a lot of people whose families were focused on just getting by, far from the American dream. Those were the kinds of people that Algren wrote about, so his work really struck me. I always felt like he was the embodiment not just of Chicago, but of mid-20th-century America coming out of World War II, when everything was supposed to be a Ford and white picket fence. It wasn’t like that for a lot of people and that’s what Algren wrote about.” Born to the lower half of the middle – “working-class, but not exactly poor”, Caplan explains – Algren grew up immersed in a grittier milieu than many of the well-heeled, well-educated celebrity scribes of the day. A proud product of the public school system, he planned to find work at a newspaper following his college graduation, but the Depression instead sent him on an eye-opening cross-country odyssey by freight train. During these lean days, he was pinched for purloining a typewriter from a Texas classroom and spent five rough months in the clink, during which he developed a deep identification with the assorted wretches he met there. “This introduced him to another America,” Caplan says. “That’s where the spark first happened.” Algren got involved with the Works Progress Administration established by the New Deal to aid jobseekers, ultimately meeting Studs Terkel, Richard Wright, and “a lot of writers telling the story of people on the underside” through the arts outreach of the Federal Writers’ Project. Stimulated by their high-minded company, he began to churn out a steady stream of short stories and novels about his originally chosen cohort: alcoholics, sex workers, drug users, boxers on the take, penny-ante criminals, corrupt politicos, anyone close to the howling desperation he could sense festering beneath the wholesome exterior of the United States. He shipped out to the European front of the second world war before his career hit its peak and returned to find that “he was certainly known as a guy who could both get an award from Eleanor Roosevelt and hang out with the bums on Skid Row”, as Caplan puts it. Though plenty of writers have fancied themselves mouthpieces of the people for taking a tour of poverty before retreating to their towers of privilege, Algren was dedicated to the squalor he stylized in his work. “To me, that’s what distinguishes him – his credibility,” Caplan says. “He really lived this life that he wrote about. He had a little apartment in Wicker Park, which was a slum mostly for Polish immigrants at the time, in almost a monastic lifestyle. He had a very stripped-down existence, and then he’d hang out at the bars where everyone knew him. This wasn’t checking a scene out for two weeks or a month. He was committed. This was his life. He hung out in high society, but to him, the real world was ‘behind the billboard’, as he said. If you didn’t know what was going on at the bottom of a society, you didn’t know what was going on, period.” While maintaining his connection to the dregs, the success of novels like The Man with the Golden Arm and A Walk on the Wild Side catapulted Algren to the top of society’s highest echelons. His involvement with the feminist trailblazer Simone de Beauvoir and the eventual love triangle formed with Jean-Paul Sartre, fictionalized in her novel The Mandarins, helped to solidify his outsized renown. But his fortunes waned as quickly as they rose, commercial success eluding him while his contemporaries continued thriving. He went into academia as finances tightened, considered going into the flourishing Vietnam black market and dodged his taxes as anti-war protest. In 1975, a sorely needed journalism assignment profiling a wrestler led him to Paterson, New Jersey. He fell in love with its serenity and left his beloved Chicago, leaving his mantle behind. He ended his life in a semi-obscurity that’s only grown with time. “Part of it is that America moved on,” Caplan explains. “They didn’t want to hear a story about the working class or poor. Saul Bellow was writing about middle-class people in Hyde Park and that became more desirable in that moment. Hemingway made sure that he always had a reputation as a tough guy, a guy’s guy, and Norman Mailer did the same. Even though, for a while, Algren had some of that image, he didn’t work at it so much. Once it passed, he didn’t go out and cultivate it, make sure people remembered him. He just wanted to write and thought that should be enough. Today, we know more clearly than ever that it’s not enough, people like to have an idea of the person.” Algren belonged to a generation of hard-drinking, brawling writers that’s long since gone extinct. His bare-knuckle hyper-masculinity renders him utterly alien to a more sensitive current publishing landscape and his public feuding has migrated to other pop-cultural spheres. Caplan floats hip-hop as a present-day equivalent to the heated literary scene of Algren’s era, chuckling before conceding that “there’s something to that!” at the suggestion that he could have been the Tupac of his day. The documentary takes a stance of prudent ambivalence to his lessened stock; he was a vital talent and crucial piece of the national literary tradition, but inextricably tied to his time and place in a way that the onward march of time doesn’t necessarily favor. Caplan readily acknowledges that for all his genius, the coarseness by which Algren defined himself keeps him planted in the past. “It’s a little bit tougher when you’re open to scrutiny,” he says. “That’s something I don’t think Algren would have done well with.” Algren is available to rent digitally in the US on 11 January with a UK date to be announcedA Chinese developer previously considered financially sound is embarking on a fire sale of assets as the contagion of bad debts built up within China’s bloated housing sector continues to spread. Shimao Group Holdings, which is in the top dozen Chinese property companies, was plunged into crisis after it said it defaulted a trust loan last week after missing a 645m yuan ($101m) payment that it guaranteed. Its situation worsened on Monday night when its credit rating was downgraded to junk status by S&amp;P. After a wild few days of trading, its shares fell 17% on Friday, and then bounced back 20% on Monday amid reports of the fire sale, and then fell again on Tuesday by 5% when it tried to play down the speculation. Shimao denied in a filing to the Hong Kong stock exchange on Tuesday that it was selling its flagship Shimao International Plaza in Shanghai for more than 10bn yuan ($1.6bn), but did concede that some of its 455bn yuan ($71bn) of assets were up for grabs. The statement advised investors “not to rely on market rumours in relation to the group” and that “information should only be based on the company’s official announcement”. However, its financial plight was laid bare by a report from the credit rating agency S&amp;P which said its liquidity was “weak” and that its cash position “will continue to erode for a prolonged period”. S&amp;P moved Shimao to a rating of B-, considered junk status in financial markets and well below the top investment grade that it enjoyed only two months ago when it was one of the Chinese developers that passed the government’s “three red lines” test on borrowing. The red lines test were introduced by Xi Jinping’s government in Beijing in order to rein in what he sees as excessively risky and speculative borrowing in the property sector. By reducing the flow of cheap credit to developers, the tougher rules have set off a chain reaction throughout the industry, starting with China’s second-largest property developer Evergrande, which slipped into default on some if its $300bn debts in December. But despite official insistence that the problem is limited to a few duds, the contagion appears to be spreading and is being accelerated by falling house prices and sales. Logan Wright, director of China markets research at Rhodium Group in Hong Kong, said the fundamental problem facing the industry was that falling sales were depriving companies of cash to repay debts piled up in the good times. New home prices fell 0.3% month-on-month in November, the biggest decline since February 2015, and plunged 16.31% by sales value. “As long as sales continue to decline meaningfully, the risk is that any policy support may not arrive quickly enough to prevent additional defaults, and slowing construction activity and economic growth,” Wright said. “Local governments are facing declining revenues from land sales and they will not be able to offer much help to developers under growing financial pressures.” S&amp;P estimated that Shimao needed to find 55bn yuan ($8bn) to repay onshore debt maturities this year and its deteriorating credit rating meant it would have to do so from “internal resources” rather than more borrowing. “The company is facing heightened refinancing risks due to still-tight regulatory conditions, apart from the materially weakened capital markets access,” S&amp;P analysts wrote. “We don’t believe the company will be able to access capital markets in the next six months given the volatility in prices of its capital market instruments, both domestically and offshore. “While we don’t anticipate that banks will call for early debt repayment, given that bank loans are generally secured by project assets, such risk could increase as sales deteriorate. According to industry data, Shimao’s 2021 total contracted sales were about 270bn yuan ($42bn). This was at the lower end of our forecast … and reflected a more than a 60% year-on-year drop in contracted sales in December 2021.” Evergrande, meanwhile, said late on Monday that it had moved out of its Shenzhen headquarters to cut costs. The company also kept a glimmer of hope alive that its first onshore Chinese yuan bond default might still be avoided by extending until Thursday a deadline for bondholders to agree to a six-month, 4.5bn yuan ($157m) payment deferral.Top story: ‘No regard for the rules’ Good morning from me, Warren Murray, and welcome to your daily scene-setter. Boris Johnson has been accused of an “utterly outrageous” breach of lockdown rules after a leaked email showed one of his top officials invited more than 100 Downing Street staff to a “bring your own booze” party. The police are investigating. The PM is believed to have attended the No 10 garden party on 20 May 2020 along with his then fiancee Carrie. At the time, social mixing was banned except with one other person from another household outdoors in a public place. An email by Johnson’s principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds, seen by ITV News, encouraged staff to “make the most of the lovely weather and have some socially distanced drinks in the No 10 garden this evening”. Johnson will now come under huge pressure to explain how he was involved. A spokesperson declined to comment in light of a continuing inquiry into potential breaches of lockdown in Downing Street. No 10 did not deny this weekend that Johnson and his wife, Carrie, whom he married in May 2021, attended the event. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, said: “Boris Johnson has consistently shown that he has no regard for the rules he puts in place for the rest of us … At the time this party took place, key workers on the frontline were working round the clock to keep us all safe, people suffered loneliness and loss in unimaginably tough circumstances.” With Conservative MPs again furious, Ian Blackford, the SNP Westminster leader, said Johnson “has no moral authority left, and as he won’t go – his Tory MPs have a duty to remove him from power.” * * * Push for five-day isolation – Boris Johnson has ordered officials to examine plans to cut Covid isolation to five days in England. Scientists have urged caution – Prof Peter Openshaw, from the government’s virus advisory group Nervtag, said it was a “reasonable” idea but he had not seen evidence to back such a change. Meanwhile experts have told our science correspondent Linda Geddes that we can’t rely on the popular notion that it’s in Covid-19’s own interests to become more mild over time. Once a virus has spread via a person, it no longer needs that person, and doesn’t care whether they get sick or die afterwards. Even as more and more people gain immunity, Sars-Cov-2 could still evolve again, worsening the situation. The good news is this becomes less likely the more of the world’s population is vaccinated – the fewer infected, the fewer chances for the virus to evolve. * * * Djokovic visa still on the line – The Australian Border Force is investigating whether Novak Djokovic incorrectly declared, in a form completed by an agent on his behalf, he had not travelled and would not do so for two weeks before his flight to Australia, in the latest twist in the tennis star’s visa cancellation saga. Social media posts seemingly show he was in Belgrade on Christmas Day before flying to Australia from Spain on 4 January. Despite winning back his visa in court, Djokovic’s fate may be determined by Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, who has the power to cancel it again. That would likely be met with a fresh legal challenge from Djokovic, who is trying to remain in Melbourne long enough to play in the Australian Open where he is chasing a male record 21st grand slam singles title. * * * Lords watchdog receives Mone complaint – The House of Lords commissioners for standards are considering a complaint against the Conservative peer Michelle Mone, relating to the PPE business awarded £203m government contracts after she referred it to the Cabinet Office in May 2020. It comes after the Guardian reported that leaked files appear to suggest Mone and her husband, the Isle of Man-based financier Douglas Barrowman, were secretly involved in the company, PPE Medpro. After the company was awarded contracts in May and June 2020, Mone and Barrowman have consistently denied any “role or function” in PPE Medpro. Lawyers for Mone, who ran the lingerie company Ultimo before David Cameron made her a peer in 2015, have said she “was not connected to PPE Medpro in any capacity”. Mone’s representatives declined to comment on the complaint. Mone’s lawyers have said the Guardian’s reporting is “grounded entirely on supposition and speculation and not based on accuracy”. * * * Star jumps and porridge – Britain’s third-biggest energy supplier has apologised and said it was “embarrassed” after it advised customers to keep their heatings bills low by “having a cuddle with your pets”, eating “hearty bowls of porridge” and “doing a few star jumps”. MPs called the guidance from SSE Energy Services, part of Ovo, “insulting” and “offensive”. Millions of UK households are facing a “cost of living catastrophe” in the spring, including a rise in energy bills to as much as £2,000 a year on 1 April for an average household on a direct debit tariff. Labour will hope to pile pressure on Rishi Sunak and Boris Johnson today with a binding vote in parliament on cutting VAT on home energy bills. Sunak, the chancellor, will attempt to quell Tory unrest over the cost of living as delegations of MPs press him to cancel a planned tax rise and ditch the VAT on energy bills in exchange for savings on tackling the pandemic. * * * Dying man gets pig heart – Doctors in the US have transplanted a genetically modified pig’s heart into a patient who did not qualify for a human donor heart. David Bennett, 57, was on Monday breathing on his own while still connected to a heart-lung machine to help his new heart. Surgeons used a heart from a pig that had undergone gene-editing to lessen the chance of organ rejection. “It was either die or do this transplant. I want to live. I know it’s a shot in the dark, but it’s my last choice,” Bennett said a day before the surgery at the University of Maryland medical centre in Baltimore. * * * Roman ruins on HS2 route – A wealthy Roman trading town has been discovered half a metre below the surface of a remote field in Northamptonshire. A 10-metre-wide Roman road, domestic and industrial buildings, more than 300 coins and at least four wells have been unearthed at the site, where 80 archaeologists have been working for the past 12 months. The field is on the route of the HS2 rail network and one of the associated archaeological effort’s most significant findings to date. It is known as Blackgrounds after the dense black soil that has helped preserve the Roman remains, and was used for pasture until the archaeological dig began. An iron age village, formed of more than 30 roundhouses, stood on the site at the time of the Roman invasion in 43BC. It expanded during the period of the Roman occupation which lasted until AD410. Today in Focus podcast: Guantánamo, the endless prison The US jail in Cuba has been beset by allegations of torture since it was set up 20 years ago. But despite all the promises to close it down, it remains operational with no end in sight, says Julian Borger. Lunchtime read: ‘Don’t plan it, just go’ The pandemic has left our best-laid plans in disarray, but we can still have spur-of-the-moment adventures, writes Amy Fleming. Sport Steven Gerrard refused to blame a lengthy VAR call that led to an Aston Villa equaliser being ruled out for offside for his team’s elimination from the FA Cup by Manchester United last night, with the manager instead urging his team to “flip” the result when hosting them in the Premier League on Saturday. Villa lost the third-round tie at Old Trafford 1-0 having conceded Scott McTominay’s early header but then dominated throughout. United also rode their luck as Villa had two goals ruled out in the second half. Sam Billings, fresh from the Big Bash League, has answered a call-up to England’s Ashes squad for Friday’s fifth Test in Hobart, 90 minutes before his intended flight for the T20 team’s upcoming Caribbean tour. Fresh doubt has been cast on European fixtures involving English rugby clubs playing in France this week amid fears strict travel rules could wreak more havoc on the Champions and Challenge Cups. Newcastle are due to play in France on Friday, as are Bath and Sale at the weekend, and while the organisers, European Professional Club Rugby, said last week that all fixtures will go ahead as planned, the key stumbling block is that clubs must isolate for 48 hours upon arrival before their matches, according to current travel rules. Business Stocks across Asia have carried on the downward trajectory set by Europe and Wall Street yesterday as concerns about rate increases by the US Federal Reserve weighed on the minds of investors. The FTSE100 looks like opening up around 0.3%, however, with the pound on $1.359 and €1.198. The papers A full roundup of today’s front pages can be found here – our usual summary follows. The normally pro-Boris Johnson Express blasts a full-throated warning in its splash headline: “Enough Boris! You MUST end ‘partygate’ farce now”. The Mail takes a similar line and says “Boris rocked by new party revelations”. Others are more scathing with the i picking up on a particularly galling line from the leaked email invitation to the gathering on 20 May. “‘Bring your own booze’”. Our Guardian front page uses the same line: “Fury as email reveals No 10 ‘bring your own booze’ lockdown party”. The Mirror describes the email as “Invite to do what you like”, while the Metro goes with a play on words – “Downing it Street” – alongside a picture of Johnson quaffing a pint of beer. The coverage contrasts with that of the Times and Telegraph, neither of which choose to lead with the party revelations. The Times does have the story on its front page – “No10 celebrated ‘lovely weather’ with lockdown drinks party” – but leads on limits to sporting fixtures being eased. Ditto the Telegraph, which says “Johnson received invite to lockdown party” but leads on cabinet anger over misleading isolation guidance. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendA staple of the Australian diet is the latest victim of the Omicron crisis, as staff shortages hit Australia’s biggest chicken supplier and shelves go empty. The staff shortages have significantly cut sales at Ingham’s and made some products unavailable at one of its big customers, KFC. Australians eat almost 47kg of chicken each a year, making it the country’s most popular meat, according to industry statistics. It is also the cheapest meat on the market – at an average of $5.43 a kilo it is less than half the price of pork, lamb and beef. “The rapid spread of the Omicron variant across eastern Australian states from December 2021 and the resulting staff shortages, are now also having a significant impact on the Australian supply chain, operations, logistics and sales performance of Ingham’s, and some of its suppliers and customers,” Ingham’s said in a statement to the ASX that sent its share price tumbling more than 6%. “This has disrupted production and distribution capability, and impacted sales.” Market sources said Ingham’s customers included KFC, which Guardian Australia has confirmed is suffering from a shortage of some products due to difficulty in obtaining fresh chicken pieces on the east coast. Staff shortages are worst in processing plants, where chickens are cut into pieces such as thigh and breast fillets. This has resulted in Ingham’s shipping more whole chickens to supermarkets and other retailers. Consumers have reported empty shelves in the chicken sections of supermarkets as shoppers clear out available stock. Ingham’s said its main sites were open and “have not experienced significant on-site transmission of Covid”. “However, they are experiencing significantly lower levels of staff availability which is impacting production volumes and operational efficiency,” the company said. “Operational changes are being made to volume and mix across Ingham’s Australian business and it is not currently possible to predict how long this disruption will continue.” A KFC spokesperson said the fast food chain was “currently experiencing intermittent supply chain disruptions nationally due to Covid-19 related absenteeism at our chicken suppliers, meaning some of our restaurants are unable to offer our full menu which relies on fresh chicken”. “We’re working with our multiple suppliers to mitigate the impact and provide them with support, but we expect some disruptions to continue in the coming weeks.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Ingham’s said it was too early to tell what effect the shortages would have on profit. Its managing director, Andrew Reeves, said many employees were “forced to isolate at home due to contracting Covid in the community or as a result of being close contacts”. He said a decision by state and federal governments which removed a requirement for asymptomatic close contacts who work in the meat industry to isolate for seven days “should assist to alleviate some of the current staff shortages”. “As operating conditions begin to stabilise, we expect our production capacity to recover relatively quickly to meet customer and consumer demand.” The secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Sally McManus, said workers in meatworks were particularly vulnerable to catching Covid-19. “There’s social distancing that’s been put in place but that is not enough with Omicron and inevitably if one person on that line gets sick and is infectious there’s a high chance, especially as we know because of that type of wet, cold environment, for it to spread as well,” she said. Eggs, however, are not yet in short supply, with the industry confident that it can handle the disruptions. “Any absence of eggs in stores is a result of disruptions to supermarket staffing and logistics, and not a reflection of continuity of supply,” said Rowan McMonnies, managing director of Australian Eggs. “Australia’s 21 million hens are still laying eggs, and farmers are working around the clock to get those eggs to their customers,” he said.Karen Dejesus, 54, was cooking breakfast for her young granddaughter and her son when she heard fire alarms on Sunday morning in the Bronx borough of New York. Dejesus and her family have lived in the high rise apartment building for almost 19 years. Alarms in the building went off erroneously so often that residents on Sunday didn’t register the sirens as real, she told the Guardian. “So many of us were used to hearing that fire alarm go off, it was like second nature to us,” said Dejesus. But when plumes of smoke and flames began to flood her third-floor apartment, the same floor the fire started on, along with screams of help from residents trapped inside, Dejesus realized the alarms were real. With no fire escapes on her Bronx high rise, Dejesus and her family had to escape through the window, aided by attending firefighters. “[You’re] in a building that’s burning and you don’t know how you’re going to get out. You don’t know if the firefighters are going to get to you in time,” said Dejesus. “Obviously, the building was not fireproof like we thought it was.” Over 200 New York City firefighters responded to the fire in the Bronx that killed 17 people, eight of them children, in the deadliest fire in the city in over 30 years. The five-alarm fire that also left 60 residents injured began when a space heater in one of the apartment units malfunctioned, said the New York City fire commissioner, Dan Nigro, and quickly spread through the complex’s stairwells and into other units via an open door. “Some of the kids that died, I knew. That’s what’s going through my mind over and over and over,” said Cookie Dennis, 72, who was on the third floor when the fire broke out. Dozens of residents were rushed to area hospitals, with 32 sent to five borough hospitals in life-threatening condition. Investigators confirmed that victims of the fire, often with severe smoke inhalation, were found in stairwells on every floor of the apartment complex, with many found in cardiac and respiratory arrest. Many residents who survived the fire escaped through stairways obscured with smoke or waited, hoping for assistance from firefighters. Dennis described how she waited in her apartment until the fire was out before getting assistance from firefighters. “After the fire was out and everything was set, they knocked on the doors and said, ‘Can you breathe? Are you breathing in there?” said Dennis. Dennis, who mostly lives alone, was only able to take her medication after the blaze, leaving nearly all of her belongings behind while she stays at a friend’s home temporarily. “The smoke was still so bad and it was pitch black and there were wires hanging and water [everywhere],” said Dennis. “It looks like a war zone,” said Dejesus. Support from neighbors in this tight-knit community has been overwhelming, as donations of money, food, clothing and other supplies have poured in for residents in need. “I think that the community is really, really coming together,” said Keisha Sillah who visited the site of the fire on Monday to see where she could donate supplies for affected residents. “A lot of people are devastated because some way or another, you know someone from someone.” Elizabeth Fermin, 54, who lives across the street from where the fire broke out, has donated several bags of clothing from a store her son owns to victims of the fire, directing other neighbors interested in helping to donation drop-off points around the neighborhood on Monday. “It’s very sad ’cause I just go on the news to see if I recognize one of my friends,” said Fermin. “I know a lot of people from there. I got a lot of friends there.” Fermin has lived in the neighborhood for nearly 22 years, often donating clothes and toys to residents who would stop by. She watched the fire from her apartment window as first responders rescued people trapped inside, including several young children and infants. “I feel sorry for them. I’ve got pain in my heart since yesterday. I’ve never seen nothing like that. I’ve seen fire, but not like that,” said Fermin. As affected residents recover from the blaze and search for housing and resources in the coming days, many are grateful that they survived the fire, but anxiously wait on word of how their neighbors fared. “I just thank God that we’re here,” said Dejesus.A group of North Carolina voters told state officials on Monday that they want Republican congressman Madison Cawthorn to be disqualified as a congressional candidate, citing his involvement in the 6 January attack on the Capitol. Cawthorn questioned the outcome of the presidential election during the “Save America Rally” before the Capitol riot later that day that resulted in five deaths. At the rally, Cawthorn made baseless claims that the election had been stolen from Donald Trump, and has been accused of firing up the crowd, many of whom went on to storm the Capitol. Lawyers filed the candidacy challenge on behalf of 11 voters with North Carolina’s board of elections, which oversees a process by which candidate qualifications are scrutinized. The voters say Cawthorn, who formally filed as a candidate last month, cannot run because he fails to comply with an amendment in the constitution ratified shortly after the civil war. The 1868 amendment says no one can serve in Congress “who, having previously taken an oath, as a member of Congress … to support the constitution of the United States, shall have engaged in insurrection or rebellion against the same”. The written challenge says the events on 6 January “amounted to an insurrection”, and that Cawthorn’s speech at the rally supporting Trump, his other comments, and information in published reports, provide a “reasonable suspicion or belief” that he helped facilitate the insurrection and is thus disqualified. “Challengers have reasonable suspicion that Representative Cawthorn was involved in efforts to intimidate Congress and the Vice-President into rejecting valid electoral votes and subvert the essential constitutional function of an orderly and peaceful transition of power,” the complaint read. The complaint went on to detail the ways Cawthorn allegedly promoted the demonstration ahead of time, including him tweeting: “The future of this republic hinges on the actions of a solitary few … It’s time to fight.” The complaint also details reports of Cawthorn meeting with planners of the 6 January demonstration and possibly the Capitol assault. Cawthorn, 26, became the youngest member of Congress after his November 2020 election, and has become a social media favorite of Trump supporters. He plans to run in a new district that appears friendlier to Republicans. He formally filed candidacy papers just before filing was suspended while redistricting lawsuits are pending. Last September, Cawthorn warned North Carolinians of potential “bloodshed” over future elections he claims could “continue to be stolen”, and questioned whether Biden was “dutifully elected”. He advised them to begin amassing ammunition for what he said is likely American-v-American “bloodshed” over unfavorable election results. “When tyranny becomes law, rebellion becomes your duty,” he said, in addition to describing the rioters who were arrested during the 6 January insurrection as “political prisoners”. He said “we are actively working” on plans for a similar protest in Washington. Ron Fein, legal director of Free Speech for People, a national election and campaign finance reform group backing the challenge to Cawthorn, told the Guardian the complaint was “the first legal challenge to a candidate’s eligibility under the disqualification clause filed since post-civil war Reconstruction in the 19th century”. He said: “It sets a line that says that just as the framers of the 14th amendment wrote and intended, you can’t take an oath to support the constitution and then facilitate an insurrection against the United States while expecting to pursue public office.” Fein said the challenge will be the first of many against members of Congress associated with the insurrection. Free Speech for People and the group Our Revolution announced last week they would urge state administrators to bar Trump and members of Congress from future ballots. He said: “This isn’t just about the voters of that district. The insurrection threatened our country’s entire democratic system and putting insurrectionists from any state into the halls of Congress threatens the entire country.” The challenge asks the board to create a five-member panel from counties within the proposed 13th district to hear the challenge. The panel’s decision can be appealed to the state board and later to court. The challengers also asked the board to let them question Cawthorn under oath in a deposition before the regional panel convenes, and to subpoena him and others to obtain documents. John Wallace, a longtime lawyer for Democratic causes in North Carolina, who also filed the challenge, told the Guardian: “The disqualification of Representative Cawthorn certainly should provide a deterrent to others who might try and obstruct or defeat our democratic processes.” A Cawthorn spokesperson, Luke Ball, said “over 245,000 patriots from western North Carolina elected Congressman Cawthorn to serve them in Washington” – a reference to his November 2020 victory in the current 11th district. Now “a dozen activists who are comically misinterpreting and twisting the 14th amendment for political gain will not distract him from that service,” Ball wrote.A lot of people, particularly at this self-improvement stage of the year, spend a great deal of time worrying about what makes them look old. Is it the bags under the eyes or the invisible triceps? This is daft, since, if you have a ring light or – better yet – are willing to pretend that your camera isn’t working, no one needs to know what you really look like unless they live with you (and those people have a fair idea already). The giveaway now is how you use your phone. You can absolutely carbon-date yourself in a single exchange. If you leave voicemail, that makes you a boomer, according to assorted experts. If you send a voice note, you are (spiritually, at least) a millennial, or even generation Z. This makes no sense, since, to your interlocutor, these are two identical experiences: an annoying taped message that they are burdened with listening to. However, if you query the rules, that puts you back in boomer territory. If you trail off a text with “…”, this situates you right in the middle of generation X, but if you ask a younger acquaintance what is so wrong with ellipsis, you doubly age yourself, first by using ellipsis and second by knowing what it is called. Between two people over 40, switching from a text to a phone call in the middle of an exchange is a little infra dig, but not drastic. You might just be at a loose end. In the 30 to 40 bracket, to call anyone at all without scheduling it first is considered incredibly impertinent. To the under-30s, this counts as de-escalation – don’t intensify the tone, change the platform. Boomers answer their phone the minute it rings, like it is a smoke alarm. They could be in the middle of getting knighted, or being diagnosed with a terminal illness, and they would still go: “Ooh, unknown caller ID – could be important.” There is a generation above, sometimes called the “silent generation”, where they keep their phone in a drawer, forget it is there and might call you back a month later. This used to really bug me, but now I find it ineffably charming and nostalgic, like vinyl. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistTherapists dwell in the land of emotions. It is our job to receive the emotional tenor of our analysands, to follow their speech patterns, their repetitions, their haltings, speedings-up and silences. We endeavour to find the words to decipher the complexity and subtlety of what is wanting to be conveyed and understood. It is not a simple job. The therapist’s emotional capacities are stretched. We register a feeling in the person we are working with, such as fear. But it isn’t just fear; there is a tinge of despair that alerts us to a closing in, almost, a collapse and a freeze. Or we register anger, and simultaneously tucked into the seam of that anger is disappointment, a very different kind of feeling, but which, once recognised, can disperse the anger. Getting to the accuracy of the feeling allows for an emotional sigh of understanding. The feelings can be digested, and in time flow through and out of the body. Feelings, emotions, are profoundly physical. Whereas once it was thought that they were distractions from thought, we now know that emotions are precursors to thought and profoundly implicated in consciousness. Or, as the American philosopher Owen Flanagan argues in his new book, How to Do Things With Emotions: The Morality of Anger and Shame Across Cultures, emotions are things we do. How we enact them, he insists, what sense we have of them and their purposes, are culturally inscribed and made sense of through the communal embrace of the rules they enforce. Flanagan is mainly talking about the attitudes that police society through instilling in children the correct ways to behave. In a long discussion on anger and shame, he makes an ethical argument – that we in the west need to turn up shame and tone down anger, because our society suffers from too much explosive fury and too little modesty and embarrassment about personal behaviour and desires. He visits the Minangkabau people of West Sumatra in Indonesia, where shame is the main instrument of socialisation. For the Bara people of southern Madagascar, it is parental anger that is deployed to show children what is allowed. Flanagan contrasts our libertarian view of anger, in which we feel free to let rip privately and publicly through trolling, road rage and sending intimate photos, for example, with more homogeneous societies, where anger is used to discourage antisocial behaviour and enhance respect. Being scolded, being shamed, is sanctioned by all as an accepted form of child rearing. In such communities, anger is not the expulsive emotion to which we have grown accustomed. For the Minangkabau, tantrums and protest are simply not tolerated. Children are taught to withdraw quietly to manage their shame privately. But lest you think we have re-entered bourgeois Victorian England, Flanagan contends that this form of control isn’t damaging. The emotional harm that we might imagine shame and anger cause are, he argues, eviscerated as the cultural prescription is internalised as conscience, as morality and rules for living. If there is a fair bit of naivety in Flanagan’s project, there is also much to be admired. As he deconstructs the forms of anger used by westerners, he seems delighted to turn back the clock, as if we could disregard the different cultural forces, including the anonymity of the internet slanging machine, the noise of Fox News, the radio shock jocks and various therapies that claim that anger requires healthy expression and shame requires deconstruction. He ponders the philosopher’s question: which ways of living are best in allowing us to step outside the imprisonment of our personal upbringings? He wants us in the west, in North America and Britain, to reject libertarian values and strive for emotions that enhance rather than splinter society. Reputation tracking, which Flanagan applauds, pertains to small groups in which transgressive behaviour isn’t tolerated because we are responsible to our community. That’s appealing, but it doesn’t reflect late modernity, in which such a group composition seems unrealistic and in which individuality – how I feel, how you feel – is highly valued. Many young people crave recognition – whether online likes or even negative responses – and the nature of these engagements is very different to the day-to-day encounters within our social groups. Ultimately, Flanagan asks this important question: what do emotions do, and do they do the right thing? His answer draws on his work as a philosopher anthropologist, an approach to which I am sympathetic as a psychoanalyst who often experiences herself as an anthropologist of the mind. Like him, psychoanalysts and therapists understand the individual mind as the sum of other minds and yet unique. We make sense of ourselves by reference to our personal and social behaviour. The American physicist and bestselling author Leonard Mlodinow’s new book, Emotional: The New Thinking About Feelings, in which he popularises the findings from neuroscience over the past 50 years, is of a different nature. Mlodinow shows, through reports of psychologists’ experiments and a series of quizzes, that recognising how much we are motivated by emotions allows us to be more thoughtful and present, more rational. Feelings are private, personal and social. Emotions are the building blocks of consciousness and thought. Both books argue that we should see this work of emotions as central to who we are and can be. Susie Orbach is a psychotherapist, psychoanalyst and writer. Her most recent book is In Therapy: The Unfolding Story (Wellcome Collection) • How to Do Things With Emotions: The Morality of Anger and Shame Across Cultures by Owen Flanagan is published by Princeton University Press (£22). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply • Emotional: The New Thinking About Feelings by Leonard Mlodinow is published by Allen Lane (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyPolar bears snore. Perhaps not all of them, but certainly the hulking beast that slept near me, my wife, Nicola, and our two young children. Deep, growly exhalations, not dissimilar to my own, I was cheerfully informed by George, nine, and Lottie, seven. The nocturnal habits of the world’s largest land-living carnivore were revealed to us during a stay over at Pairi Daiza (Persian for paradise), a peculiarly beautiful zoo and botanical gardens in a most implausible location: deepest Wallonia, the Francophone and economically struggling region of southern Belgium. Founded in 1993 as a humble bird sanctuary around the remnants of a 12th-century Cistercian abbey and a neighbouring stately home, today Pairi Daiza is home to 7,000 animals, along with the largest Chinese and Indonesian gardens in Europe, spread across 65 hectares (160 acres) of picture-perfect landscape. To put this in context, London zoo houses 16,000 animals on just 15 hectares on the edge of Regent’s Park. Pairi Daiza, voted Europe’s top zoo for the past three years by the Diamond Theme Park awards, the Oscars of the zoological world, is vast and ever-expanding. It was the park’s latest growth spurt into the Belgian countryside in the municipality of Brugelette, an hour’s drive from Brussels, that offered the opportunity for us to hear a polar bear’s nightly snorts. Two years ago, in recognition that its sheer size makes it difficult for even the most sprightly of wildlife spotters to cover in a day, let alone a young family, Pairi Daiza opened 50 rooms with views of the bears, wolves, deer and seals. Last year they went further. A new section of the zoo, entitled the Land of the Cold, was opened, complete with a further 50 bedrooms sharing glass walls with the polar bears, walruses, penguins and Siberian tigers. The new high-spec accommodation includes sub-aquatic rooms, so you can watch water-dwelling animals swim underwater and feed, all from the comfort of your bed, or indeed your own whirlpool bath. The rooms are not recommended for those who fancy a lazy start to their day, although the polar bears were courteous enough to keep their roars around us to a minimum. We experienced the snoring during a rather eerie walk, late at night, back from one of the zoo’s restaurants. But the new “immersive” accommodation has proven immensely popular, and it is easy to see why in a setting like this. Pairi Daiza is the “childhood dream come true” of former lawyer and financial consultant Eric Domb, 61, who is obsessive enough about the place to live in it, and keep a treehouse holiday home for himself among the red pandas. Domb is, to put it mildly, a collector. His favourite animal is said to be the elephant. The zoo has 23 – two African and 21 Asian – the largest herd in Europe. He also has a fascination with China: he travelled to Shanghai and brought over a team of landscapers to help build his Middle Kingdom world – home to five giant pandas – and Chinese garden, full of pink and purple flowering azaleas, camellias and maples. Visitors are advised that it is best enjoyed barefoot. On a trip to Vancouver, Domb spotted a Twin Beech seaplane that he thought would inspire his guests. After multiple stops, the plane arrived in 2015 at Lac de la Plate Taille, south of Charleroi, the only water surface in Belgium big enough for the landing, before being transported to sit alongside the zoo’s lake, where it is a cause of curiosity for both the visitors and the harbour seals that live in that part of the zoo. Like many theme parks, Pairi Daiza has a train encircling it, but this one is run by a fully functioning, early-20th-century steam engine salvaged from Poland that whistles along at a pace just on the right side of alarming. Zoos need to work hard to justify their existence, and the image of an eccentric Belgian collecting baubles from around the world for a European audience could be offputting to some. I arrived as a zoo-sceptic, and my son wanted to know where the animals had been taken from. But the stated purpose of Pairi Daiza is to save species from extinction and introduce them into the wild if possible, while seeking to educate visitors about the wider culture of the lands the animals originate from – and why all of that matters. The zoo has been a member of the European Association of Zoos and Aquariums since 1994, coordinating breeding programmes for endangered species to ensure a healthy gene pool. There are fewer than 26,000 polar bears in the wild, with numbers diminishing quickly as their sea-ice habitat shrinks. Pairi Daiza is currently introducing two males and two females. The NGO Polar Bear International has granted the zoo “ambassador” status in recognition of its efforts. Scientific programmes include finding a cure for elephant herpes and inventing a pregnancy test for pandas. It is also a place of refuge. Two underweight walruses recently arrived from a zoo in St Petersburg that closed during the pandemic, and they are now doing well. This autumn, the local media was full of a story about a stowaway racoon offered a home after being found onboard the Dutch freighter Singelgracht on its return from a trip to Baltimore. Last year, 477 turtles, snakes, lizards and caiman crocodiles, discovered by border control or left abandoned by owners, were taken in by the zoo’s Mersus Emergo, a former whaling ship anchored by the lake as accommodation for the park’s reptiles and amphibians. There is no set route around the park – guests are encouraged to get a little lost, find something new. Waterways or steep landscapes are used wherever possible as a means to parcel off enclosures. As we arrived, and a flock of pelicans soared overhead, my first impression was of something akin to Jurassic Park, albeit with a brewery and a replica wood-framed Taoist temple that serves Chinese food, as two of nine catering outlets. As part of the accommodation package, visitors have two full days of access to the park, which we fully exploited. But we will have to return. There was simply too much we did not have time to see or, indeed, hear. I wonder if Siberian tigers snore? The trip was provided by Pairi Daiza: Le Jardin des Mondes. A one-night stay for a family of four in a room overlooking the sea lions costs from €373, including half-board and unlimited entry to the zoo over two days. A sub-aquatic room close to the polar bears costs from €630He is the online shopping tycoon billed as the UK’s answer to the Silicon Valley tech titans – with a personal fortune put at more than £2bn last spring and whose penchant for displaying his toned torso at pre-pandemic yacht parties has anchored many a tabloid newspaper rags-to-riches story. Yet for Matthew Moulding – the founder, chief executive and chair of the e-commerce company The Hut Group (THG) – 2021 proved a humbling year. The acclaim that greeted his company’s £4.5bn London stock market flotation in the autumn of 2020 evaporated in 2021, as parts of the City of London turned on the company that owns online beauty and nutrition brands including Espa and Myprotein, as well as providing e-commerce technology to firms such as Unilever. THG’s shares – which had soared after the group floated – slumped by 71% between January and December. That fall cost its investors, among which Moulding is its biggest shareholder, about £6.9bn in paper losses. The reversal has heaped yet more scrutiny on a business that has not been shy of giving critics targets to snipe at: group companies have made significant donations to the Conservative party; while THG cocked a snook at City convention prior to its stock market debut by retaining Moulding in both the chair and chief executive roles. The board also signed off a pre-flotation deal that saw Moulding acquire THG’s offices, warehouses and leisure facilities – before immediately becoming the company’s landlord by leasing those buildings back to the company for an annual rent of £19m. That property deal was frowned on by City figures at the time, but justified by the company on the grounds it cut THG’s debts. Yet some investor questions have lingered, including should the company have sold the buildings to its founder before floating? What was the exact value of that deal and the price paid? And why wasn’t THG more transparent about all the relevant numbers? The company does not seem to have explicitly disclosed how much the property portfolio cost Moulding. But a Guardian analysis of THG’s accounts, which pieces together figures in THG’s annual report, suggests the deal was worth £297m – but Moulding might not have parted with any cash at all. Instead, the entrepreneur could have waived £76m of THG shares he was due to receive, as well as taking on £221m of the property portfolio’s debts and other liabilities. The company did not dispute the figures. And if they are accurate, this could raise new questions for THG – because a £297m price does not appear to reflect the company’s own historical filings about the value of individual properties in the portfolio. THG published specific individual values for 14 of the 18 properties in the portfolio, in a collection of its own annual reports and Companies House accounts between 2015 and 2020. The historical filings suggest that, at those points in time, the 14 properties had values that add up to £295m – just £2m less than the figure Moulding appeared to pay for all 18 buildings. Of course, property values rise and fall. The value of each of the 14 may have changed. But what about the four outstanding properties in the portfolio? According to the Guardian’s calculations, their current value could be as much as £55m. They include a new 56,873 sq metre (612,180 sq ft) warehouse near Wrocław in south-west Poland, for which THG has disclosed it pays Moulding a rent of €3.7m (£3.1m) a year. Such a rent – the third highest in the portfolio – would imply a property value of about £50m, according to research on typical yields collated by the statistical website Statista and property firm Cushman Wakefield. THG says the building is worth £43.3m. Three further offices in Northwich, Cheshire, charge rents that suggest the buildings are collectively worth as much as £5m, according to financial and property experts. Richard Kleiner, a managing partner of the City accounting firm Gerald Edelman, said: “I agree with the Guardian’s analysis … presumably, THG can more fully explain the accounting so that the analysis can be interpreted in a different way.” Moulding has had a mixed relationship with followers of his company, and has criticised the City and financial journalists for their coverage and analysis, even going as far to suggest that he regrets ever having taken the firm public. At the weekend it emerged he has handed a dossier to regulators over what THG described as a coordinated attack on its share price. However, the entrepreneur has never fully explained why he became THG’s landlord just as the company joined the stock market, although last January the company said: “The transaction removed in excess of £200m of debt from THG’s balance sheet immediately which increases to in excess of £400m over the near term as THG completes its infrastructure rollout programme globally.” The online retailer also previously said that a chief executive acting as a public company’s landlord was “not unique”, while adding that the property sale “was agreed on arm’s length terms with the independent non-execs’ and professional shareholders’ oversight. Mr Moulding paid the market value as independently valued by a global top tier accountancy practice appointed by THG on behalf of all shareholders.” Even so, THG declined invitations to provide an on-the-record comment to the Guardian’s most recent questions in December about the value of the property deal. It said the transaction was completely lawful, had been concluded only after taking extensive advice from a range of property and financial experts and that the company disputed it had valued the 14 properties at £295m. It said the Guardian’s calculations were wrong, but did not respond to repeated requests to provide a breakdown of the individual property values. THG added that the portfolio’s valuation was assessed by “[Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors] accredited experts, following the recognised ‘Red Book’ global standard”. Its 2020 annual report also disclosed that the board’s related party committee – created after the property deal had concluded – found “no significant matters … as part of this subsequent review [of the property sale]”. Still, THG would not respond to further questions about the identities of the firms it hired to conduct the “Red Book” valuations, or the dates when the research was concluded. Nor would it make clear its position on specific buildings, where seemingly legitimate questions about valuations remain unanswered. For example, the portfolio’s most valuable piece of real estate – at least from a rental point of view – is a new four-building development called Icon, which the company constructed at Manchester airport to “house 2,000 people and … focus on video production and photography to be used across THG’s and clients’ digital offerings”. THG pays Moulding an annual rent of £7.78m for use of those buildings, according to the company’s listing prospectus, which also calls the site a “state-of-the-art facility”. Meanwhile, THG’s 2019 annual report informed shareholders that the Icon buildings were “a £135m THG investment”. Those figures would imply a yield – or rate of return – of about 5.8% for Moulding, which sits in line with the market rate for properties predominantly rented on 25-year leases by a public company tenant, according to property and financial experts. However, THG told the Guardian that Icon was actually valued at £62.25m when it was sold to the company’s founder. It did not explain why the company would pay the tycoon the 12.5% annual return on his investment such a valuation would imply. Moulding has also pledged all annual profits from his THG property arm to charity, although the company has said that, because of the debt on the portfolio, it would be “barely income generating” in the first year. THG has said that it does not endorse any political party and has also donated to the Manchester mayor’s office and Labour-controlled Manchester city council.Millions more people in China have been ordered into lockdown and Hong Kong has banned transit passengers from 150 places as China continues to battle outbreaks across several provinces a few weeks before the Winter Olympics. China’s national health commission reported 110 new locally transmitted Covid-19 cases for Monday, including 87 in Henan province, 13 in Shaanxi, and 10 in Tianjin. The cases in Henan, which include at least some of the highly transmissible Omicron variant, prompted the lockdown of five million residents in the city of Anyang on Monday evening. Anyang recorded 58 of the 87 Henan cases. At least two Omicron cases have been confirmed in the city in recent days, linked to an outbreak in Tianjin, about 500km away. Anyang residents have been ordered into their homes and banned from driving on the roads, according to the state news agency Xinhua. Non-essential businesses have been closed down. Also in Henan, Zhengzhou city has closed schools and kindergartens and barred in-restaurant dining, while Yuzhou remains in lockdown. Xi’an city in northern China is in its third week of strict lockdown, while Shenzhen in the south has implemented targeted lockdowns of some housing compounds and launched a mass testing drive. Across numerous Chinese cities, public and long distance transport has been reduced or suspended, including multiple flights from the US. Tianjin is of particular concern to authorities over its proximity to Beijing, and officials have pledged to fulfil the city’s role as a “moat” to protect the capital. The origin of the Omicron strain is eluding officials. Zhang Ying, the deputy director of the city’s CDC, recently said it may have been spreading “for some time” before it was detected. With the Winter Olympics just around the corner, there are mounting concerns and rumours circulating about harsher restrictions to come. On Saturday a 39-year-old woman was arrested for allegedly disseminating false information about plans to shut down the popular Beijing party district Sanlitun, and on Tuesday the Beijing organising committee rejected rumours of plans to close some or all of the city during the games. Deputy director Huang Chun said the Omicron variant was spreading quickly around the world but the “closed loop” system for athletes, employees and others attending was running “smoothly” and there was no need to adjust it unless there was an outbreak within it. In Hong Kong, where a relatively small number of Omicron cases have also been detected, authorities have reportedly planned to ban all international transit passengers coming from about 150 places. Bloomberg reported on Monday the ban would be extended to air passengers from “Group A” countries, which have been designated high-risk, from 15 January to 14 February. According to Bloomberg, diplomats, government officials, athletes and staff travelling to the Games would be exempt from the ban. China is under pressure to maintain its official commitment to a zero-Covid strategy which has been challenged by the latest outbreaks and Omicron cases. As of December officials claimed to have fully vaccinated more than 82% of the population. However there are concerns that Omicron has a substantial ability to evade immune responses and current vaccines are less effective. China uses Sinovac and Sinopharm, two domestically developed and produced vaccines based on inactivated viruses. Dr Daryl Cheng, medical leader for the Melbourne vaccine education centre, said there were concerns that these types of vaccines appear to have a higher rate of breakthrough infections with Omicron. “We’re stuck in a perfect storm at the moment where Omicron is significantly infectious, and in places like China where they may have a higher rate of breakthrough infections,” Cheng told the Guardian. “It puts the population at significant risk of infection … [and] if you’re going for Covid-zero it puts higher strain on resources.” Cheng said Sinovac and Sinopharm – like all currently used vaccines – were developed before Omicron appeared, and so it was expected that they all would have reduced effectiveness, as happens with vaccines against new variations of the flu, which are adjusted each year. “The question is whether or not further boosters of the same vaccine achieve greater effectiveness [against Omicron], versus needing to mix and match, versus developing a newer version of the traditional vaccine,” he said. “It’s a very complex and multifactorial discussion because you may not have the time or availability [to get it to people].” Some countries are giving a booster on top of citizens’ two doses with a different type of vaccine, often an mRNA type. China had indicated it would approve the mRNA vaccine developed by Pfizer for domestic use in 2021 but has not done so. There are no mRNA vaccines approved for use in China. Cheng said China may be developing an mRNA vaccine but Omicron was “spreading by the day”.A formative trauma befell Christopher “Peacemaker” Smith when he was around 12 years old, and he’s never gotten over it. The psychopathic quasi-superhero (his power is mostly just having the body of star John Cena) leading the new HBO Max series spun off from the Suicide Squad franchise is reintroduced to us fresh off a four-year prison stint, but he’s really been locked in a state of arrested development since tweenhood. His is a world of rocket launchers and fleshlights, bong rips and dick jokes, junk food and cheap beer. He certainly has the boastful, non-stop libido of the newly pubescent, not just game for the odd barfly hookup or MMF threesome, but fully assured that his prowess could sow doubt in the staunchest of lesbians. His idea of wit is naming his bald eagle sidekick Eagly. He swears as if he’s just learned the words. The eight episodes spent with this defender of justice – no matter how many men, women and children he has to kill to do it – are dialed into his same set of immature predilections, in tune with his description from showrunner James Gunn as “the world’s biggest douchebag”. Characters bicker with the juvenile circularity of kids who need to be separated, constantly pointing out the flaws in each other’s equally absurd logic. (Every episode reiterates the “why would someone put penises all over the beach?” exchange from its big-screen predecessor in some form, to diminishing returns.) The hyper-charged sensibility of violence treats each explosive headshot like one of the power chords in Wig Wam’s Do Ya Wanna Taste It, the theme song for the inexplicably lengthy opening titles in which the cast members all do a silly dance. The soundtrack favors this stripe of cock-rock, all hair metal and 80s-styled guitar lixx. In one of Peacemaker’s tenderest moments, he bonds with an agent over their shared love of Finnish glam progenitors Hanoi Rocks. That scene encapsulates the usual appeal of Gunn’s work, which tends to raise the low ceiling on the taste of adolescent boys through earnestness and pop-cultural fluency. Those virtues have yielded one of the more accomplished entries in Troma Entertainment’s canon of Z-grade cheapies as well as the Marvel Cinematic Universe, bringing greater proficiency to the bottom of the barrel and a looser sense of personality to the blockbuster. Caught in the awkward middle ground of quasi-prestige TV, however, his technique as a director lands in a less satisfying in-between, too polished to be schlock and too modest in scale to run with the superhero big dogs. Gunn works well in close quarters, the first season’s highlight sequences almost all being contained mano-a-mano fights. But too often, the televisual terrain proves inhospitable for him, as a storyteller and stylist of action. Like so many streaming series in recent years, with their odd run times and small episode orders, this one’s trying to fill its 40ish-minute installments with a feature’s worth of narrative. Peacemaker, his BFF Vigilante (Freddie Stroma, doing Rorschach from Watchmen as a huge dork), and his black-op handlers face a twofer of threats, the combined might of which still leave these episodes feeling padded and sparse. As the head honcho of the local neo-Nazi contingent, Peacemaker’s father (Robert Patrick) lands at odds with his monomaniacally driven son, and an invasion of the body snatchers plays out elsewhere in their Pacific north-west suburb of Evergreen. Assorted subplots checking in with such members of the squad as disrespected tech nerd Economos (Steve Agee) and newbie Adebayo (Danielle Brooks) go nowhere, their personal business offering more distraction than character shading. Cena himself is the show’s strongest attribute, his veiny musculature lending a much-needed weight to face-offs that falter when ramping up the plastic-looking CGI. It’s something like physical comedy that the bass has been cranked into the red every time he hits a wall or floor, letting us feel the heaviness of his elephantine body. He’s well-suited to the role as a budding comic performer too, his alpha-man-boy bluster the ideal fit for Gunn’s sophomoric hijinks. (Cena’s goofy bulldog self-seriousness brings to mind Danny McBride, a comparison that really clicks when that actor’s constant collaborator Jody Hill stops by to direct an episode.) In spite of his dedicated douchebaggery, Peacemaker’s a likable lunkhead easy to spend time with, the main raison d’etre for a series that dims whenever he’s not onscreen. He’s locked on to a serviceable shtick, even if its pull-my-finger gags worked better alongside an ensemble of equally colorful wackos in film form. At his best, he wears down our grownup defenses and taps into the Mountain-Dew-chugging, loogie-hocking teenage dirtbag laying dormant within all of us. Peacemaker launches on HBO Max in the US and Binge in Australia on 13 January, with a UK date to be announced.An audience wearing face masks sits around the edges of a nondescript room in an unassuming building in the centre of Nairobi. Sparsely furnished and decorated with a few posters advertising PrEP, a drug that reduces chances of contracting HIV, there is a low hum of excited chatter. Then the speakers crackle into action, playing Sweet Dreams by Beyoncé, and in struts Toyo, a 23-year-old transgender woman, wearing a figure-hugging sparkly blue dress accessorised with bright red painted nails and the ubiqitious face mask, in black. She walks to the end of the room, strikes a pose and struts back out. Toyo is followed by Miss K – or Kelvin, when not in drag – 24, who is wearing a red strappy dress, long black wig, fake Louboutin heels, and plenty of makeup. Toyo and Miss K are in the Dolls – a group of gay, transgender and non-binary people who volunteer at Ishtar, a drop-in centre for men who have sex with men, and the venue for today’s show. For half an hour or so, members of the Dolls model an array of outfits on their makeshift catwalk and perform two lip-synced songs. The Dolls formed in late 2018 with four members. Now they are 35, an example of the growing confidence of the LGBTQ+ community in Kenya, where homosexuality is criminalised and people face stigma, discrimination and violence. Ishtar, which receives funding from the Global Fund, belongs to the Gay and Lesbian Coalition of Kenya which began in 2006 with six organisations under its umbrella. Now there are about 20 member groups, including some in rural areas, according to Peter Njane, Ishtar’s director. Njane says verbal abuse and discrimination remain but adds: “I’m seeing hope because we are seeing gay men out and about … A lot of changes have happened in this country.” Toyo, one of the Dolls’ founding members, first heard about Ishtar from a gay man in her neighbourhood. “I was excited when I was told about an organisation like that,” she says. “I thought I was alone in this world. In my village, everyone threw stones at me saying “You’re so feminine, you’re so this …” Volunteering at Ishtar, Toyo found a sense of community and began thinking about how she could spread the word. She had done some modelling and had a large following on Instagram, so teamed up with other volunteers and started experimenting with fashion, makeup and performing. Then she saw RuPaul’s Drag Race – a US reality television show that documents a search for drag stars – and was immediately inspired. “I saw myself in RuPaul – I could get into character, look perfect, everyone was happy. Then I got out of character and no one could remember me. It’s like you’re two people in one body,” she says. “We could only do these events, wear the clothes and makeup, at Ishtar. Outside, we are very different people.” It wasn’t long before people started asking to join the group. Kelvin first saw the Dolls perform in 2018 when he was studying at fashion school. He joined last year after he couldn’t afford to continue his studies. As Miss K, his first performance was lip-syncing to Whitney Houston’s I Will Always Love You in front of about 70 people. “I cross-dressed in school and in public, but I wasn’t as happy,” he says. “In Kenya, when you cross-dress, people say something is wrong with you. They pray for you to get demons out of you. I wasn’t doing it with other members of the LGBTQ+ community – people who know me, appreciate me for who I am.” He adds: “The Dolls support each other, mentor you. If there’s a problem, you can tell them.” Before Covid hit, the Dolls were gaining momentum and had started being invited to perform at other LGBTQ+ organisations and some private events. They had introduced an annual Miss Ishtar pageant. Despite problems caused by the pandemic, Toyo has big plans for the Dolls’ future. She wants to create a clothes line for their fashion shows. Currently, buying outfits, accessories, shoes and makeup is a challenge. Sometimes members get women to buy items, or buy in bulk and from charity shops to avoid unwanted attention, then customise outfits on the sewing machine at Ishtar. She gets messages from people across Kenya, from Mombasa and Kisumu, asking how they can set up their own version of the Dolls. “We are like a pilot project everyone is looking at,” says Toyo. “We want to make the Dolls stronger and an example for others, and have other branches. It is through these events that we create awareness; I hope we can go to the mainstream media where people will stop judging us on our sexuality and start seeing our talent, our ability to do other things … It’s about diversity, teaching other people about who we are.” The Global Fund and their partners provided transport for the Guardian in Kenya Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Over the years, footballers agitating for a transfer have concocted all manner of schemes and ruses in an attempt to secure their dream move. The well-placed media briefing: classic. Refusing to turn up for pre-season training: an old favourite. Few players, however, have gone to the trouble of commissioning and writing a 220-page graphic novel purely for the purpose of earning a move to Real Madrid. You didn’t need to a be a literature scholar to glimpse the subtext of “Je M’Appelle Kylian”, the comic-book autobiography released by Kylian Mbappé in November in collaboration with the illustrator Faro. The young Mbappé makes no secret of his desire to play for Real Madrid when he is older, to the point where in one early passage he is even visited in a dream by Cristiano Ronaldo and Zinedine Zidane. In the dream, Ronaldo and Mbappé do keepie-uppies while Zidane hands him a freshly laundered white Madrid kit. Later, Mbappé is invited to Madrid for real, an experience he describes as “the best of his life”. Later still, Mbappé is at Monaco when Paris Saint-Germain come in with a record-breaking bid. “Are you sure about your choice?” Mbappé’s mother asks him. “You know that Madrid still want to sign you. You’re not going to get bored in Ligue 1?” At which point, Mbappé’s representatives inform them they are close to an agreement with PSG that will see Mbappé earning €18m a year plus bonuses. “Ummm, that’s not bad,” Mbappé grimaces, with a grudging acceptance that the wheels of this high-end transfer had been irrevocably set in motion. I mean, as graphic metaphor goes, Maus this is not. And yet as Mbappé enters the last six months of his contract at PSG and his move to Real begins to take on a ring of inevitability, it’s worth re-examining the basic absurdity of what is being proposed here. One of the world’s richest clubs – under no real financial pressure – is about to lose one of the world’s best players for nothing, in part because Ronaldo visited him in a dream. Someone here, you feel, is getting mugged off. Watching Mbappé in PSG’s rain-sodden 1-1 draw at Lyon on Sunday night offered a few clues. Mbappé wasn’t the best player on the pitch, or very possibly the best player on his own side (that was probably Marquinhos). But as PSG – already 10 points clear in Ligue 1 – toiled at a deserted Stade Groupama, somehow the moments when Mbappé got the ball were the only times the game seemed to mean anything at all. He dipped and swerved and wriggled out of three-man challenges. He hit the post with a free-kick from a heroically unpromising angle. At his best Mbappé takes the game into new places, unfamiliar places; places you didn’t think football could go. The contrast with what was unfolding around him was stark. For all their bloodless excellence, PSG seem a particularly unhappy club at the moment, on the pitch as well as off. Every attack seems strained. Every win feels like a temporary relief from agony. Every new week seems to bring fresh revelations from the dressing room, a sort of sporting Great Gatsby where everyone is partying but nobody is really having any fun. A couple of weeks ago a big L’Equipe exposé lifted the lid on the many fissures at the club. The indulgence of Lionel Messi, who reportedly missed training the morning after a private party to celebrate his Ballon d’Or win, has been met with indignation. Keylor Navas and Gianluigi Donnarumma are currently engaged in a gloriously bitchy fracas over the goalkeeper’s jersey. Mauro Icardi’s marriage has been in crisis. Meanwhile, Achraf Hakimi is said to be unhappy with the lack of defensive structure (to which the only response is: did you not read the letterhead? Who, exactly, did you think was signing you?) Few individuals capture this malaise like the increasingly forlorn Mauricio Pochettino, the alchemist-coach who seems more tangential with every passing week. Putatively, he’s the man in charge. In reality he’s little more than a bystander, the coaching equivalent of Rowan, the training instructor in The Office: helplessly looking on as the lovelorn Icardi bares his soul, Mbappé describes his ultimate fantasy in unsparing detail (“Ronaldo. Zidane. I’m just watching”) and Neymar strums Freelove Freeway on his acoustic guitar. This is, if you think about it, quite some achievement. A 37-year-old Qatari billionaire buys a football club with an unlimited budget to attract the world’s best players to one of its greatest cities. Over the course of a decade he wins seven league titles by a combined margin of 101 points. On paper – and let’s set aside the morality of the thing for a minute – this sounds like the most riotously fun project in the history of football. And yet for some reason, it’s not. It feels malcontent and unsatisfying and overwrought and over-serious and thoroughly joyless. Is this why Mbappé is leaving? Probably not, although it certainly doesn’t help. On one level perhaps this is just a loveless marriage that has simply run its course, as well the fulfilment of an inexorable childhood dream. And yet whatever Mbappé’s motivations it’s hard not to see this as a judgment on PSG too: a club that for all its riches seems to have lost its way, lost itself, forgotten why it got into this in the first place. When you have all the money in the world, few players are ever truly irreplaceable. And yet PSG may just discover that Mbappé is one of them.An Indiana state senator has backtracked on his remarks that teachers must be impartial when discussing nazism in classrooms after he sparked widespread backlash. During a state senate committee hearing last week about Senate Bill 167, a proposed bill that would ban “concepts that divide”, the Republican senator Scott Baldwin, who co-wrote the bill, said teachers should remain unprejudiced when teaching lessons about fascism and nazism. “Marxism, nazism, fascism … I have no problem with the education system providing instruction on the existence of those ‘isms’,” Baldwin said, adding, “I believe we’ve gone too far when we take a position … We need to be impartial.” He went on to say that teachers should “just provide the facts” and that he is “not sure it’s right for us to determine how that child should think and that’s where I’m trying to provide the guardrails”. Baldwin has since walked back on his remarks. In an email to the Indianapolis Star last Thursday, he said that his intention with the bill was to make sure teachers are being impartial when discussing and teaching “legitimate political groups”. “When I was drafting this bill, my intent with regard to ‘political affiliation’ was to cover political parties within the legal American political system,” Baldwin said. “In my comments during committee, I was thinking more about the big picture and trying to say that we should not tell kids what to think about politics.” He went on to denounce the aforementioned ideologies, saying, “nazism, Marxism and fascism are a stain on our world history and should be regarded as such, and I failed to adequately articulate that in my comments during the meeting. I believe that kids should learn about these horrible events in history so that we don’t experience them again in humanity.” SB 167 was filed in recent weeks in response to the fierce debates that have emerged across Indiana and the rest of the country in the past year regarding the ways schools should teach children about racism, history and other subject matters. The bill prohibits kindergarten through 12th grade schools from teaching students that “any sex, race, ethnicity, religion, color, national origin, or political affiliation” is inherently superior, inferior, racist, sexist, oppressive. Teachers would also be prohibited from making individuals feel “discomfort, guilt, anguish, responsibility or any other form of psychological distress” when it comes to meritocracy and the notion that it was created by one group to oppress another. The bill also prohibits teachers and curriculums from teaching that Indiana and the United States was founded as a racist or sexist state or nation. The midwest chapter of the Anti-Defamation League has criticized Baldwin’s apology, arguing that it “doesn’t change the deep harms of using ‘impartiality’ or ‘neutrality’ as tools to sanitize history”. “This is part of the continued efforts by some to try and rewrite history and characterize extremism, racism, and genocide as somehow legitimate. That is dangerous and despicable. It should be categorically, universally, and loudly rejected,” the organization added. The incident comes less than three months after a north Texas school official said that classrooms with books on Holocaust must offer “opposing” viewpoints.Who will keep wicket? As if Jos Buttler’s Ashes series had not been painful enough, a campaign that included one particularly humiliating drop – to spare a century-bound Marnus Labuschagne in Adelaide – and a combined 45 runs across his last six innings has ended with a broken finger and an early flight home. Buttler averages 35.68 in 20 Tests as a specialist batter compared with 29.60 in 37 as wicketkeeper, including just 19.04 against Australia at home and away, leaving his long-term place in the team in doubt. First a new keeper has to be found to end the series. Jonny Bairstow, the obvious candidate, has his own injury to nurse, and though Ollie Pope did admirably as stand-in in Sydney Sam Billings is widely expected to make his Test debut. At 30 Billings has experience across all formats and also as a captain, but he has only played 11 first-class matches in the last three years, keeping wicket in just two of those. This will not be an easy audition. Time to switch up the seamers again? Given their struggles getting the Kookaburra to swing the only curveballs England have produced in Australia have been with their team selections. Stuart Broad and Jimmy Anderson watched from the sidelines as the opening Test was played on a green pitch, Mark Wood and Jack Leach missed the second, Broad was eased out again for the third. The series has exposed the English bowlers’ limitations but also their qualities, with Wood’s pace in particular discomfiting the Australians. He was hit on the foot in being trapped lbw by Pat Cummins in Sydney and is dealing with the resulting bruise, while Ben Stokes’ injury seems likely to keep the ball out of his hands in Hobart. Who knows what surprises England have in store, but Ollie Robinson and Chris Woakes, the unlikely new-ball pairing in the opening game, stand by for potential returns. Another opening reshuffle It is a sad fact that England’s most successful opener in the last five years – of those who have performed the role more than once – has been Jack Leach even though in one of his two attempts he was out for one. The tourists go into the final game of the series wondering whether Rory Burns, discarded after the first two matches, is less of a liability than Haseeb Hameed, who since the opening game has scored 6, 0, 0, 7, 6 and 9. Hameed, who spent five years in the international wilderness after his breakthrough in India in 2016, now seems likely to return there, with Burns and Dawid Malan the most obvious candidates to replace him. Zak Crawley’s place is secure after his 77 in Sydney. The 23-year-old does not always please the purists but it was a fine innings, impressive particularly against the short ball, and across the series only Travis Head (twice) has faced 50 or more balls with a superior strike rate to his 77. Expect more experimentation when England head to the West Indies in March. Root’s batting It is ridiculously premature to label this a problem given Root famously ended 2021 with 1,708 runs across the calendar year at an average of 61. But by the end of the year a cloud had formed on his horizon, and it was Scott Boland-shaped. It was the 32-year-old who, on his debut, ended the final innings of Root’s annus mirabilis in Melbourne, and since his half-century in the first knock of that game the England captain has faced 22 Boland deliveries, hit one scoring shot and been dismissed three times, twice caught in the slips and once by the wicketkeeper. Thankfully Boland is nursing sore ribs which were bruised when he fell in his follow-through in Sydney and might not be cleared to play in the final Test. Can they end the series on something of a high? It is possible to argue that given their lack of preparation England were always going to flop in their first few matches of the series, and rather than wallowing in that misery their fans should revel in Sydney’s signs that the giant is finally rousing. It is wise not to go overboard here, but despite his injury Stokes batted excellently in the fourth Test, as did the returning Bairstow, while Leach bowled better and to better fields. There is no hiding from England’s inferiority across the series, but with a strong performance in Hobart their failure will at least be given a sheen of respectability. And perhaps the series might end with Anderson adding another record to his growing collection: he is just 14 runs away from becoming the highest-scoring No 11 of all time.Nilüfer Yanya may have grown up in Chelsea, but hers is not the world of the Sloane Ranger 2.0: pristine Georgian townhouses and endless champagne brunches. Instead, it is the manic, deadening, claustrophobic side of the city that radiates through her work: on recent single Stabilise, the 26-year-old sings of never-ending high rises, filled with small flats “rotten to the core”. “Grey concrete,” she says. “I see that immediately when the song starts. A literal grey but also an emotional grey.” Today we are in the first kind of London – a posh, gleaming, pink-accented coffee shop in Bayswater – discussing Yanya’s upcoming second album, Painless, a collection of prickly, occasionally jazzy, and always catchy post-punk that lands somewhere between Joy Division, King Krule and PJ Harvey. It is the sequel to 2019’s rave-reviewed Miss Universe, a record that heralded this unassuming, smiley woman as one of Britain’s most exciting new rock stars. And yet, in spite of her uniformly excellent output, Yanya’s rise seems highly unusual. Not because it was sparked by a flukey moment of internet-fuelled hype – but because it wasn’t. Instead, it involved nothing more newfangled than gigging around London throughout her teens and early 20s, signing to an independent label and, then, more of the same. Granted, she was offered some (questionable) shortcuts along the way, such as the time she dodged involvement in a doomed manufactured girl band with links to One Direction’s Louis Tomlinson, an industry approach Yanya sums up as: “‘Let’s go and pinch some young people, tell them we’re going to make a really successful group but we’re obviously going to make a lot more money than them.’ It’s a very selfish thing to do.” Even more so considering she heard the entire project was unceremoniously ditched a year later. In any case, being a pop star was never on Yanya’s radar. You don’t make sour, spiky, impressionistic rock songs if you want to be top of the charts, or, indeed, if you want to surf the zeitgeist: Painless doesn’t exactly correspond with the current sound of young London. Do her friends listen to guitar music? “Not massively,” she admits. It’s also not the music some people expected her to make, going by her name (her father is Turkish) and her appearance (she is mixed race). “Some people have [described it as] R&amp;B and it’s like: where are you getting that from? There’s a very small element of that in any music I’ve released.” It was boys with guitars that shaped her musical ambitions from the start. A talented pianist as a child, she was turned on to “pop-rock, skater-punk, and the Strokes” by her elder sister. “It was weird because I didn’t really listen to any female singers; the only music that was ‘credible’ was by guys. Obviously I never realised that, I just thought this is cool. I didn’t think ‘I feel excluded.’” Without seeing any women doing it, how did she know she could? “I just wanted to try. I guess I wasn’t worrying about it being commercially successful; I wasn’t thinking: how am I going to make this a TikTok hit.” Not that she’s totally off the hook in that regard: she is now being encouraged by her team to promote her wares on the platform: “It’s a young person’s thing; I feel like I’m past that. Can’t I just be an adult now?!” For Yanya, adulthood hasn’t only involved a creeping ambivalence towards social media; it has also turned her attention towards her Turkish heritage. Painless features a saz, the stringed instrument her father used to play around the house, and she has recently started taking Turkish lessons. Her younger self shared none of this enthusiasm. “When you grow up here and your parents are from other countries, you want to disassociate in some way,” she says. “You’re like: ‘No, I just want to be from London, I don’t want to have to deal with all this other stuff.’” She still feels like she’s only just starting to understand Turkish culture: “I don’t really know anything. My mum’s Irish and Bajan so there’s so much going on, I don’t really know myself most of the time.” It doesn’t help that the music industry tends to treat her background in a reductive, flattening way. “‘You’re Turkish, great, we’ve got that covered’ or ‘You’re mixed race, cool, got that ticked.’ They’re like: ‘Well we need people who aren’t just white now, but you still look white so that’s even better.’” One weapon against industry cynicism is to surround yourself with people who genuinely have your best interests at heart – and Yanya has managed to keep her career a family affair. At 16, she recorded her first song in her uncle’s Cornwall studio, a tradition she has continued with Painless. Her younger sister, Elif, sometimes joins her on tour as a backing singer, while her elder sister Molly directs her music videos. With Molly, she has also set up an initiative called Artists in Transit that brings creative workshops to refugee children, initially in Greece and now in London. “You’re just talking to people, making nice things,” explains Yanya. “Their parents just want them to have a nice time no matter where they are, so we’re playing to that. I don’t know how to help people get out of that situation, [but] I think the first step is getting to know people and bridging some sort of gap.” As the child of two visual artists, creativity has been a constant in Yanya’s life. But the arts, she notes, seem increasingly undervalued in the UK. A case in point: she attended Pimlico School, known for fostering music talent (alumni include La Roux’s Elly Jackson, Roots Manuva and Dave Okumu of the Invisible, who also taught Yanya music there). Halfway through her education, the school was converted into an academy and music teaching cut by half. She despairs of the way creativity has become “a luxury. It shouldn’t be something for people that have extra money or extra time. Why can’t everyone take part?”. School music lessons, giving young refugees a creative outlet: the arts are not just a nice-to-have, says Yanya, they are an essential. “It’s a way of communicating, it crosses cultures. When you cut people off from being able to do that, it’s like cutting off an arm.” It’s not difficult to agree – and if anyone remains sceptical about the benefits of encouraging creativity in childhood, an encounter with Yanya’s exhilarating music is sure to change their minds. Painless is released on 4 March.It’s a point in 2022’s favour that, rather than violent insurrection or the misery of lockdown, most English-speaking people on the internet are currently preoccupied with a harmless word game. Harmless at the time of writing, I should say – it’s popular enough that some kind of backlash is inevitable. I’m sure any day now Wordle will be revealed as a Bad Thing and I don’t want to speculate how; I am merely here to observe that it is a) a lot of fun b) linguistically interesting, and I’d like to explain why. I may even be able to make you a bit better at it. If you don’t already know, Wordle is a browser-based puzzle that gives you six goes at guessing a five-letter word. If your guess includes a letter that’s correct but in the wrong place, it turns yellow (more like ochre – now there’s a good starting word for you). If it includes a letter that’s correct and in the right place, it turns green, allowing you to build on your guesses until you hit the jackpot. The solution to the Wordle in the screenshot above is “craze”. It’s helpful to understand what Wordle is mainly testing, and I think there are a couple of things: first, your knowledge of the frequency of individual letters in the English language – that is, how common they are (think of the value of letters in scrabble – “q” is 10 because it’s harder to find words that use it, whereas “e” is 1). So it would be unwise, for example, to use “hyrax” as your first guess. More interestingly, though, it probes your instinct for how letters can be combined. Very often you find yourself thinking: I’ve got an “o” an “r” and a “t”. Do many English words end in “o”? Is “t” a good bet to start the word with? Should it be followed by “r”, or should there be a vowel in between them? OK, so most of us will have a sense of how to answer these questions already, because we use words every day and have a gut feeling for which sequences are possible where, and which aren’t allowed at all (“ng”, for example, is pretty common in English, but never at the beginning of a word, and “lng” never appears anywhere). But linguistics can help a bit. There is actually a whole branch of it that looks at the way sounds enter into sequences, and it’s called phonotactics. Each language has its own phonotactic constraints – such as the rule that says “ng” can’t start a word in English (it can, and does, in Māori and Swahili). Then there are rules that determine the possible order of consonants in a syllable: “tr” is fine at the beginning of a syllable but not the end, and the reverse is true for “rt”. “Bl” and “lb” follow the same pattern. That’s not actually a coincidence. There’s a mechanism behind it called the “sonority sequencing principle” or SSP. Certain sounds, often “hard” ones like “t”, “b” or “g”, are not very sonorous, or resonant. Softer sounds like “r”, “l” and “w” are a bit more sonorous, and vowels are very sonorous. In a syllable that contains consonant clusters, the less sonorous sounds will tend to appear at the beginning, there will be a sonority peak in the form of a vowel, and then a gradual downward slope back to something less sonorous. “Blurb” is a lovely example of this, as is “twerk” or “plump”. “Rbubl”, an impossible word, violates SSP because “r” is more sonorous than “b”, and “b” is less sonorous than “l”. Within this framework, some combinations of sounds are seen way more often than others: “tr” and “pr” are everywhere, but “dw” is pretty unusual, appearing in “dwell” and “dweeb”, with “dz” rarer still – “adzes” may be the only Wordle-able example. Why do we see this rise and fall pattern with sonority? Basically, it makes things easier for both the speaker (the transition between sounds requires less effort if there’s a gradient rather than a sudden leap) and the hearer (syllables are more distinct when there are less sonorous, more abrupt sounds at the edges). As a bizarre aside, some researchers believe that climate has an effect on the ratio of sonorous to not-so-sonorous sounds in a language. In places with higher temperatures, which can distort high frequency sounds, languages may have fewer consonants and simpler syllables as a result. Anyway, the reason it’s useful to think about SSP when you’re Wordle-ing is because it can guide you towards more likely sequences and away from unlikely or impossible ones. There is something to beware of here, however, and it’s the fact that in English there often isn’t a one-to-one correspondence between sounds and letters. “Sh” is actually one sound, not a combination of “s” and “h” – but it’s still represented by two letters, whereas “e” can indicate no sound at all, as in “craze”, which ends phonetically with a “z”. SSP was described with sounds in mind, and doesn’t always work perfectly with letters. I await a version of Wordle for linguistic purists that uses the international phonetic alphabet, but until then, a little bit of phonotactics might still be enough to give you an edge. Good luck! David Shariatmadari is the author of Don’t Believe a Word: From Myths to Misunderstandings – How Language Really WorksHere are the main stories on Tuesday, 11 January: The Australian Border Force is investigating whether Novak Djokovic made a false travel claim on his visa application, as immigration minister Alex Hawke continues to consider whether to again cancel the tennis star’s visa; There are more than 3,500 Covid patients in hospitals nationwide, including 2,186 in NSW, 816 in Victoria, 502 in Qld and 211 in SA; NSW reports 25,870 new Covid cases and 11 deaths, Victoria 37,944 cases and 13 deaths, Qld 20,566 cases after testing glitch fixed, SA 2,921 cases, ACT 1,508 cases and one death, Tasmania 1,379 cases, NT 594. A bushfire is threatening parts of south-west Western Australia; The Queensland chief health officer urges people to stop “pox parties” aimed at spreading Covid; and General practitioners call for “urgent improvements” to the children’s vaccine rollout. We will see you back here tomorrow. We’re well into this twilight zone where much of the latest economic data is a bit dated because it takes in the post-Delta blip as the lockdowns came off for NSW and Victoria (and the ACT), without capturing the subsequent and current Omicron drop. For instance, we had November retail trade figures from the ABS, showing business rising 7.3% in November, or double the market consensus of 3.6%, according to the CBA. The CBA said in a note: The post Delta lockdown recovery was strong. We expect a cautious household will see January retail sales weaken, as isolation requirements and risk aversion returns to some degree. Staff shortages in hospitality and retail settings will also impact the demand and supply of some goods and services. A flavour of that turmoil is picked up in this article by Ben Butler and I, with industry groups worrying that without the assistance given to businesses this time around, Omicron’s turmoil could be worse than during the depths of Delta’s. The other big eco information out on Tuesday was Australia’s trade balance coming in at a $9.42bn surplus. That’s down on previous months, and the peak of $13.65bn last July, but Australia is exporting a little under a third more than we are importing so that supports our dollar, for one thing. Anyway, the interesting bits are probably that coal, iron ore and gas exports dropped (as prices fell) in November, while rural goods exports jumped 13% thanks in large part to good rains in much of the country. Imports, too, were on the up in November, rising 6.3%, with household electrical goods up almost 20% presumably filling up shops that had already moved so much home entertainment gear during the lockdowns they needed restocking. Consumer confidence dropped 2.2% at the start of this year, though, as ANZ Roy Morgan noted in their survey out today. Richard Forbes, the chief executive of Independent Food Distributors Australia, which supplies food deliveries to hospitals and nursing homes, says not enough has been done to support the sector during the Omicron wave. He told The Australian: There is much discussion around keeping food on the shelves of supermarkets but little on the importance of maintaining food deliveries to the 1500 hospitals and nursing homes for patients, doctors and nursing staff. Here is a full story on the unfolding issues we mentioned earlier today regarding the ambulance service in Victoria: Poor access to testing and long delays in receiving results are compounding the challenges faced by regional and rural communities amid the Omicron wave of Covid-19, health professionals and local representatives say. The full story is here: Finger lickin’ bad. AAP reports that the Serbian prime minister Ana Brnabic told Scott Morrison earlier today to treat Novak Djokovic with dignity. While we brought you news of the phone call between the prime ministers earlier today, this AAP report outlines the Serbian view of the conversation: Prime Minister Scott Morrison’s Serbian counterpart has asked that the two governments work closely on issues concerning tennis star Novak Djokovic’s visa. The prime minister’s office said Mr Morrison had a constructive call with Serbian Prime Minister Ana Brnabic on Tuesday morning. In the call, Mr Morrison explained Australia’s non-discriminatory border policy and its role in protecting the country during the COVID-19 pandemic. The leaders agreed to stay in contact on the issue, and to further strengthening the bilateral relationship. Serbia’s public broadcaster, RTS, reported the Serbian prime minister asked Mr Morrison to ensure the tennis star was treated with dignity. “The (Serbian) prime minister especially emphasised the importance of the conditions for training and physical preparation for the upcoming competition, considering that Novak Djokovic was not allowed to train in the previous days, and the tournament in Melbourne starts this weekend,” RTS reported. “The prime minister also asked (Mr) Morrison to be in direct contact in the coming days and for all information to be exchanged directly between the government of Serbia and the government of Australia.” It comes as the fallout over the cancellation of Djokovic’s visa - which was then overturned - continues to make international headlines. Following the court decision, which the government says was “on a procedural ground”, Immigration Minister Alex Hawke is considering whether to use his discretionary powers to cancel Djokovic’s visa. On Tuesday afternoon, Mr Hawke’s spokesman said: “In line with due process, minister Hawke will thoroughly consider the matter.” “As the issue is ongoing, for legal reasons it is inappropriate to comment further,” the spokesman said. Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews said the Australian Open was bigger than one player but that he was not lobbying Mr Hawke to act either way. Labor frontbencher Kristina Keneally said the Djokovic saga is a lose-lose for the federal government, as the fallout over his immigration detention and visa issue continues. Thanks for the afternoon delight Mostafa. Let’s see what the evening brings. And with that I return the blog to the capable hands of Nino Bucci. Thanks for reading. An out of control bushfire is raging in south-west Western Australia, with authorities warning it could be too late to evacuate homes. Eagle Bay, Naturaliste and Dunsborough near Busselton are all under threat, with emergency warnings still in place. Residents are urged to shelter in their homes in a room away from the fire front and to make sure they can easily escape. “If your home catches on fire and the conditions inside become unbearable, you need to get out and go to an area that has already been burnt,” the Department of Fire and Emergency Services warned. A bushfire Watch and Act is in place for people north of Caves Road and west of Cape Naturaliste Road in parts of Naturaliste and Dunsborough. Earlier today, WA police commissioner Chris Dawson said the fire was “uncontrolled and uncontained”. It is a significant concern for those people that live in the Eagle Bay community. It’s too late for you to leave. If your home catches on fire and the conditions become unbearable, you need to get out. Last night, Ambulance Victoria issued its second “code red” in a week, with the latest one lasting for four hours, as a result of the pressures from the pandemic. In a statement, the emergency services said it declared a “code red” between 11.20pm on Monday, and 3.30am on Tuesday. The global COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a significant and unprecedented impact on health systems including Ambulance Victoria and hospital emergency departments. Ambulance Victoria has a detailed Emergency Response Plan and escalation procedures to effectively manage a surge in workload and demand. The Victorian Ambulance Union told the Sydney Morning Herald there were 135 “pending” cases during the night, with 20 at one point requiring an ambulance with lights and sirens. Under code red protocols, people are directed to use taxis to get to the hospital, and non-emergency vehicles can be used for emergency events. The declaration was previously used during the black Saturday bushfires and during the deadly thunderstorm asthma event of 2016. It has now been issued twice in seven days. We begin where everything begins today: with Novak Djokovic. This time, reports have emerged that immigration minister Alex Hawke will NOT make a decision today on whether to cancel Djokovic’s visa or not: Good afternoon, and a thanks to Nino Bucci and Caitlin Cassidy for their stellar work today, Mostafa Rachwani with you for the next little bit. I’m taking a break but Mostafa Rachwani has taken the wheel, so you’re in good hands. The statement from Hall and Wilcox confirms tennis star Novak Djokovic received an exemption to the law firm’s office vaccination policy in order to be able to attend for yesterday’s hearing. It does not say a whole lot other than that, but here it is in full: Hall &amp; Wilcox is acting for Novak Djokovic in relation to the successful motion to quash the cancellation of his visa to enter Australia. Natalie Bannister has led this matter since Mr Djokovic’s arrival in Australia, supported by Penelope Ford, Graydon Dowd and a team of lawyers and support professionals. Hall &amp; Wilcox briefed counsel including Paul Holdenson QC, Nick Wood SC, Nik Dragojlovic and Jim Hartley. The issue involves whether Mr Djokovic was treated properly and provided procedural fairness when he entered the country. Judge Kelly ordered that the decision to cancel Mr Djokovic’s visa be quashed and that Mr Djokovic be released from detention. Natalie and the team have worked extremely hard and under intense pressure to support Mr Djokovic and successfully have his visa reinstated. We are proud of this result and delighted for our client. Mr Djokovic attended our Melbourne office for the hearing. This attendance was in accordance with our COVID-19 vaccination policy, under a medical exemption approved by our COVID officer and Managing Partner. We understand that there is a lot of interest in the case. We will comment further in due course. Australian tennis player Bernard Tomic has claimed during a match to qualify for the Australian Open (which he lost) that he has Covid, but has not been able to be tested. It might seem like an odd week in tennis, but then you see Tomic doing stuff like this and all seems well with the world again. We’ve asked the government whether the investigation into Novak Djokovic’s declaration he hadn’t travelled in the fortnight before his travel will form part of the decision to cancel his visa. A spokesman for immigration minister Alex Hawke said: As noted yesterday in the Federal Circuit and Family Court, Minister Hawke is considering whether to cancel Mr Djokovic’s visa under section 133C(3) of the Migration Act. In line with due process, Minister Hawke will thoroughly consider the matter. As the issue is ongoing, for legal reasons it is inappropriate to comment further. Here’s our full report on the Covid situation in Queensland, taking in the press conference earlier today: Tasmania’s state health commander has contracted Covid, AAP reports: Tasmania’s state health commander Kathrine Morgan-Wicks has tested positive to coronavirus and is isolating at home. Ms Morgan-Wicks says she is asymptomatic and will continue working in the role, as well as in her position as health department secretary. She returned a positive result on Tuesday afternoon after being tested in the morning. “I am asymptomatic but undertook a PCR test ... following a member of my household developing mild symptoms and being confirmed as a positive case,” she said. Ms Morgan-Wicks said she was “currently well”. Members of her household are in quarantine as close contacts. Tasmania recorded 1379 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, with the number of people being treated in hospital for virus symptoms dropping to seven. The cases are made up of 1015 self-reported positive rapid antigen tests and 364 PCR tests, taking the state’s number of active infections to 8356. The health department says seven people are being treated in hospital specifically for COVID-19, down from 11 reported on Monday. Another 11 people with the virus are in hospital for unrelated medical conditions. Fifty positive cases are staying in community management clinics, while 278 are being monitored under the COVID-at-home system. Tasmania’s Child Health and Parenting Service is reducing client service delivery until February 4 to allow nursing staff to focus on broader health system requirements. Two inmates at Risdon Prison outside Hobart have reportedly tested positive. The state recorded four new cases, one of which is suspected to have been infectious in the community. If this is confirmed, it would be only the third Omicron case who was not in quarantine during their entire infectious period. Exposure sites have been listed in Perth, including a supermarket, post office, and two pharmacies. The Australian Border Force is investigating whether Novak Djokovic incorrectly declared he had not travelled and would not do so for two weeks before his flight to Australia, in the latest twist in the tennis star’s visa cancellation saga. Questions have been raised about the declaration completed by an agent for Djokovic, with social media posts seemingly showing he was in Belgrade on Christmas Day before flying to Australia from Spain on 4 January. Djokovic’s agent and lawyers have been contacted for comment. The full story is here: There were 2,921 new cases reported today (down from 4,024 yesterday) but hospital admissions increased from 188 to 211. The state also reported one death. AAP reports that the Northern Territory recorded 594 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours. The Northern Territory has reported 594 new COVID-19 infections as authorities attempt to calm community fears about the spread and severity of the virus. At Tuesday’s daily briefing, Deputy Chief Minister Nicole Manison focused on hospital admissions over case numbers, saying they remain low. “There are 32 patients in hospitals across the territory but only 11 of them are classified as acute admissions,” she told reporters. “This represents 0.42 per cent of all active cases, which still remains low.” Across the NT there are about 2600 active COVID-19 infections, which is the equivalent of about one per cent of the territory’s population. About 300 of these are in central Australia after 65 people, many in Alice Springs, tested positive overnight. It includes five aged care facility residents at Old Timers Village. Ms Manison said the facility’s vaccination rate was high and none of the infected residents were showing symptoms. “The total case count for Alice is in line with the percentage of the territory population,” she said. “It is not surprising. It is not alarming.” Ms Manison also urged infected Territorians to use the NT government’s COVID-19 website and online tools to declare they had tested positive after calls to its hotline tripled on Tuesday and wait times “blew out”. Meanwhile, Yuendumu and Yuelamu, about 295km northwest of Alice Springs, remain in lockout until Saturday with another three people testing positive overnight. It brings the total number of virus infections in low vaccination Yuendumu to 18. Extra health staff have been sent to the town to help with virus testing and vaccinations. “One thing I want to say which was very disappointing was that we only saw 11 vaccinations in the last 24 hours,” Ms Manison said. Vaccination rates remain stubbornly low in the town, with only 65 per cent of the 675 residents aged 16 and over electing to have a jab, and just 41 per cent double dosed. Ms Manison was also forced to clarify confusion about the territory’s day-old vaccine pass. She said only business serving alcohol were required to check patrons were vaccinated, not all cafes and restaurants. ACT Health has reported a significant jump in cases, from 938 to 1,508. It recorded a slight increase in hospital admissions (28, up from 25). A man in his 80s has died. Retail trade increased 7.3% in November, but the emergence of the Omicron variant in Australia since then has clouded the economic outlook, AAP reports. Australians went on a record spending spree in November, buoyed by the end of last year’s COVID-19 lockdowns. But the subsequent emergence of the highly infectious Omicron variant has clouded the outlook. Retail trade soared 7.3 per cent in November, the fourth-strongest monthly rise on record, lifting sales to their highest level ever at $33.4 billion. The previous record for sales was set in November 2020, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said on Tuesday. Victoria saw the largest increase in the month, rising 20 per cent after its Delta-variant lockdown ended in late October, and following the earlier opening up from restrictions in NSW and the ACT. Australian Retailers Association CEO Paul Zahra said retailers overall had a strong November, aided by the end of COVID restrictions, record-breaking Black Friday sales and early shopping ahead of Christmas. But he said businesses are facing fresh challenges with the rising cases of Omicron. “We’ve entered new territory in the pandemic with Omicron decimating workforces and impacting supplies and deliveries of essential goods,” Mr Zahra said. BIS Oxford Economics senior economist Sean Langcake expects the Omicron variant will have limited impact on the December sales figures, but will pose a challenge in early 2022. “Consumer caution will reduce in-store foot traffic, while disruption to supply chains and labour availability will further limit sales,” he said. Separate data showed consumer confidence has fallen across Australia as a result of the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. In the first release for 2022, the weekly ANZ-Roy Morgan consumer confidence index dropped 2.2 per cent compared to its pre-Christmas level, the last time the survey was conducted. The ABS also released international trade figures for November, which showed the surplus shrank to $9.4 billion after a downwardly revised $10.8 billion in October. Imports jumped six per cent, outpacing a two per cent increase in exports. A man has died in custody in Tasmania, AAP reports: A man has died in custody in Tasmania, with the incident to be examined by the coroner. The death occurred overnight, director of prisons Ian Thomas said in a statement on Tuesday afternoon. “On behalf of the Tasmania Prison Service I extend my sincere condolences to the family and friends of the deceased man at this difficult time,” he said. No further details, such as the man’s age or how or where his death occurred, have been released. “The Tasmania Prison Service will not be making any further comment as the matter is now the subject of an examination by the coroner,” Mr Thomas said. “This is standard practice whenever a death occurs in a corrections environment.” General practitioners have called for “urgent improvements” to the children’s vaccine rollout, warning supply and delivery issues mean they are “trying to vaccinate the nation’s children with one arm tied behind their back”. In a statement to the Guardian, Royal Australian College of General Practitioners president Dr Karen Price said she has warned health minister Greg Hunt directly about the problems with the children’s rollout and called for urgent change. Here’s her statement in full: The RACGP is calling for urgent improvements to recalibrate the children’s vaccine rollout so that our kids can receive at least one vaccine dose before returning to the classroom. GPs and their practice teams are trying to vaccinate the nation’s children with one arm tied behind their back. We are hearing from GPs who can’t obtain enough stock to meet demand from patients, as well as orders being cancelled at the last minute. Some practices have been allocated 50 or 100 doses a week when they have around 1,500 children on their books. It’s not hard to do the math and see we can’t keep up with demand. I have spoken with the Health Minister this morning to inform him of the challenges facing general practices. I was told any issues will be dealt with accordingly, and that GPs have already delivered 64% of the available childhood vaccinations yesterday. Most parents understandably want their children to be vaccinated before the school year begins, particularly as we’re seeing record cases in Australia and kids mixing at school has been a key driver of infections. But I can’t imagine we will achieve this at the current pace of the rollout. I am hoping our regular RACGP feedback will continue to inform and suggest areas of improvement. Circling back on the Queensland Covid numbers. A little hard to compare these with previous days, given the delays suffered by pathology providers, but today’s figures were: 20,566 new cases (include additional data from the previous day) and 4,186 home test (RAT) results. 502 patients in hospital (up from 419), 27 in ICU, six ventilated. 109,524 active cases. A vaccination rate of 87.5%, with a first dose rate of 91.1%. Gerrard also said just before those comments below that there were 2,138 Queensland healthcare staff who have tested positive for Covid, and 2,715 who are close contacts. The Queensland Covid press conference has finished. Gerrard is feeling it this press conference. He said: When you see a few [Covid] patients ... you realise they are no different from other patients that we are used to looking after and that initial anxiety settles down. I have experienced that personally myself with Covid. I experienced that with Ebola in West Africa. When you see these patients, you realise they are people like other patients and I think that anxiety will settle. [You] realise it is just another virus. There is nothing mystical ... about it. It is just a virus and in this case we have an effective vaccine, and I think that is it. I think it is what you said – fear of the unknown. It is refreshing to hear a (somewhat) new voice on Covid as we almost tick over into the third year of the pandemic. Perhaps there should be a rotation of all state CHOs, as a treat? Gerrard says he has read reports about “Covid parties”. I have read about these reports of Covid parties. They are utterly ridiculous. There is one way, the best way to get immunity to this virus, is through vaccination, not through Covid parties. They are ridiculous, so please stop them. Please stop. Interesting to hear Gerrard speak in a little more detail about the modelling (with the caveat that modelling throughout the pandemic has been rubbery, and that what the modelling shows for Queensland may not apply to Victoria, etc). Gerrard says that he expects the peaks of hospitalisations will come a week after the peak in case numbers, and that it is looking as if this will happen in the first or second week of February. This is part of the reason the Queensland government is delaying the start of the school year, he says: Gerrard is expecting the peak will be short and sharp, and removing school kids from the mix will reduce the pressures on the hospital system. D’Ath says that if she can get the Morrison government to do one thing, it is to provide the state with more home test (RAT) kits. She said: If I can get the commonwealth to do one thing, it is give us more of those self-assessment kits for people to take home, to take pressure off of the testing clinics. The Queensland health minister, Yvette D’Ath, says a software problem affected private pathology providers, causing a delay in receiving PCR test results, but that the issue had since been rectified. The chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, says hospital admissions jumped from 419 to 502 people as of 7pm last night. A man in his 70s with significant underlying medical problems also died yesterday. Gerrard says about the hospital admissions: That is expanding fairly rapidly and that is what is expected to do. They will continue based on our predictions until the beginning of February. Those numbers will become quite significant in the coming weeks until the beginning of February and hopefully the mathematical modelling is correct, it will start to decline after that. Health minister Yvette D’Ath is speaking from a vaccination centre. The state recorded 20,566 cases (including some results from the previous day because of delays impacting pathology providers). There were 4,186 of these reported from home tests. The prime minister’s office has released a read-out from the call between Scott Morrison and the Serbian prime minister, Ana Brnabić, this morning. The read-out said: The PM had a constructive call with PM Brnabić this morning on Novak Djokovic. The PM explained our non-discriminatory border policy and its role in protecting Australia during the Covid-19 pandemic. They both agreed to stay in contact on the issue, and to further strengthening the bilateral relationship. It is unclear who instigated the call. Another (somewhat less well-known) tennis player who had their Australian visa cancelled hopes Novak Djokovic can contest the grand slam. Czech doubles specialist Renata Voráčová told Reuters she was frustrated at being forced to leave Melbourne due to her visa being cancelled. She had the same exemption as Djokovic – that she had contracted Covid in the past six months. She said she contracted the virus last month and that, along with other medical issues, prevented her from getting vaccinated, but she planned to do so in future. The full comments are in this ABC story here. Thanks for your stellar work Caitlin, although I would prefer if you did not mention fire during summer (there’s enough on as it is). With that, I will pass the baton on to Nino Bucci, who will keep the fire burning this afternoon. Prime minister Scott Morrison has reportedly spoken to his Serbian counterpart, who requested direct liaison between governments about issues over Novak Djokovic’s visa, AAP reports. Serbia’s public broadcaster, RTS, reported the two spoke by phone on Monday morning. Serbian prime minister Ana Brnabić asked Morrison to ensure the tennis star was treated with dignity. RTS: The [Serbian] prime minister especially emphasised the importance of the conditions for training and physical preparation for the upcoming competition, considering that Novak Djokovic was not allowed to train in the previous days, and the tournament in Melbourne starts this weekend. The prime minister also asked Morrison to be in direct contact in the coming days and for all information to be exchanged directly between the government of Serbia and the government of Australia. The two reportedly agreed to talk again in coming days. Comment was being sought from Morrison’s office. Australia’s biggest chicken supplier, Ingham’s, says staff shortages caused by the Omicron wave are “having a significant impact on the Australian supply chain, operations, logistics and sales performance of Ingham’s, and some of its suppliers and customers”. “This has disrupted production and distribution capability, and impacted sales,” the company said in a statement to the ASX: All Ingham’s major Australian sites are operational and have not experienced significant on-site transmission of Covid. However, they are currently experiencing significantly lower levels of staff availability. which is impacting production volumes and operational efficiency. There are also reports that KFC is running short of some types of chicken. Market sources have confirmed it is an Ingham’s customer. Ingham’s shares were down about 6.6% at midday. NSW might have reported 25,870 new Covid infections today, roughly in line with that 25,000 a day prediction for the end of January back on 15 December. Of course, nobody believes the latest figures are a good reflection of how fast the virus is spreading in the community. In fact, within the NSW government, the question is how soon will it reach 100,000 cases a day. That first six-figure day could come as early as the end of the week if that’s when the government starts releasing both the PCR and the rapid antigen test results. Expect the tenor of that announcement to be one of qualification. Yes, it’s a shocking number but many of the cases will be double-counting (people getting a PCR and RAT result) and some accumulation (results of earlier days only being reported now). Still, even with the qualification, the beefed-up figures will probably be only a portion of how much the virus is spreading given the difficulty of getting your hands on a RAT. Every government is scratching for RATs of course, and the price tag will have to be swallowed by someone. For the NSW government, the RAT bill for the 100 million tests could be north of $500m, perhaps well north. Taxpayers may be grabbing for the Bex (if it’s still a thing). Some news outlets including Der Spiegel are claiming the Serbian website displaying test results is showing anomalies for Novak Djokovic’s positive Covid-19 test, which granted him an exemption to enter Australia. Der Spiegel said a QR code on his presented positive Covid test from 16 December – confirmation code 7371999-259039 – when scanned by them at 1.19pm local time on Monday showed a negative result. But when they tried again just over an hour later it was displaying a positive result. Guardian staff tested the system this morning and did not find anomalies. We are not suggesting the test has been faked, or know for certain what documents Der Spiegel was using. We have put questions to Djokovic’s team, the immigration minister and border force. If Djokovic’s test were to have been negative, it would completely undermine his case for being granted an exemption to enter Australia in the first place. As we know, he isn’t vaccinated. In an interview with the Australian Border Force he told officers he had Covid-19 twice – in June 2020 and December 2021 – and court documents showed Djokovic’s reason for seeking a medical exemption from Australia’s vaccination requirements was that he contracted Covid on 16 December. This was accepted by Tennis Australia and the Victorian state government medical panels, which granted him the exemption on 30 December. We don’t have Covid numbers from Queensland yet. The state isn’t able to provide full data yet due to likely software glitch at some private clinics. Health authorities are due to provide an update in the next hour or so. Palaszczuk says there are concerns about rising Covid cases and hospitalisations on the Gold Coast. She says not enough people are wearing their masks and following health directives. Just because you’re on holiday, doesn’t mean you can’t get Covid. The police commissioner says 200 or 300 masks are being handed out every day - predominantly to travellers from interstate. Back in Victoria, and Andrews says it is still the plan for children to return to school on time: Queensland’s police commissioner Katarina Carroll says the search for the 14-year-old girl may be scaled down in the coming days: At some stage we do get advice around survivability and it may be scaled down ... if that advice has come in that’ll be the case but we know ... people can only survive certain days ... To this point there has been an extraordinary amount of searching done for that child. Turning to missing persons, the search is continuing for the 14-year-old girl who has been missing since the weekend. Another incident occurred this morning on the Mary River. Two females are safe and well but a 52-year-old male is currently missing. It is believed the group were out searching for cattle stock and were caught up in flood waters. Palaszczuk is up from Maryborough. She thanks “everybody working hard to ensure people get back onto their feet”. Assessments are continuing to work out what extra support is needed in the area. Work is underway to get power up as soon as possible, and food supply chains are returning. Queensland rail will open at 6pm tonight. Queensland police have revoked the emergency declaration for Maryborough, though a number of roads remain closed and services are continuing to several flood-impacted areas. Good news on the cyclone front. Palaszczuk says “we are not hearing any bad impacts of tropical cyclone Tiffany”, which has been downgraded today. It will be monitored over the next 24 to 48 hours lest it reforms. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, is due to provide a Covid/vaccination/flood/cyclone update in the next few minutes, but the health minister, Yvette D’Ath, and chief health officer Dr John Gerrard will also hold a press conference at 12pm local time from Queensland Children’s Hospital Vaccination Centre. Andrews is asked again whether the vaccination exemption for Djokovic was granted by a Victorian panel. He says Tennis Australia “had a process”: I will leave you to speak to them, if you want any further details of that. I am very conscious of the fact it’s one thing to speak to comments I made months ago, and we’ve been consistent on those comments, but not let’s get into the ins and outs by way of process. It’s been adjudicated, it may be appealed. Whilst we may have views on whether we would play a role in the granting of a visa, that’s what those questions basically relate to, we don’t grant them. And our view has been sought and we’ve been very clear about our view. He says he isn’t calling on the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, to cancel the visa, and if you want to know what he’s going to do “get on the blower”: The nature of quite extraordinary powers that are held by the immigration minister is I won’t be out there calling for him to use them or not use them. That’s a matter for him. He ought to do that free of any pressure, free of any public debate and discourse because otherwise you find yourself – I’m not a lawyer – you may find yourself back in the federal court again. Again, these are not matters for me. We have many things to do. Many things to get on with. Issuing visas is not one of the responsibilities that I have. Others have those responsibilities. And I direct you to them. If you want to know what Alex Hawke will do, get on the blower to him and have a chat. The Australian Open is bigger than Djokovic, Andrews says. You know, I think that Rafa and a few others have made the position very, very clear. This is – this tournament is much bigger than any one person. It’s a grand slam, the biggest thing in tennis in the first quarter of the year, every year. It’s a massive event for us. And it’s bigger than any one person, whether that be, you know, in the court, or on the court. This tournament is much bigger than any one person. Andrews is asked whether Djokovic should be allowed to play in the Australian Open. He says that’s a matter for the federal government. The issue of who gets into the country and their vaccination status is not an issue for state governments. I don’t issue visas, the commonwealth government does that. There’s a court ruling, whether that’s appealed is a matter for the commonwealth government. If the immigration minister wants to use his extraordinary powers, that’s a matter for him. I don’t want to offer comment on that. I stand by our comments. We have not sought to, in fact, quite the opposite, we have not sought to convince the commonwealth government to allow anyone else. When we talked about exemptions previously, you would recall that Minister Hawke had said it was his expectation if you weren’t double vaxxed, you wouldn’t get into the country, if you’re playing tennis or doing anything else. That wasn’t the commonwealth government’s position and they have been letting people in who hasn’t been double vaxxed. It requires a state government to sponsor that person, or support that exemption from being double dose vaccinated. So, the notion of exemption was a little different then and the position was a little different there. Because there was the prospect that people won’t be allowed in at all unless they were double vaxxed. I stand by our comments. I was asked the question, would we be asking the commonwealth government to exempt certain people from the requirement to be vaccinated, no, that was the answer then, that is the answer now. Here’s the detail of what the ACTU secretary, Sally McManus, has asked Scott Morrison to do in order to support workers during the Omicron crisis, which has seen large numbers of people unable to work because they are either waiting for a hard-to-get test, isolating because they are a close contact or sick with the virus. McManus laid out four demands in a letter to Morrison, sent yesterday, in which she also asked for a meeting with the prime minister. The demands are: 1. Rapid antigen tests to be free and accessible for all. Until supply has been resolved, they should be prioritised for frontline and essential workers. 2. Paid pandemic leave must be extended to all close contacts. Close contacts must include those exposed at work, not just in households. 3. Workers be kept safe at work, including mask requirements to N95 or P2 standard, warning Scott Morrison that unions will fight any attempt to water down OHS laws. 4. Broaden and increase support payments for workers, people out of work and businesses affected by Covid. Demand No. 2 would re-expand who counts as a close contact: the rules currently only capture those in a household-type situation with exposure of four hours or more. McManus will hold a press conference at midday. It is striking how much the rhetoric has changed this year. I remember when Andrews would warn Victorians if the state government didn’t enforce various health measures, there wouldn’t be dozens of cases, or hundreds of cases, there would be thousands of cases. Now, we are discussing the possibility to have thousands of people in general wards, and hundreds hospitalised with Covid being a best-case scenario: Please, can you just take the time, if you’re eligible, if you’ve got that letter, please go and make an appointment, whether it’s at a state clinic, a community pharmacy, or your local GP surgery to get your third dose. That’s how we’ll limit the spread of this. Just finally ... we have some people that are gravely ill, some people in intensive care, but the vast majority of people are in hospital and not requiring that sort of care. If we were to stop isolating people, if we were to stop testing, if we were to let this rip, we’ll finish up not with hundreds of people in general wards, we would finish up with thousands, and we all know what that means. It means every non-Covid case that requires hospitalisation won’t be able to get that care. Andrews says there is “significant pressure” on Victoria’s health system amidst rising case numbers. There is currently a record number of people hospitalised with Covid in the state. He says at least 4,500 healthcare workers are unable to work because they’re Covid positive or close contacts of cases. There were 3,392 health – the hospital staff, not available to work, because they were either Covid-19 cases or close contacts of cases. There were a further 422 Ambulance Victoria staff unable to work as well. That’s at least 4,500. They’re self-reporting numbers. I expect that number to be in fact higher and that does put great pressure on our system. It’s not a matter of money or machines, they don’t treat people anyway, it’s qualified staff, people who provide healthcare to other people, and our staff, because we’ve got so many cases in the Victorian community, this is so wildly infectious, like any group in the community, there’s a significant number of people who are getting this, have already got it, and others isolating because they live in households. Another $4m of grants will be offered to GPs and pharmacists to vaccinate children after hours at schools, Andrews says. Some 30 pop-up clinics will also be established in schools “very soon” additional to state vaccination hubs. About half of those who are eligible for a third booster dose have received their vaccination, Andrews says. We’ve got to do better than that in coming weeks. I know the holiday period, perhaps, getting your third dose is the last thing on people’s minds as they celebrate and spend quality time with family and friends. But now as we are getting into January, we need to focus on getting everyone who is eligible to be boosted, or to get a third dose, to go along, make an appointment, honour that appointment and get that additional protection, not just for yourself, but for all of us, and particularly for our health system, that comes with a third dose, particularly against this Omicron variant. Some 39,000 bookings have been made for five to 11-year-olds since the system opened, and 3,000 children received a vaccine yesterday. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews is up now. He thanks everyone who has queued up to get a PCR test, and those who have taken a rapid antigen tests. I thank them very much, and those who have undertaken a rapid antigen test at home and have then, if positive, have gone and registered. That is a much better system and it means people are getting their results as fast as possible. I know there’s some pressure in that testing system, it’s not just in Melbourne or Victoria, it’s across our whole country. Everyone wants the same thing at the same time and we have many cases in our communities right across our nation. That means more people with symptoms, more people with a reason to test, that does put pressure on symptoms. I thank the staff doing their very best, and people being patient waiting for their important results. The latest standoff in Djokovic versus Home Affairs is Andy Murray versus Nigel Farage: Tasmania’s case numbers are in, and there have been 1,379 new Covid-19 cases recorded overnight. There are now 18 people being treated in hospital with Covid, seven of which are hospitalised specifically due to symptoms. It is a slight jump from 1,218 cases reported yesterday. For some lighter content, and if you’ve missed it, this is quite funny: Speaking of Covid updates, Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk will hold a press conference outside Maryborough City Hall at 10.30am local time. Daniel Andrews is back in the building: Journalist and Human Rights Watch researcher Sophie McNeill says the Novak Djokovic case has served as a “jolting reminder of Australia’s abusive treatment of refugees and asylum seekers”. While the world number one tennis player, Novak Djokovic, spent four nights detained at an immigration hotel in Melbourne before a judge ordered his release, his case became a jolting reminder of Australia’s abusive treatment of refugees and asylum seekers who have been held in the country’s immigration detention system for years. Australian politicians have long relied on “tough on borders” rhetoric to win elections. This populist tactic has helped to ensure these abusive policies have remained in place for as long as they have. Inhumane treatment of refugees is not an acceptable nor a lawful policy of deterrence. All Australians should voice their opposition to prolonged and indefinite immigration detention, because while Djokovic may now be free, hundreds of others are not. Dairy and meat producers are pleading for more government help to cope with Covid disruptions in their industries as supermarket shelves empty and farm workers are hit by the virus. One big abattoir in South Australia has requested its staff return to work, despite 140 of them testing positive, while other farmers are facing filling milk vats or rotting produce as goods are held back from the market due to the lack of staffing. Grant Crothers, president of the Australian Dairy Products Federation, said as many as 40% of workers in some parts of the dairy food chain were absent because of Covid or because they were close contacts. Consumer confidence has fallen across Australia as a result of the rapid spread of the Omicron strain of Covid-19, potentially dampening the outlook for retail spending, AAP reports. In the first release for 2022, the weekly ANZ-Roy Morgan consumer confidence index dropped 2.2% compared its pre-Christmas level – the last time the survey was conducted. ANZ’s head of Australian economics David Plank: The rapid rise of Omicron cases across Australia is likely responsible for the dampened outlook in the first week of January. Confidence fell in all the major capitals, with Adelaide faring the worst. Plank noted that in the decade from 2011 to 2020, consumer confidence had risen 2.6% on average in the first survey in January. Consumer confidence provides a guide to future retail spending. The Australian Bureau of Statistics will release retail sales figures for November on Tuesday. Economists’ forecasts point to another strong result of 3.8%, building on the 4.9% increase in October as NSW, Victoria and the ACT emerged from last year’s extensive lockdowns battling the Delta strain. However, an analysis by ANZ last week showed spending in the week to 5 January was at its lowest level since these lockdowns as consumers showed caution about being in public places because of Omicron. This has been compounded by staff shortages, while supply chain disruptions are leaving some supermarket shelves bare. Still, the confidence survey found respondents are still relatively happy about their own financial circumstances. The sub-index for views on ‘current financial conditions’ increased by 1.4%, while ‘future financial conditions’ rose by 0.7%. Thanks, I’ll take 10. Lawyer Justin Quill says it’s unlikely Hawke will cancel Djokovic’s visa: The reason I think they won’t do it is because they will know there’s a good chance if they do try and make that decision today that we will wind up back in court this afternoon or tomorrow morning in front of the same judge who was clearly very unimpressed by the Commonwealth’s conduct in the proceeding. That judge will grant what’s called an interlocutory injunction, a temporary injunction allowing Djokovic to play. In Western Australia, there is an emergency warning for a bushfire burning in the city of Busselton, two-and-a-half hours from Perth. The warning is in place for people in southern parts of Meelup Regional Park in Naturaliste and Dunsborough. You can hit the ‘Tube for Part 4 of the widely acclaimed Djokovic series. This is quite a striking chart. There have been an additional 842 people hospitalised and 79 deaths in the past week in NSW alone. We are not expecting the peak until at least the end of January. I feel like I’m living in the film Groundhog Day but it’s just people hoarding toilet paper day after day until the end of time, and Bill Murray is nowhere to be seen. In Victoria, 32.67% of Covid tests returned a positive result in the latest period. I’m not sure how this factors in with rapid antigen tests – which are only reported when they are positive. Rapid antigen tests are in high demand in Queensland. As they are, well, everywhere, it seems: Turning to the positivity rate, 36.27% of tests in NSW returned a positive result in the latest reporting period. New South Wales daily Covid case numbers are in, with 25,870 new infections recorded. They remain relatively stable, but again, we’re only getting the numbers of positive PCR tests, not rapid antigen tests. There are 2,186 people being treated in hospital, a jump of more than 100 overnight. There were 2,030 in hospital on Monday. There are 170 people being treated in ICU, a jump of 11 on yesterday’s numbers. Test numbers are also down – there were 71,325 test results in the past 24 hours compared to just over 80,000 tests reported on Monday. Sadly, there were 11 deaths. Victoria’s case numbers are in. There were 37,944 new cases detected – roughly half of which were from PCR tests and half from rapid antigen tests. Sadly, there were 13 deaths recorded overnight. There are 861 people being treated in hospital with Covid, including 117 in ICU. That’s a slight jump in hospital patients from yesterday, but ICU numbers remain steady. It’s also worth noting 861 is the highest number of patients to be hospitalised with Covid in Victoria since the pandemic began. Previously, the record was 851 on 18 October. Retired Australian soccer player and human rights activist Craig Foster has released a statement calling for the 33 refugees still languishing in Melbourne’s Park Hotel to be released immediately as they enter their ninth year in detention. It’s vitally important because for a short period, the number one tennis player in the world was caught in the system that mistreats so many innocent people, kills them in fact and if nothing else, that alone shows what we’ve allowed ourselves to become. Year by year, amendment by amendment, Act by Act and decade by decade a privatised detention system has emerged that would have seemed impossible not that long ago. Australia’s deputy chief medical officer Michael Kidd has told ABC Breakfast that 35,077 five- to 11-year-olds were vaccinated yesterday, the first day the cohort became eligible. There are currently 6,000 sites where children can receive a vaccine. We have enough of the paediatric Pfizer vaccine for every five- to 11-year-old to receive their first dose by the end of this month. So there is no need to panic about not being able to get an appointment over the next few days. There will be appointments available over the next couple of weeks before children are starting to go back to school in Australia. The hubs are playing a very important role in our vaccine rollout, as are our general practices and pharmacies and other centres as well, so it’s important that we have this distribution network of clinics available for people to be able to get their vaccines in a timely manner. The ATP Tour has just released a statement on Novak Djokovic. It says the events in Melbourne have been “damaging on all fronts” and welcomed the outcome of Monday’s court hearing. The ATP fully respects the sacrifices the people of Australia have made since the onset of Covid-19 and the stringent immigration policies that have been put in place. Complications in recent days related to player entry into Australia have however highlighted the need for clearer understanding, communication and application of the rules. In travelling to Melbourne, it’s clear Novak Djokovic believed he had been granted a necessary medical exemption in order to comply with entry regulations. The series of events leading to Monday’s court hearing have been damaging on all fronts, including for Novak’s well-being and preparation for the Australian Open. Player medical exemption requests are made independently of ATP, however we have been in constant contact with Tennis Australia to seek clarity throughout this process. We welcome the outcome of Monday’s hearing and look forward to an exciting few weeks of tennis ahead. More broadly, ATP continues to strongly recommend vaccination for all players on the ATP Tour, which we believe is essential for our sport to navigate the pandemic. This is based on scientific evidence supporting the health benefits provided and to comply with global travel regulations, which we anticipate will become stricter over time. We are encouraged that 97 per cent of the Top 100 players are vaccinated leading into this year’s Australian Open. Labor MP Mark Butler appeared on ABC News earlier, echoing Kristina Keneally who told Sunrise the decision on whether to re-cancel Djokovic’s visa was one for the government. Butler said the saga had been an “embarrassing soap opera”. Any individual who comes to this country should be able to satisfy the entry tests, so if Mr Djokovic can’t satisfy those tests then he shouldn’t be in Australia. That’s really ultimately the decision the government has to make, but they will have to make it lawfully because this has been a deeply embarrassing soap opera for Australia and I’m sure for Mr Djokovic as well. ... It is a deep embarrassment. They’ve just got to get it right. Amidst all the Djokovic content, it is well worth reading Guardian reporter Cait Kelly’s story today on the refugees left behind at Melbourne’s Park Hotel. Since December 2020 refugee advocates have stood outside the former hotel every day, trying desperately to bring awareness to the plight of the 30-plus men stuck indefinitely inside. When the world’s No 1 male tennis player unexpectedly joined refugees and asylum seekers inside, it brought a new group of protesters and an international media spotlight. But that unlikely alliance ended on Monday night, as a court ordered Djokovic’s release from immigration detention after quashing the Australian government’s decision to cancel his visa. Read the full story here: Calling upon residents of Ipswich. Police are seeking help from the community to find police dog Quizz, who went missing from Redbank Plains this morning. Queensland police said: Around 3am, the dog squad were called to track an offender who allegedly ran from a stolen vehicle near Greenwood Village Road. Police Dog Quizz commenced a pursuit, however he became separated from his handler. Officers have commenced a search of the surrounding area but have not been able to find him. PD Quizz is a three-year-old Sabel German Shepherd with a black and tan hide. He is wearing a black tracking harness with a long tracking lead. He is not considered dangerous, however PD Quizz should not be approached. If ... sighted please contact police immediately. We’ve got to get this guy home! The Health Services Union has warned the aged care sector is experiencing an “unprecedented crisis” with “chronic understaffing, excessive workloads and extended shifts” hitting the sector amid the Omicron wave of Covid-19. According to a survey of more than 1,000 HSU members: 82% believe their facility was unprepared for the current Omicron “let it rip” approach 90% are experiencing understaffing 84% are experiencing excessive workloads 36% are working in facilities that have implemented 12 hour shifts Staff have also reported working 16-hour shifts, working seven days consecutively, care staff without food safety qualifications working in kitchens, a shortage of PPE for workers and a shortage of rapid antigen tests. The HSU national president Gerard Hayes says the federal government didn’t prepare the sector for the outbreak: The Morrison government comprehensively failed to plan before allowing Omicron to rip through the community and modestly paid workers, and residents in aged care facilities who built this country, are paying the price. Only just over a third of members surveyed have received their booster shot, despite working overtime in high risk settings. There are active outbreaks in almost 500 aged care facilities across the country. Yet workers can’t access RATs, they can’t access PPE. They are on the front line with very little protection. Not only are staff at risk but vulnerable residents are at a heightened risk of severe disease or death. More support for cancelling Djokovic’s visa: A 14-year-old girl swept away in floodwaters north of Brisbane on the weekend is still missing as residents in the region assess the damage after days of extreme weather, AAP reports. Water levels started to drop on Monday after the remnants of tropical cyclone Seth dumped more than half a metre of rain on the Wide Bay-Burnett region in two days. Many of the affected homes and businesses are in the regional city of Maryborough, which was issued with an evacuation order on Sunday after an underground stormwater mechanism failed, allowing floodwater to surge up through the drains. Meanwhile a GoFundMe page for the missing girl, Krystal Cain, said she was swept away “in a torrent of water” on Saturday while travelling to Agnes Water to visit her grandparents. “Krystal is still missing and we hold hope that she is still alive somewhere,” it says, describing the girl as a loving daughter, sister, granddaughter, niece and friend. Water police, divers, volunteers and aerial support are assisting with the search. The opposition has been out and about this morning critiquing the government’s pandemic response and handling of the Djokovic situation. Labor senator Kristina Keneally told Sunrise it had been an “incredible mess”, but it was “up to the Morrison government” to decide whether to revoke his visa for a second time: Prime minister Morrison and home affairs minister Karen Andrews have a whole lot of explaining to do because what we have seen from this is Australians now know they cannot trust the Morrison government to enforce the rules at the border and they have done incredible damage. The Morrison government looks like a pack of idiots that could not organise a meat raffle in a local RSL. Come on, here. This is extraordinary circumstances. The Morrison government issued Novak Djokovic a Visa on 18 November. The Australian Open is not a secret event, the fact Novak Djokovic, a known anti-vaxxer, wanted to come to Australia and play was not a state secret and yet Mr Morrison, as he has done at every stage in this pandemic, failed to plan, failed to act. Quite frankly, his failures, whether around ordering rapid antigen tests, ordering enough vaccines, making sure the supermarkets are well stocked and enforcing the rules at the border, all of these failures from Mr Morrison are hurting real Australians. Right now, what does it say if you get deported? And what does it say about if he gets to stay? If you get deported it does incredible damage to Australia, if he gets to stay it does incredible damage to our tough border laws and is a real insult to the Australians who did the hard work of lockdowns and vaccination is the Morrison government fails to make the right decision. Uncertainty remains on how students will be able to return safely to schools as Covid-19 cases soar, AAP reports. The country’s leading medical advisory panel met on Monday to discuss the start of the 2022 school year, ahead of a national cabinet meeting on Thursday. NSW and Victoria have backed a federal government push for a coordinated approach, with the premiers of those states meeting virtually on Monday to discuss virus-related issues including in schools. Queensland has postponed the start of its school year by two weeks, saying the delay was needed to allow more time for students to get vaccinated before classes resume. South Australia officials have said rapid antigen tests would be needed to help teachers keep track of the virus. The school year starts at the end of January, roughly at the same time cases of the Omicron variant are expected to peak. Children aged five to 11 were cleared to receive a Pfizer vaccine from Monday, with an estimated 2.3 million children now eligible for their first dose. Scott Morrison said plans for the return to school would be worked through in talks this week. The prime minister reiterated his preference for students to be back in the classroom on the first day of term, rather than learning from home: It’s obviously a key issue for parents as they are thinking about their children going back to school in a few weeks’ time. We’ll look to have those arrangements very clear by the time that occurs. The chief medical officer Paul Kelly said health-based issues would be taken into account before a unified approach was decided: It’s related to balancing the wider aspects and the importance of face-to-face learning in schools with the risk of Covid. There is mixed messaging emerging this morning on whether immigration minister Alex Hawke should intervene and cancel Novak Djokovic’s visa for a second time. Federal government MP and former professional tennis player John Alexander says his visa should not be cancelled again after the court’s decision: I see it as something that should not become a political problem. It is not political at this point ... The rules regarding visa applications and approvals are quite clear, they’re complex, but they are clear, and the judge has looked at this obviously very, very carefully and he has made a very strong decision. Others disagree. In an opinion piece for the Sydney Morning Herald, Deakin University epidemiologist Hassan Valley said cancelling his visa would send a “strong message” that rules apply to everyone equally: So, as one of the most privileged human beings on the planet who has ignored the science and refused to be vaccinated I think an incredibly strong message could have been sent by upholding Djokovic’s visa cancellation. The message being that the rules apply to everyone equally. Immigration lawyer Simon Jeans told Sunrise this morning the right decision was made in court: The judge was very critical of the way Novak Djokovic was treated while he was at the airport, the way he was interviewed, the way he was not given an opportunity to talk with his lawyers before they made a decision and that they had taken his phone away and he was not able to contact anyone. The process that was conducted in the airport was at fault. There were mistakes made in that process and there were mistakes made in the decision, so the judge was quite critical of how he was treated and that became quite obvious, if you like. The judge applied the blowtorch to the minister and the minister took the hint and conceded the case before a judgement was made. McManus appeared on ABC News this morning, discussing the ACTU’s list of demands to the federal government. She said changing the definition of a “close contact” to someone who has spent four hours in a household with a confirmed Covid case was “really crazy”: Working people might be spending eight hours with someone who is Covid-positive and they are no longer considered a close contact ... Those people who have worked next to someone for a really long time and aren’t included in that definition of “close contact” no longer get isolation payments. So if you run out of sick leave or if you never had any in the first place, it means you are stuck with nothing during that period of time. So this is, I hope, just an oversight, but an oversight the prime minister has made and it has got to be fixed. We are told to live with the virus, but the idea was not for everyone to get sick at once and this is what has happened unfortunately. Health care workers, whether they be ambos or whether they be in the emergency departments, or in the hospitals are absolutely exhausted, absolutely exhausted. It is mayhem for them and extremely stressful. And it is very, very anxious time for people who are sick. I’ve never seen so many sick people not knowing whether or not they need to go to hospital or not. We really just need to know that the prime minister actually understand the depth of this crisis and the burden that is being placed on us, on frontline workers, both a financial one for people now losing their jobs New guidelines being considered by national cabinet will see a return of fruit and vegetables to the supermarket shelves within the week, AAP reports. Supermarkets have been overwhelmed by panic-buying just as transport and logistics companies and suppliers are hit by large proportions of workers calling in sick or dealing with tough Covid-19 quarantine rules. Australian Fresh Produce Alliance chief executive Michael Rogers had warned that fruit and vegetables could rot in the fields because of the supply chain issues and a shortage of workers. Guidelines issued by the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee have changed the definition of close contacts for those exposed to Covid-19 working in critical food and grocery production, manufacturing, logistics and distribution facilities. Rogers: The measures that change requirements for close contacts which have been announced are very welcome because they put capacity back in the system, but it’s still going to be a very tight situation. The decision by Queensland, NSW and Victoria will put fruit and veg back on shelves in those states, the national guidelines go a long way to a nationally consistent approach. Other states won’t see disruption to supply in the same way as it’s been seen in Sydney. It is expected supermarket shelves will begin to fill over the next week. The national cabinet is set to discuss the guidelines on Thursday but the prime minister wants action before then. Morrison said governments were determined to minimise the impact of the Omicron strain of Covid-19 on the workforce. Close contacts who test negative but are asymptomatic will be able to continue to work, but be monitored using rapid antigen tests. The rules won’t apply to frontline retail workers such as supermarket checkout operators. Amid supply chain and staff shortages, Australian Council of Trade Unions secretary Sally McManus has written to prime minister Scott Morrison overnight calling for an urgent meeting to discuss the impact of Omicron on exhausted essential workers. In a statement, she said: The prime minister has not heard from working people and we are on the front lines. Australian workers are not ok at the moment. We have never had so many working people sick at once. Healthcare workers are exhausted, people are anxious and uncertain. The unions’ list of demands includes restoring pandemic leave for close contacts of infected colleagues, free rapid antigen tests and priority for frontline workers until supply issues are resolved, and mandating N95 or P2 standard masks. McManus: Many are losing pay while sick as they have no sick leave. Others are losing hours and their jobs as businesses close or cut back in what is turning into an unofficial lockdown. Good morning, We’re 11 days into the year, Novak Djokovic is still in the country, and I am back to knowing what day of the week it is. Caitlin Cassidy here to guide you through this morning’s news, and all eyes are on the Serbian tennis player, who yesterday won an appeal against his visa cancellation after spending four days in an immigration detention centre. A wild 24 hours saw ecstatic Djokovic’s fans pepper-sprayed by police as they celebrated his release in Melbourne. But the victory comes with the threat that immigration minister Alex Hawke may revoke his entry visa for a second time, using powers granted by Australia’s Migration Act. Djokovic said he was “pleased” and “grateful” for the ruling, and was still determined to stay and compete at the Australian Open. Meanwhile, Australia is still in a pandemic and passed the grim milestone of 1m active Covid-19 cases yesterday. There have been 250,000 Covid cases since Friday alone. There were a record 18 deaths in NSW yesterday, as Nine newspapers flag the state government is set to mandate the registration of positive rapid antigen tests. With public hospitals under increased pressure, the NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association is calling on the commonwealth to increase resources in the aged care sector as a matter of urgency, citing a “staffing crisis” and lack of equipment including correct masks and RATs. There’s much to get through, so let’s dive in.The Great Bubble Barrier is just that – a wall of bubbles. It gurgles across the water in a diagonal screen, pushing plastic to one side while allowing fish and other wildlife to pass unharmed. The technology, created by a Dutch firm and already being used in Amsterdam, will be trialled in the Porto region of Portugalas part of the EU-supported Maelstrom (marine litter sustainable removal and management) project. It is the latest in a series of new technologies designed to find sustainable ways to remove and treat river debris before it reaches the sea. Plastic can be spread by natural disasters, such as a tsunami, which can push invasive species and debris halfway across the world. But rivers carry a much more regular supply of plastic to the oceans. Research in 2017 found that 10 river systems transport 90% of all the plastic that ends up in the world’s oceans (two in Africa – the Nile and Niger – with the other eight in Asia: the Ganges, Indus, Yellow, Yangtze, Haihe, Pearl, Mekong and Amur). Molly Morse, a scientist at UC Santa Barbara’s Benioff Ocean Initiative and lead on its global Clean Currents Coalition, says: “In some cases, communities don’t have access to proper waste pickup services and must turn to what might seem to be the only alternative: dump the trash directly in the river to be carried away. “In other cases, plastic litter on land is moved by rain or wind into a river, where […] the plastic may make its way to the ocean.” An estimated 0.8m to 2.7m tonnes of plastic are carried by rivers to the ocean each year. That is the equivalent of 66,000 to 225,000 doubledecker buses. Without barriers, river currents carry plastic directly to the sea, where it becomes far trickier to tackle: plastic often floats for vast distances, can host invasive species and becomes part of the wider plastisphere, such as the concentration of seaborne waste in the Great Pacific garbage patch. That is why some scientists are calling for greater efforts to stop plastic going into rivers in the first place. A 2020 study found that a “significant reduction” of plastic in the ocean could be achieved only by stopping it reaching the sea, or through a combination of river barriers and other clean-up devices. Cue inventors, who have developed an array of river barriers and collection devices to catch and remove riverine plastic – from simple nets and booms to conveyor belts and robots. Mr Trash Wheel, known officially as the Inner Harbor Water Wheel, is a conveyor-belt system powered by currents and solar energy, launched in 2014 in the US city of Baltimore. Long booms with submerged skirts funnel waste into a central hub, where autonomous rakes scoop it on to a conveyor belt that deposits it on a barge, with more than 17 tonnes collected in a day. Once full, the barge takes the rubbish to be incinerated in a power plant, though it is hoped that eventually the collected waste can be sorted and recycled. There is now a whole family of Trash Wheels in Baltimore, the latest addition being Gwynnda, the Good Wheel of the West. Or there’s the Interceptor, a floating, solar-powered device developed by the non-profit organisation The Ocean Cleanup, billed as the “world’s first scalable solution” to rid the oceans of plastic. Similar but larger than the trash wheel, it has barriers that guide rubbish on to a conveyor belt, where a shuttle distributes it among five onboard waste bins. Another design, the Azure barrier, developed by the UK-based startup Ichthion to operate in any river, can remove up to 80 tonnes of plastic a day using durable, tide-sensitive booms that direct plastic to extraction points along the bank. The plastic is processed into flakes for recycling. Other more hi-tech inventions include the WasteShark, an electronically controlled “aquadrone” that preys on plastic – up to 350kg at a time. Using algorithms from the German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, the WasteShark moves around and back to its docking station autonomously, where up to five of the catamaran-shaped vessels can deposit the collected plastic and recharge. The design, developed by a Dutch startup, RanMarine, is due to be showcased at CES 2022 in Las Vegas this month. While the cost of implementing these technologies may be feasible for some cities and towns – and vastly preferable to the cost of plastic pollution, which it is estimated will reach $7.1tn (£5.25tn) by 2040 – there are many other factors to consider. These include, says Morse, “the physical river characteristics, amount of waste, seasonal changes, ecology, power sources, workforce availability, security, boat traffic [and] funding”. Philip Ehrhorn, co-founder of the Great Bubble Barrier, says: “One of the biggest challenges we face is the lack of regulation regarding plastic pollution in our waterways and thereof the lack of ownership and responsibility for the problem. “The urgency to solve our plastic pollution problem in rivers is down to forward-thinking water authorities and governments, since plastic is not yet officially considered a water pollutant,” he says. Most of the world’s top 20 plastic-polluting rivers are in developing countries. But Ehrhorn adds: “Europe still has a huge issue with plastic pollution, which shouldn’t be ignored nor underestimated.” EU laws were introduced in January last year to tackle the “wild west” of plastic waste being dumped in poorer countries; the UK is one of Europe’s worst offenders, exporting about 70% of its plastic. But the wildest west lies across the Atlantic: the US is the world’s biggest plastic polluter, accounting for more than all EU countries combined. There is no one-size-fits-all solution, says Morse. “Rivers vary immensely in respect to factors such as depth, width, flow and seasonality. What might work in a massive river like the Mississippi in the United States, which flows all year round, likely will not work for a smaller, more seasonal river like the Tijuana in Mexico.” In Ecuador, Ichthion’s Azure prototype had problems on the Portoviejo River. Data had suggested the river’s depth varied in the wet and dry seasons by two metres; in reality, it fluctuated by as much as four metres within a few days. Getting support from the local people and permission for new infrastructure can also be difficult. For the Clean Currents Coalition, which is working with eight teams around the world, simplicity works best. “The most successful solutions have been the simpler technologies – such as booms, barriers and traps – that are manufactured locally and require manual removal of the captured waste,” Morse says. This can also create extra jobs. One example of these is Wildcoast’s “brute boom” at the Los Laureles Canyon, a tributary of the Tijuana River. The double-walled float stretches across the river and allows the boom to move with the changing depth. A suspended steel mesh catches the plastic, which is taken for processing once the boom is full. Reports from San Diego in California suggest that it has succeeded in reducing plastic downstream. TerraCycle’s river traps, which are installed in some of Bangkok’s 1,600 polluted canals, catch up to 2.5 tonnes of waste a day, helping to recycle plastic instead of sending it to landfill. A German startup, Plastic Fischer, has installed TrashBooms in waterways in Indonesia, India and Vietnam. It advocates a local, low-tech and low-cost approach, using locally manufactured mesh-and-float barriers to catch rubbish. Many environmentalists argue that these innovations treat the symptoms, not the problem, and that the only real solution is to curb plastic production. But, with plastic manufacturing shipments estimated to have risen by 2.2% last year by the Plastic Industry Association, this is not likely any time soon. “If we’re going to keep producing, consuming and disposing of plastics at, or near, our current rate, our ability to manage it needs to catch up – and quickly,” says Morse.Heathrow airport has said at least 600,000 passengers cancelled their travel plans from the airport in December because of Omicron, warning aviation would take years to recover from the pandemic. Only 19.4 million passengers passed through the airport in 2021 – less than a quarter of 2019 levels and below even 2020, the year when the Covid-19 pandemic started in March. Heathrow said passengers cancelled their travel plans last month because of the Omicron variant and the uncertainty caused by swiftly imposed government travel restrictions. The UK’s busiest airport again urged the government to remove all testing requirements for fully vaccinated passengers and to adopt a playbook for any future variants of concern that is more predictable. The Heathrow chief executive, John Holland-Kaye, said: “There are currently travel restrictions, such as testing, on all Heathrow routes – the aviation industry will only fully recover when these are all lifted and there is no risk that they will be reimposed at short notice, a situation which is likely to be years away.” He said there was significant doubt over the speed at which demand would recover. The International Air Transport Association, the industry body, forecasts that passenger numbers will not reach pre-pandemic levels until 2025, on the assumption travel restrictions are removed at both ends of a route and travellers have confidence the curbs will not return rapidly. Travel firms reported a surge in bookings last week after the government relaxed travel restrictions, ditching the requirement for a pre-departure test for UK arrivals who will not have to self-isolate until they receive the result from the day two test, which has been changed from a PCR test to a cheaper lateral flow test. EasyJet and Tui said the biggest jump was in bookings to the Canary Islands. Heathrow also called for help from the regulator, the Civil Aviation Authority, which has approved an interim rise in landing charges from £22 to £30.19 a passenger. The airport had called for higher charges of up to £43 to help recoup losses caused by the pandemic. The levy is likely to be passed directly on to travellers.Health officials have clarified that the recommended Covid self-isolation period in the US is shorter than in the UK at a time when the prime minister is considering reducing it to five days. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) previously said the isolation period was in effect the same in both countries. It said the recommended minimum of six full days in the UK was counted from the onset of symptoms, while in the US, the five-day isolation began from the day of a positive test, which could be several days after the first symptoms. However, the UKHSA has updated its blogpost, which now states: “In the UK our advice is to self-isolate for at least six full days from the point at which you have symptoms or get a positive test, whichever is first.” It continued: “In the United States, the advice is to isolate for at least five full days from the same point.” The blogpost concludes: “We believe that allowing people to leave self-isolation after two negative lateral flow tests on days six and seven is the optimal approach at present. This supports people who are unlikely to be infectious to go back to work and resume other activities, but continues to protect the wider population from infection. The UKHSA said it made the correction after the US CDC health protection agency clarified that its isolation period started when symptoms first appeared. The CDC cut the recommended isolation period there to five days in December. Boris Johnson has been facing calls from MPs and business bosses to follow suit in the UK in order to help ease staff absences across the economy and public services. On Monday, the prime minister said he would “act according to the science” on potentially reducing the time period to five days. The period has already been cut from 10 days to seven, as long as the person in isolation has negative lateral flow test results, and Johnson’s official spokesman said “if it is possible to go further then we will do so”. The UKHSA is leading work on the issue along with the government’s Covid taskforce based in the Cabinet Office. On the change to its blogpost, a UKHSA spokesperson said: “We updated our blog following clarification from the CDC on their isolation guidance on 4 January.” On Sunday, the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, said it would be “helpful” to cut the isolation period to five days because of the pressures on the UK’s workforce.The world’s oceans have been set to simmer, and the heat is being cranked up. Last year saw the hottest ocean temperatures in recorded history, the sixth consecutive year that this record has been broken, according to new research. The heating up of our oceans is being primarily driven by the human-caused climate crisis, scientists say, and represents a starkly simple indicator of global heating. While the atmosphere’s temperature is also trending sharply upwards, individual years are less likely to be record-breakers compared with the warming of the oceans. Last year saw a heat record for the top 2,000 meters of all oceans around the world, despite an ongoing La Niña event, a periodic climatic feature that cools waters in the Pacific. The 2021 record tops a stretch of modern record-keeping that goes back to 1955. The second hottest year for oceans was 2020, while the third hottest was 2019. “The ocean heat content is relentlessly increasing, globally, and this is a primary indicator of human-induced climate change,” said Kevin Trenberth, a climate scientist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Colorado and co-author of the research, published in Advances in Atmospheric Sciences. Warmer ocean waters are helping supercharge storms, hurricanes and extreme rainfall, the paper states, which is escalating the risks of severe flooding. Heated ocean water expands and eats away at the vast Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets, which are collectively shedding around 1tn tons of ice a year, with both of these processes fueling sea level rise. Oceans take up about a third of the carbon dioxide emitted by human activity, causing them to acidify. This degrades coral reefs, home to a quarter of the world’s marine life and the provider of food for more than 500m people, and can prove harmful to individual species of fish. As the world warms from the burning of fossil fuels, deforestation and other activities, the oceans have taken the brunt of the extra heat. More than 90% of the heat generated over the past 50 years has been absorbed by the oceans, temporarily helping spare humanity, and other land-based species, from temperatures that would already be catastrophic. The amount of heat soaked up by the oceans is enormous. Last year, the upper 2,000 meters of the ocean, where most of the warming occurs, absorbed 14 more zettajoules (a unit of electrical energy equal to one sextillion joules) than it did in 2020. This amount of extra energy is 145 times greater than the world’s entire electricity generation which, by comparison, is about half of a zettajoule. Long-term ocean warming is strongest in the Atlantic and Southern oceans, the new research states, although the north Pacific has had a “dramatic” increase in heat since 1990 and the Mediterranean Sea posted a clear high temperature record last year. The heating trend is so pronounced it’s clear to ascertain the fingerprint of human influence in just four years of records, according to John Abraham, another of the study’s co-authors. “Ocean heat content is one of the best indicators of climate change,” added Abraham, an expert in thermal sciences at University of St Thomas. “Until we reach net zero emissions, that heating will continue, and we’ll continue to break ocean heat content records, as we did this year,” said Michael Mann, a climate scientist at Penn State University and another of the 23 researchers who worked on the paper. “Better awareness and understanding of the oceans are a basis for the actions to combat climate change.”For long winter nights, Joanna Ruth Meyer’s lush, folkloric debut Echo North (Pushkin, £8.99) is certain to enchant. In a Russian-inspired fantasy world, Echo makes a pact with a strange talking wolf: she will live for a year in his house and in exchange the wolf will save her father’s life. There, she finds secrets, danger, a magical library and the mystery of the wolf’s enchantment to unravel. Immersive and romantic, it’s a unique spin on fairytales such as East of the Sun and West of the Moon and Beauty and the Beast. There are more fairytales in Natasha Bowen’s epic debut Skin of the Sea (Penguin, £7.99), which fuses The Little Mermaid with west African mythology. Simi, a young black mermaid, is one of the Mami Wata, duty-bound to gather the souls of those who die at sea. When a living boy is thrown from a slave ship, Simi defies the decree to save his life and must travel to the supreme creator to make her amends. Fantastical creatures and vengeful gods form a vivid backdrop to this rich and original story of one girl’s journey to find herself. Also challenging stereotypical depictions of enslaved people in fiction is Alex Wheatle’s Kemosha of the Caribbean (Andersen Press, £7.99, February), which puts a young black girl centre stage in a thrilling high seas adventure set in 1650s Jamaica. Born into slavery and sold to work in the colonial outpost of Port Royal, Kemosha escapes aboard the ship of notorious pirate Captain Morgan, eager to earn enough to buy her brother’s freedom. Kemosha’s indomitable spirit, determination and wit make for an unforgettable heroine. In Blue Running by Lori Ann Stephens (Moonflower, £16.99), the near future has spawned the violent and corrupt Republic of Texas, where gun ownership is mandatory, abortion illegal and the country isolated from the US by both a wall and an internet blackout. When a firearms accident kills Bluebonnet’s best friend, she goes on the run, joining up with Jet, a pregnant Latin American migrant. Their race to the border is gripping. Can you trust everything you read in a newspaper? In contemporary fiction, Muhammad Khan’s Mark My Words (Macmillan, £7.99, February) explores the impact of two very different schools merging into one. Frustrated by elite student cliques and the glossy, official school newspaper, Dua sets up an alternative to highlight social inequalities exposed by the merger, along with controversies the school would prefer to keep quiet. A bold and timely book about protest and finding your voice. Finally, Kate Weston’s Diary of a Confused Feminist, one of the funniest young adult books of recent years, continues in a sequel, Must Do Better (Hodder, £7.99, February). It’s a new term and Kat is determined to spread the word about her feminist society and support her friends through difficult times, And there’s a class trip to France to look forward to. These astutely observed misadventures echo the much-missed teen writer Louise Rennison in a frank, contemporary take on sex, relationships and mental health. To order most of these books for a special price, click on the titles or go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWith the Premier League title race already close to being a foregone conclusion, Manchester City could be considering a proper victory-lap signing to rub it all in: none other than 2018’s Luka Modric. With the Croatia midfielder yet to agree a new deal with Real Madrid for when his contract expires this summer, El Nacional reports that the 36-year-old is “tired of being underestimated” by the club’s modest and unassuming head honcho Florentino Pérez. And in the wings Pep Guardiola is reportedly prepared to welcome Modric with “open arms”. Liverpool may have suggested they’re not keen to splash out but it looks like they might have rustled up a few bob to wave in the direction of Seville for the defender Jules Koundé, Rumours are that the Reds are prepared to cough up and activate the £75m release clause for the French defender, who has won seven caps for his country. Liverpool may face competition from Chelsea and Real Madrid, who are also sniffing around the 23-year-old. Talking of Chelsea, their defender Antonio Rüdiger is the subject of interest from PSG and Real Madrid. Madrid are thought to be Rüdiger’s preferred destination but the French league leaders are reportedly prepared to pay the Germany defender €7m after tax, so which will win out in this romantic tale? Today’s Newcastle rumour puts Bayer Leverkusen’s Patrik Schick on their radar as they step up that search for a striker, any striker, to solve their goalscoring problems. It would cost around £50m to spring the Czech Republic striker from the Bundesliga, but money’s not the main issue here. Also linked with the Toon is Steven Bergwijn, whose people are said to be sizing up loan options away from Tottenham, with Ajax also interested. On the subject of getting out of N17, Tanguy Ndombele not fancying it against Morecambe and being assailed by a cacophony of boos when substituted seems to have alerted a number of European suitors to his potential availability. PSG, Barcelona, Milan, Roma and Lyon have all been linked with the Tottenham midfielder. Going the other way could be Milan’s Franck Kessié, with Spurs apparently leading the hunt for the Ivory Coast midfielder. Meanwhile plucky, cash-strapped Barcelona continue to be linked with an inordinate range of targets, some likelier than others. There has been plenty of talk that Xavi Hernández is interested in snapping up Álvaro Morata from Atlético Madrid, though the Barça manager has waved it away as a mere “hypothesis”. Meanwhile, TNT Sports claims the former Chelsea playmaker Oscar, currently at Shanghai Port FC, is also a target for the Catalans. In the WSL, Arsenal’s Vivianne Miedema is subject of interest from PSG and all-conquering Barcelona, with the Dutch striker’s contract expiring in the summer, but Arsenal are keen to keep her and Miedema has suggested she’s open to staying. And that’s all the weather. Only 20 more days to churn through.Labour has accused Boris Johnson of repeatedly misleading or obfuscating in the House of Commons and in interviews during questions about lockdown breaches in Downing Street. Here are the moments Johnson denied rules were broken. 1 December – House of Commons After the Mirror’s first story broke about Christmas parties in Downing Street: “What I can tell the right hon and learned gentleman is that all guidance was followed completely in No 10.” 2 December – Sky News Asked why he would not explain his account of the allegations, Johnson said: “Because I have told you and what I want to repeat … that the guidance is there and I am very, very keen that people understand this.” 7 December – BBC News When asked about Downing Street Parties in December, the prime minister said: “All the guidelines were observed.” 8 December – House of Commons After the Allegra Stratton video is released by ITV News: “I apologise for the impression that has been given that staff in Downing Street take this less than seriously. I am sickened myself and furious about that, but I repeat what I have said to him: I have been repeatedly assured that the rules were not broken. I repeat that I have been repeatedly assured since these allegations emerged that there was no party and that no Covid rules were broken.” 8 December – Downing Street press conference Asked why he had not extended the No10 inquiry: “ … all the evidence I can see, people in this building have stayed within the rules … if that turns out not to be the case … and people wish to bring allegations to my attention or to the police … then of course there will be proper sanctions …” 13 December – Sky News Asked again about Downing Street parties: “I can tell you once again that I certainly broke no rules … all that is being looked into.” 20 December – BBC News After the Guardian reveals pictures of people, including the prime minister, at No 10 drinks in the garden on 15 May 2020 “Those were people at work, talking about work. I have said what I have to say about that.”The police are investigating after a leaked email showed one of Boris Johnson’s top officials invited more than 100 Downing Street staff to a “bring your own booze” party during the first lockdown. At the time, only two people from different households could meet outdoors socially distanced. The prime minister is believed to have attended the event. We would like to know what you were doing on 20 May 2020. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Like most Canadians, residents of the city of Hamilton, Ontario, are well used to waking to find their yards and houses coated in a mantle of white. But when they left their houses on a recent morning, they were surprised to realise that it was not snow that had fallen in the night. At first, Adrienne Van Halem thought the city authorities had accidentally sprayed salt across the road, sidewalks and yards of her neighbourhood. “But when I got closer, I realized it wasn’t salt at all. There were white husks covering everything,” she said. “It was a snowfall of soybeans.” She shared images of her car to Reddit and a neighbourhood group on Facebook, where some urged her to quickly contact the city. Others, however said that the occasional dump of soya bean husks was part of life in Hamilton, an industrial city an hour south-west of Toronto. “Growing up [here] the snow was black and the car was dirty … living near any factory … be prepared to have pollution and fallout,” wrote one user. Van Halem, who lives down the street from a soya processing plant operated by US-based Bunge, contacted the company to see if they had an explanation. The next day, she received a voice mail confirming the soya husks had been accidentally released after a filter malfunctioned. “While the hulls discharge posed no health or safety risk to either neighbours or employees, we understand that the residue was an annoyance for our neighbours,” a Bunge spokesperson, Deb Seidel, told CBC News. Van Halem says she received a gift certificate for a local car wash’s cheapest cleaning package from the St Louis-based company, whose revenues in 2020 exceeded $40bn. “I appreciate the gesture because my car is still dirty from it,” said Van Halem. “And I get that it’s one of the realities that comes with living in a semi-industrial area.” She and her husband were aware that food processing sites had a history of accidentally releasing products into the air when they recently bought their house. In 2020, a factory accidentally dumped sugar on a neighbourhood. “But it didn’t leave a great taste in my mouth that the company didn’t seem to realise it had happened until neighbours started complaining.”Many things were remarkable about the trial of the Colston Four, who last week were found not guilty of criminal damage for pulling down the statue of the 17th-century slave trader Edward Colston and throwing it into Bristol harbour. Among them was the fact that the four defendants were white, as was the judge and, reportedly, most of the jurors. It made me wonder, are white people increasingly recognising the significance of Britain’s legacy of slavery? In my view, white people in Britain have a special responsibility when it comes to this legacy. After all, the vast majority of those who transported the captured Africans to the Caribbean were white. Similarly, the vast majority of those who “bought” these enslaved people and made them work on the appalling sugar, cotton and coffee plantations were white. The same is true of the shipowners and sailors, bankers and insurance officers, traders, dockworkers, shopkeepers and countless others involved in selling the commodities back in Britain. This includes my own family, who made money importing tobacco from American and Cuban plantations that were worked on by enslaved people. As to the general population who gained from the enormous wealth that poured into Britain on the back of slavery, again the vast majority were white. Of course, there were some Black and mixed-race people who helped capture the men and women enslaved by the British. Indeed, the presidents of both Benin and Ghana have acknowledged and apologised for their ancestors’ culpability in the slave trade. There were also some Black and mixed-race sailors, traders, plantation owners, even slaveholders. But this was on a minute scale compared to the systematic brutality of the white-controlled Caribbean slave societies. More than this, it is clear that the legacy of slavery is very much alive in Britain today. And while it is hard to prove a direct link between Britain’s role in slavery and contemporary social conditions, it nevertheless exists. You can see it in the higher arrest rates for Black British people, the differentials of economic opportunity and health outcomes, the widespread racism. Clearly, other groups experience social and economic hardships in Britain, including members of the white working class, but this does not preclude dealing with the specific challenges facing those of African and Caribbean descent. So while Britain today is an increasingly diverse society, it is still reasonable to say that the white population has an additional responsibility when it comes to the legacy of slavery. This then is what might be termed “white debt”. A cultural debt, acknowledging and apologising for the horror that was British slavery. A financial debt, compensating for the economic losses endured by those enslaved and the generations of their descendants. And a debt of gratitude, to the enslaved freedom fighters, who not only won liberty for themselves through bravery, courage and organisation, but for everyone, all humanity, including white people. I am not saying that white people alone have a debt, I am saying that white people have an additional responsibility. In the same way that by affirming Black Lives Matter it does not mean everyone else’s lives don’t matter, but that special attention needs to be paid to Black lives, as they are disproportionately suffering inequality and abuse. I know a little about reparations: I have received money from the German government because of what the Nazis did to my Jewish family in the 1930s. They kicked my grandmother out of university and stole my family’s house. My family was forced to flee the country. Several relatives were killed in the Holocaust. To be clear, the British slave trade and what Jews endured in Nazi Germany are two separate historical tragedies, and to draw out similarities and differences, or worst of all to judge which crime is greater, would be a mistake. But I believe there may be some lessons to be learned. Clearly, not everyone agrees with me. When my book came out last week, I was criticised by the rightwing press for “wallowing in guilt”. Of course, going after individuals, rather than talking about white people’s collective responsibility – let alone the legacy of slavery for the descendants of those enslaved – is an effort to distract, minimise and marginalise. It is also not unusual. Midway through the trial of the Colston Four, a presenter on the rightwing news channel GB News proclaimed: “I’m in favour of white people calling out racism … but the Colston saga reeks of white guilt.” The good news is that conversations around our shared history are increasingly happening. Think of the Black Lives Matter protests. The National Trust report into properties funded by slavery. The University of Glasgow, Bank of England, Lloyds of London and others engaging with their legacies of slavery. Instead of being erased, as Boris Johnson and his associates often claim, our history is being brought into the light, so it can be reexamined and recurated. We don’t know why the jury in the Colston Four trial made their decision, but they were presented with perfectly lawful reasons to acquit. There does seem to have been a moral dimension to the proceedings. Pulling down the statue was an “expression of my allyship and solidarity with people of colour”, one of the defendants, Rhian Graham, told the court. “By removing that statue we were removing a symbol of great harm and oppression that towered over our community and offended so many.” Which is why the decision to find the Colston Four not guilty last week gave me hope. For it just perhaps signalled that white people are beginning to really acknowledge Britain’s legacy of slavery. The next question is, what should be done about it? Thomas Harding is the author of White Debt: the Demerara Uprising and Britain’s Legacy of SlaveryBy this time next year, the 2022 World Cup will have come and gone. Soccer’s great and good will have descended on Qatar for the most controversial tournament in the sport’s history, and they’ll have left again. New world champions will have been crowned. Whether or not the US men’s national team will have participated, though, is still unknown. As things stand, Gregg Berhalter’s team stand a good chance of being in Qatar. The USA occupy second place in the final round of qualifying – Concacaf’s first ever ‘octagonal’ – with more than half the fixtures played. The ghosts of 2018 World Cup qualifying still haunt American soccer, nobody is taking anything for granted, but it would be a shock if, from this position of strength, the USA didn’t make the 2022 tournament. Berhalter has systematically found solutions in most areas of the pitch since his appointment as head coach three years ago. His midfield is now a well-established unit with the USA’s defense in better shape than it was a year ago. Christian Pulisic, Gio Reyna, Timothy Weah and Brenden Aaronson also give the squad real quality in the attacking midfield and wide positions. Up front, though, there is still a position to be earned. Berhalter has options, but none to build around this far out from the World Cup at the end of the year. Some countries are lucky enough to have a world class number nine to elevate their level – see Robert Lewandowski for Poland and Harry Kane for England – but the US don’t have that. Not yet, anyway. In the eyes of many, Ricardo Pepi could potentially be that figure. The 18-year-old striker has only just completed a $20m move to Augsburg where he is expected to be a first-team player in the Bundesliga. Succeed in Germany and Pepi will surely be Berhalter’s first pick to play as his number nine at the World Cup (assuming the USA qualify). 2021 was a breakthrough year for Pepi at international level with the teenager called into Berhalter’s squad for the first time in August. He scored his first USA goal on his debut against Honduras in World Cup qualifying the following month and backed it up with a brace in a win over Jamaica the month after that. Pepi is a penalty box poacher. Flanked by top quality wide man, the teenager will get goalscoring opportunities for the USA. Pepi is also capable of creating chances for himself on the dribble. Anticipation and technical ability on the ball make the former FC Dallas youngster a good fit for Berhalter’s system and general approach. “We’re all excited,” Berhalter said when asked to describe Pepi’s potential. “For us, we’re just sitting there and we’re on the train. He’s an 18-year-old who gets an opportunity, takes advantage. What you see and I think what I really like is that he has this instinct, and it’s really hard to teach that to players.” Daryl Dike is another young American forward who could feasibly play a big role for the USA at the 2022 World Cup with the 21-year-old also making the move to a new club this month, joining West Brom in a reported $9.5m deal from Orlando City. Dike already has English Championship experience having flourished in a loan spell at Barnsley last season and has been signed to spearhead the Baggies’ promotion challenge. On talent alone, there might not be much between Dike and Pepi, but Berhalter’s system favors the latter. Indeed, the USA might not need a battering ram like Dike to lead the line in Qatar, although a good 2022 at club level for West Brom would surely see him included in the World Cup squad as a depth option at the very least. Josh Sargent stands a good chance of being included in Berhalter’s 23-man squad, although the 21-year-old’s underwhelming form for Norwich City has called into question his role for the USA. In contrast, Jordan Pefok has scored an impressive 16 goals in 30 games, including five in European competition (and one against Manchester United), for Young Boys this season, ensuring that the 25-year-old will be mentioned in any discussion over who should start up front at the World Cup. A flurry of goals by Matthew Hoppe for Schalke in the final stages of last season thrust another young American forward into focus only for the Barca Residency Academy graduate to fade into obscurity at Real Mallorca, where he has started just one league match since joining in the summer. Meanwhile, Gyasi Zardes, a relative veteran at 30 years old, remains a reliable option and a favourite of Berhalter’s. The prospect of playing Pulisic as a ‘false nine’ has even been raised, particularly after being used in this position by Chelsea manager Thomas Tuchel. Pulisic, of course, is a winger by trade. That he is even been mentioned as a potential number nine with the 2022 World Cup on the horizon highlights how the USA still have to settle on a frontman. With the 2022 World Cup being a winter tournament, there is still time for the aforementioned contenders to secure their place in Berhalter’s plans, but the transfer activity that has involved the likes of Pepi, Dike and Sargent in the last six months proves the race to be the USA’s starting number nine in Qatar has already started.Dan Smith doesn’t know how to switch off. In the decade or so that he has been the creative heart, and frontman, of the band Bastille, he has thought about music constantly. There was a two-week period over Christmas and new year where he thought he had managed not to. Then he went to a double bill at the cinema. “I got the whole way through the first film and three-quarters of the way through the second film before I had to leave, sing into my phone in the corridor awkwardly, and then come back in,” he says. “If I have a song idea that pops into my head, I have to get it down. It will eat away at me if I forget it, or it’s just on loop in my head.” This may be testament to Smith’s catchy hooks. Since the release of Bastille’s first album, it has been a decade of No 1s, award nominations and sell-out tours. Commercial success was swift, although critical acclaim followed more slowly. A fourth album, Give Me the Future, is released next month. Yet, despite this objective success, sitting in the control room of Bastille’s studio with his ankle resting on his knee, Smith says he has a “very low opinion” of himself. “I can’t really explain it,” he says. “I think there’s dissonance in my head between what we’ve achieved and how I’m perceived, and the reality in my head.” Smith, 35, is impossible not to like. We speak twice, first over Zoom before Christmas when he is isolating with Covid at home, then in the unassuming studio building, tucked behind a car showroom in south London. After greeting me, he is away, chatting freely about parties with his university friends for New Year’s Eve, “hangxiety”, insomnia, diets and how much he loved spending Christmas with his family (especially his young nephews), often interrupting himself with overlapping tangents, his broad hand gestures to emphasise points. He is affable, funny – and touchingly hospitable (“I’m sorry if you think I’m trying to drown you,” he says after offering to get me water for a fourth time). When he talks about the pressures of being in a band – touring, criticism, fame, performance anxiety, onstage panic attacks – he does so with humour and an explicit caveat about how privileged he is to do what he does. With his fastidious modesty and painstaking self-awareness, he is very much the millennial frontman. “I’ve never been good at trying to pretend to be like this slick, rock star frontman, because it’s not what I ever wanted to be,” he says. “I see other artists who are so good at that – and it’s a skill in itself – but it’s just not one that I’m that interested in.” Smith isn’t keen on interviews or photoshoots (“Just to warn you, I have no control over my face,” he says, deadpan, approaching the photographer). He seems at ease today, although he tells me his university friends still find it hilarious that someone as introverted as him is the lead singer of a mainstream band. Smith grew up in south London with his lawyer parents and sister. He had a happy childhood, he says, but he was a self-conscious child and never dreamed of a musical career. “Just the idea of standing up in front of people and doing anything, let alone playing music, was so far from anything I could imagine wanting to do.” As a teenager, Smith wrote songs on his piano and laptop in his bedroom, but kept them to himself. Then, at university, friends encouraged him to join a talent contest (he was runner up). Pub gigs and open mic nights followed, but he experienced severe stage fright. “I was so nervous. I was such a wreck,” he says. “I used to drink quite a lot before going on, which was not conducive with having to hit a loop pedal and keep time with yourself. It was a nightmare.” In 2010, after finishing university, Smith formed Bastille with Chris Wood, Kyle Simmons and Will Farquarson. The band released an EP independently and built up a loyal following, touring the country in borrowed cars. The band’s first album, Bad Blood, was written in Smith’s bedroom and produced with a friend. “It couldn’t really have been more DIY if it tried,” he says. Even when they signed a record deal he never thought they would be successful. “We were never hyped; we weren’t being told we were going to be successful. So it was news to us. It was news to our record label, and to everyone!” But when Bad Blood was released in 2013 it debuted at No 1 in the UK albums chart and became the biggest-selling digital album of that year. Its anthemic earworm, Pompeii, went platinum in the UK and double platinum in the US. Critics hated it. “It was rinsed!” Smith says, laughing. “It’s such a cliche, but you can hear 100 nice things and you remember the one that’s not. It’s such a human thing. And maybe it’s an anxious-person thing to fixate on the negative.” Critics were kinder to later albums Wild World (another UK No 1) and Doom Days (which peaked at No 4 in the UK), and in 2015 the band were nominated for a Grammy. But this intense, sudden rise to fame “freaked out” the fame-averse Smith, who is happy with the fact that many people have heard Bastille’s music, but have no idea what he looks like. “I was hugely self-deprecating as a defence mechanism,” he says. “I was always such a huge pessimist. We all worked so hard on the band at the beginning – and continue to – because we loved it. But I’ve always been expecting it to fall apart at any moment. I think that’s why I never think too far in the future.” Smith has a complicated relationship with his appearance, partly, he thinks, from being overweight as a teenager. “I was big through the end of childhood and through quite a lot of university,” he says. “I’m really aware of not wanting to imply that anyone shouldn’t want to be big. But I remember being just really self-conscious and wanting to look different.” Before his third year at university, he went travelling in Thailand and caught a virus. He lost his appetite and the weight fell off. When he returned home he started eating more healthily and exercised more. That summer, his weight dropped six stone. “When I lost loads of weight and suddenly just looked like a different person, it’s quite a … I think for anyone that’s gone through quite a big, radical physical transformation it can be a fair thing to get your head around.” He doesn’t want people to think this was a magical or aspirational transformation. “It didn’t suddenly instil me with loads of confidence,” he says. “For a long time, I still identified as a bigger guy, and still do to this day.” Smith says he has never felt pressure from the music industry to change his weight, but his body dysmorphia meant the constant exposure to seeing his own face – in videos, photographs or artwork – has been tricky to navigate. “It’s a bizarre line of work in which you are constantly confronted by your own image,” he says. “It’s not fun – and it doesn’t feel particularly healthy. “I think a lot of people suffer from different versions of body dysmorphia,” he says. “We all have the version of ourselves that we see in our own heads and often that’s so different from the version of who we are through other people’s eyes.” It makes being on stage uncomfortable. “For someone who has body image issues, it’s complicated getting up on stage every night in front of lots of people, when your instinct is to hide away,” Smith says. “Sometimes it’s not a problem, sometimes it is.” Smith has never needed to drink before getting on stage to perform with Bastille, but it is still a nerve-racking, isolating experience even with his bandmates beside him. “It’s really up in the air as to whether or not I’ll have a good show or not because I get really nervous,” he says. “I have this really unhelpful thing where I go pitch deaf on stage – so I can hear noise, but can’t place anything – and then I become really self-conscious about not singing in tune, because you can’t hear what’s going on. “I remember playing at Alexandra Palace [in north London] – which should have been such an amazing moment – and two songs in I just lost it and went completely pitch deaf and the whole gig for me was then this mad, terrifying rollercoaster of just trying to get through it. I hear myself saying this and it’s just a real shame.” Performing, in other words, is what he has to do to fulfil his passion of writing, recording and working with other creative people. He wishes he could enjoy it, and is honoured that fans come to see him, but his stage fright is “essentially a form of a panic attack”. Bastille’s fourth album leans heavily into Smith’s fondness for sci-fi (he talks fervently about the films Brazil, Minority Report and Ghost in the Shell, and the writers Philip K Dick and Margaret Atwood). He made his directorial debut for the music video to No Bad Days, exploring themes of resurrecting loved ones through technology. The song was inspired by Smith’s aunt, who died of cancer a few years ago. “She happened to live in a state in Australia where they just legalised assisted dying and she was one of the first people to go down that path,” he says. He was able to travel to see her before she died. “To me, she’s amazing for having taken that decision and was so amazingly generous at helping guide all the people around her that she loved through this incredibly difficult situation.” In the past 10 years, Smith has rarely taken time off. Even during lockdown last year he didn’t slow down, spending his days finishing the latest album, running an online film club and volunteering at food banks and vaccination centres. In the evenings he wrote more music, like he did as a student (“which I loved”). And when he’s not with Bastille, Smith is collaborating with others and enjoying being “a small part in this much bigger thing”. He has written songs for artists (including Yungblud, Lizzo and Haim); scored films (his latest is the upcoming From Devil’s Breath, a short film produced by Leonardo DiCaprio), and worked with other musicians through Bastille’s record label and studio, One Eyed Jack, which the band set up to offer a free space for other (often emerging) artists to use. He is also co-hosting a BBC Sounds podcast with books enthusiast Simon Savidge, Turn Up for the Books, out this week, and is working on a full-blown musical with two of his friends. What does he do to switch off? Marathons, naturally. Doesn’t he worry about burnout? “Massively!” Smith says. “But I think because we started in a place where I was involved with every single bit, and was determined to not leave that, I’ve just stayed involved in everything to the point where it can be consuming. I think, at points, I’ve just taken on way too much.” With all the success that Bastille has experienced, has his “brutal critical narrative” quietened down? “I think there’s a small part of me that’s really, really conditioned to think that way,” he says. “But I think I’ve seen some of that negativity beaten out of me by the fact that it’s 10 years on, and we’re still allowed to do this stuff.” And as long as he’s able to keep doing it, he is happy. “Recording has always been the thing I do for fun,” he says. “The studio is the bit I love. Touring and all the other things that come with being in a band are just a side point to making songs, writing songs and creating something out of nothing. Which, for me and my basic little brain, is really satisfying.” Give Me the Future is released on EMI on 4 February. Bastille tour the UK in March and April. The Turn Up for the Books podcast is on BBC Sounds from 12 January.“A free, fair and credible election.” These words of promise echo throughout Camilla Nielsson’s riveting documentary, capturing the fervour of the 2018 presidential vote in Zimbabwe, the country’s first without Robert Mugabe since its independence. While opening with the rip-roaring rallies for Nelson Chamisa, who is running for the presidency against the incumbent Emmerson Mnangagwa, Mugabe’s former aide, President is more than an intimate portrait of a charismatic opposition leader. Considering the fraudulent electoral practices that existed under Mugabe’s 30-year reign, this election concretises a collective cry for democracy to triumph over decades of corruption and lies. Such a desire, alas, comes with blood, sweat and tears. Punctuating the rousing scenes of Chamisa’s campaign trail – he draws support from both urban and rural voters – is the gritty behind-the-scenes grind at the opposition party’s headquarters. At times, the documentary plays like a political thriller as Chamisa staffers frantically gather intel on the outcome of what increasingly looks like a rigged election in favour of Mnangagwa. The tense atmosphere of these office corridors is juxtaposed with the protests on the streets, where pressure has boiled over into physical altercations between Chamisa voters and the police, who fire live bullets at the dissenting crowd, killing six. As Mnangagwa is sworn into office, both Chamisa’s efforts to challenge the result in court as well as his supporters’ guerrilla demonstrations prove futile. Still, this is far from a defeatist film: what President does well is show that linear narrative is not necessarily the point in the fight for democracy. Victory might not be immediate, but the people’s hope for change will never die. • President is released on 14 January in cinemas.David Sassoli, the president of the European parliament whose final political intervention had been to oppose the building of walls on the EU’s borders, has been praised for his kindness following his death at the age of 65. The former journalist, whose three-year term as speaker of the chamber was due to end next week, had been admitted to hospital in Aviano, in his native Italy, on Boxing Day following a “dysfunction of his immune system”. He died at 1.15am on Tuesday. In an address posted on social media three days before being hospitalised, Sassoli, a centre-left Italian Democrat, had spoken of his hope for the year to come but lamented the construction of walls that “block people who seek shelter”, in an apparent reference to the plight of refugees stuck between Poland and Belarus. “Our challenge is to build a new world that respects people and nature and believes in a new economy based not just on the profits for the few but on well being for all,” Sassoli had said. Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, tweeted in Italian: “I am deeply saddened by the death of a great European and Italian. Sassoli was a passionate journalist, an extraordinary president of the European parliament and above all a dear friend. My thoughts go out to his family. Rest in peace, dear David.” Mario Draghi, Italy’s prime minister, described Sassoli, who had first been elected to the European parliament in 2009, as “a man of the institutions, a profound pro-European”. Frans Timmermans, the European Commission vice-president, tweeted: “David Sassoli, EP president and dear friend, has died. I’m at a loss for words. His kindness was an inspiration to all who knew him. My heartfelt sympathies to his family and all his loved ones. Addio amico mio.” Sassoli had been in hospital since 26 Decemberwith “a serious complication due to a dysfunction of the immune system”. The former television newsreader had struggled with ill-health since being taken to hospital in Strasbourg in September where he had been treated for a severe case of pneumonia caused by legionella. “David Sassoli passed away at 1.15am on 11 January at the CRO in Aviano, Italy, where he was hospitalized,” his spokesperson Roberto Cuillo tweeted. He is survived by his wife, Alessandra, an architect, and two children, Giulio and Livia. Born in Florence, Sassoli had started his journalistic career on local newspapers before joining the staff of Il Giorno, for whom he reported from Rome. He moved to the Italian national television broadcaster RAI in 1992, where he would become a nationally known anchor presenting the main evening news. He was tempted into politics by Walter Veltroni, a former mayor of Rome who became the first leader of the Democratic party when it was formed in 2007. Between 2009 to 2014, Sassoli was the party’s head of delegation in the European parliament before becoming the surprise compromise choice for president of the chamber in 2019 following a division of the big EU institutional jobs in the wake of that year’s elections. Sassoli was a member of the chamber’s Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats, the second-biggest grouping after the centre-right European People’s party (EPP). MEPs are expected to hold the first round of voting for his successor next week. Roberta Metsola, a Maltese member of the EPP who is set to replace Sassoli, tweeted: “I am heartbroken. Europe has lost a leader, I have a lost a friend, democracy has lost a champion.”Bumper shareholder payouts, soaring profits, booming asset valuations: the oil and gas industry has bounced back from the depths of the pandemic with a vengeance. After a difficult 2020, when plunging demand led at one point to negative prices, crude recovered in 2021 and wholesale gas prices have soared in Europe and the UK. Gas has risen as much as tenfold to new all-time highs, due to factors including low storage capacity, strong Chinese demand and low wind generation during the summer. BP boss Bernard Looney illustrated this bonanza when he said the oil and gas giant had become a “cash machine”. North Sea oil and gas companies are expected to report near-record cashflows of almost $20bn (£14.9bn) for the current financial year, according to industry experts at Wood MacKenzie. The revival of the industry’s fortunes has spurred calls for a windfall tax on North Sea producers, with the proceeds used to subsidise energy bills for households facing a cost-of-living crisis. The Liberal Democrats first made the suggestion last week, and Labour took up the call at the weekend. Rachel Reeves, shadow chancellor of the exchequer, said: “There is a global gas price crisis, but 10 years of the Conservatives’ failed energy policy and dither and delay has created a price crisis that’s being felt by everyone. We want to stop bills going up.” The Conservative former energy minister Chris Skidmore has also publicly backed the idea, which has been rejected by the government. Shell, the world’s largest producer and trader of liquefied natural gas (LNG), said last week that profits would be higher than expected thanks to the elevated prices. Unlike gas that arrives via pipelines from fields in the North Sea, LNG is shipped across oceans to the highest bidder, meaning companies like Shell benefit from surging global prices. Shell was already planning to hand investors a $7bn bonus by offering to buy shares back from them, but has now said this will happen “at pace”. The largest North Sea explorer is not BP or Shell, but Harbour Energy, created via the merger of Premier Oil and Chrysaor earlier this year. In a recent update, Harbour said it expected “materially higher free cashflow at current commodity prices” and announced a $200m-a-year (£147m) dividend for investors. Many firms that drill for oil and gas in the North Sea are private companies, not listed on the stock market, meaning they do not have to publish accounts as promptly as companies such as BP, Shell or Harbour. But some have provided insight into how high gas prices are working in their favour. Rising oil prices have been good news for chemical group Ineos, which is owned by Monaco-based British multi-billionaire Sir Jim Racliffe and has drilling licences in fields including Breagh and the West of Shetlands area. Revenues increased by 87%, or €2.4bn, to €5.1bn in the three-month period ending on 30 September 2021. This was “driven primarily by higher prices and increased volumes”, the company said. “The increase in selling prices followed the increase in crude oil prices, which increased to an average of $73 [per barrel] as compared to $43 in the same period in 2020.” In a recent update on trading, Ithaca, owned by the Israeli group Delek, said rising prices meant gas revenue per barrel from its North Sea assets, which include the Alba and Alder gas fields, nearly doubled in the third quarter, from $49 last year to $97. As it boosted production to meet demand and cash in on strong prices, revenues from gas more than tripled from $59m to $180m over the three-month period. The industry has warned against a windfall tax, and points out that its own improved fortunes mean a multi-billion-pound tax uplift. “[The Treasury] will get an additional £3.5bn taxes in the two years from last April – making a total of more than £5bn,” said Oil &amp; Gas UK spokesperson Jenny Stanning. “We already pay up to 40% corporation tax – roughly double any other sector.” Graham Kellas, senior vice-president of global fiscal research at Wood Mackenzie, said a windfall tax might be counterproductive. “Higher taxes generally dampen investment and the upstream industry is currently under pressure to reduce activity, so this could be exacerbated,” he said. “Some companies may not pay any more tax even if the rate increases. “If they are investing in new projects, or involved in significant decommissioning operations, the deduction of these costs could absorb most of their revenue. For others, it will reduce their profit margin. “This may not have an immediate impact on activity but will reduce enthusiasm for future investment. Reduced investment will accelerate the decline in North Sea production and this will need to be replaced by imports, unless demand for oil products decreases at a similar rate.” Malcolm Graham-Wood, founding partner of Hydrocarbon Capital, said: “Those suggesting a windfall tax have very short memories. Not only did chancellor Osborne have to rescind a windfall owing to a massive drop in activity in the North Sea, but it was only two years ago that oil was trading at a negative number as demand was so weak. “The bottom line is that it has been proved to be counterproductive to windfall-tax the oil companies operating in the North Sea.” Green campaigners have also argued strongly that the answer to high energy prices is to generate more green power, and criticised ministers for their lack of action. Tessa Khan, director of Uplift, which campaigns for a fossil-free UK, told the Guardian: “This government has abdicated responsibility for securing affordable energy to profit-driven oil and gas companies, with disastrous results for households. As long the government fails to plan for and support renewable energy at the scale we need, we’ll continue to be reliant on expensive gas imports in this country. Opening up new oil and gas fields in the UK won’t change energy bills and will only lock us into long-term dependency on fossil fuels.” She added: “If you want to know why the government has ceded control to the industry, just look at the generous oil and gas company donations the Conservative party receives, or the dozens of Lords and MPs that are employed by or have shares in the industry. But really it’s a lack of vision, planning and investment in the UK’s massive renewables potential.”My husband and I recently got married. He was a virgin at the time and I am puzzled by the fact that he doesn’t ejaculate or orgasm. He assures me that he likes our time together but I worry he may have some underlying issue that he should get checked out. The sex is amazing for me as I have multiple orgasms but we want to have children and I am scared that will not happen easily. There are ways to conceive without intercourse and climax. But in terms of his sexual health, it would be important to know if he has ever ejaculated (perhaps while sleeping?) or had an orgasm. If not, he should certainly have a checkup. But some people – for example, those who grew up in households where there was a highly punitive attitude towards developing sexuality – do not naturally glean an understanding of their sexual selves, or discover how their genitals work through self-exploration and masturbation. Such people usually have to learn about their sexual responses as adults, and making love with an adult partner can be challenging. Try to start a very gentle, non-threatening conversation with him that might begin: “I really love having sex with you, but it seems a little bit one-sided so I am curious about what exactly gives you pleasure?” Perhaps you can jointly discover the answer. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.Joe Biden has styled himself as a defender of democracy but, critics say, is setting the worst possible example with his choice of envoy to Athens. The US president nominated George Tsunis, a hotel developer and Democratic donor with no diplomatic experience, as US ambassador to Greece. When Tsunis seeks confirmation at a Senate foreign relations committee hearing on Wednesday, he will be hoping to avoid a repeat of the train wreck that was his last appearance there eight years ago. On that occasion Tsunis was Barack Obama’s nominee for ambassador to Norway. Bumbling and ill-prepared, he admitted that he had never been to Norway and referred to the country as having a president when, as a constitutional monarchy, it does not. Tsunis also claimed that Norway’s Progress party was among “fringe elements” that “spew their hatred” and was criticized by Norway’s government. In fact, the Progress party was part of the governing coalition. The hapless nominee withdrew from consideration after causing dismay among Norwegian Americans and earning ridicule on CNN’s Anderson Cooper 360 and Comedy Central’s The Daily Show with Jon Stewart. Now he is getting a do-over that, critics maintain, he does not deserve. Brett Bruen, who was global engagement director of the Obama White House and recalls Tsunis’s first foray as a “debacle” in which he was “torn to shreds” by Senator John McCain, said: “The notion that he gets a second chance just utterly shocks me because in serious circles of international affairs he’s a punchline. “So why in the world would you send someone to a significant country like Greece – at a dangerous time – to represent us there who in the eyes of most foreign policy hands can’t keep some fundamental facts straight and does not deserve to be ambassador to Ulaanbaatar, let alone Athens?” A lawyer, developer and philanthropist, Tsunis has donated to both Democrats and Republicans, including more than $1.3m to Obama in 2012. His nomination for the post in Greece maintains a controversial American practice of naming political donors with little or no diplomatic experience as ambassadors. There is said to be disappointment in the state department that Biden, who promised to elevate career diplomats, has chosen a majority of political appointees in his first year in office. Bruen, now president the public affairs agency Global Situation Room, added: “Tsunis is likely the worst nominee that Biden has put forward and there’s some stiff competition because Biden has ignored the advice and the concerns of those with diplomatic experience, saying now is not the time to be doling out party favours to your donors. “We need to have serious seasoned leadership in our embassies overseas. The whole nomination process reeks of backroom deals and favour trading but this is what Biden said he was going to clean up.” Last month, when Michael McFaul, a former US ambassador to Russia, admitted on Twitter that he would rather be serving in government than tweeting, Bruen replied: “Something’s seriously wrong with Biden’s selection process when those with absolutely no diplomatic experience are leading large embassies and seasoned ambassadors are sitting on the sidelines, ready to serve …” Tsunis, a Greek American born in Queens, New York, founded Chartwell Hotels and chairs the Battery Park City Authority, which manages a 92-acre planned development on Manhattan’s lower west side. The White House has defended his nomination, noting that Tsunis is fluent in Greek, involved in Greek American organizations and has travelled to Greece many times. An administration official said: “We believe Mr Tsunis is well-suited for this position and the Senate should confirm quickly so he can get started on the important work to be done.” But Chas Freeman, a retired career diplomat and former ambassador to Saudi Arabia, told the Reuters news agency last year: “Aside from his Greek heritage, there is no reason to believe he is any more qualified to represent the United States in Athens than he was in Oslo. “Our embassy in Athens should not be treated as a sinecure to be purchased in return for campaign contributions or as a training ground for novice diplomats, still less incompetent amateurs.” Biden pledged to rebuild the state department and help diplomacy recover from the turmoil of Donald Trump’s presidency. But Senate Republicans have stalled the confirmation process in an effort to extract policy and personnel concessions from the White House, leaving many crucial posts unfilled. When the questioning begins, Tsunis will be under considerable pressure to avoid the stumbles that made his first hearing in 2014 a subject of widespread mockery. Dennis Jett, a professor at the Penn State School of International Affairs in Pennsylvania, said: “It was the most pathetic hearing performance I’ve ever seen. He couldn’t even answer a softball asking what would American businessmen do in Norway? “And then the fact that he didn’t know anything about the Norwegian government, didn’t know anything about the political parties involved, which McCain pointed out. It was just awful. I think his qualifications are laughable. “Somehow we in the United States have this impression that anybody who’s a successful money-grubbing businessman can be a first-class ambassador or an acceptable ambassador. It’s laughable. It’s been demonstrated over and over again that these people don’t know anything about government.” Jett, a former US ambassador to Mozambique and Peru and author of the book American Ambassadors, shares concerns over the diplomatic positions being subject to a pay-to-play system. “We’re the only country in the world that has an open market for selling the title of ambassador,” he added.In a phone interview with Fox News Digital on Saturday, Mike Pompeo revealed that he lost in excess of 90lb (41kg) over the past six months after making wholesale lifestyle changes following his exit from the Trump administration last year. The interview came after photos of a slimmed-down Pompeo emerged over the weekend, renewing speculation that the former secretary of state is seriously considering a 2024 presidential run. Pompeo – whose diminished profile in his regular Fox News appearances was not lost on the channel’s dedicated viewers – went out of his way to point out that he lost the weight himself, through self-guided workouts and more disciplined dietary habits and not with surgery or help from any fitness professionals. There’s certainly no denying Pompeo’s physical transformation. But his claims that he lost the weight through minor diet and exercise changes have created controversy among nutritionists and fitness industry professionals – none of whom believe such dramatic weight loss would be possible without major life changes. “Ninety [pounds] in six [months] is unbelievable,” one fitness expert alleged in the Kansas City Star, “especially for his age.” The 58-year-old claimed he lost the weight because he “stopped eating carbs to a large extent”, and “tried to eat smaller portions”. Pompeo says he built a gym in the basement of his home and outfitted it with some dumbbells and an elliptical machine. “I tried to get down there five, six times a week and stay at it for a half-hour or so,” he told the Post. “And that was nothing scientific. There was no trainer, there was no dietician. It was just me.” Away from the job he says he now opts for healthier options like egg whites and turkey bacon instead of pumpkin pancakes during family trips to Ihop. Pompeo insists he’s paring down for his health, not a presidential run. But unlike the ex-New Jersey governor Chris Christie (who shed 100lb in a year after Lap-Band surgery) or the New York City mayor, Eric Adams, (who flaunts his vegan diet), Pompeo – in his two interviews on the subject – seems intent on making the point that his fitness journey was the product of good ol’ fashion manly-man bootstrapping. There’d be little reason to doubt Pompeo if he weren’t also a historically unreliable narrator who has misled the public on everything from his administration’s support of the US’s controversial Afghan exit strategy to the Saudi government’s role in the murder of Jamal Khashoggi to the overly lavish gifts he received from foreign dignitaries. Not only is he being cagey about his own weight loss, but he’s making his results sound attainable. “Now from a stress standpoint, he no longer has to work for Trump, so that may be something that allows him access to a helluva lot less stress so he doesn’t keep weight on because of that,” said Milo Bryant, a 30-year fitness veteran and author of the forthcoming book Unstoppable After 40, who’s never had a client come close to Pompeo’s alleged fat burn rate. Pompeo isn’t the first politician to pimp their fitness. George HW Bush, a passionate runner, made regular use of an Air Force One treadmill during long international flights. Bill Clinton turned to street jogging after undergoing quadruple bypass surgery. Mike Huckabee moved to address his health after a chair collapsed under him in a cabinet meeting and he received a type-2 diabetes diagnosis. The erstwhile Republican presidential candidate lost 100lb, but unlike Pompeo acknowledged it was through a drastic diet change and long-distance running. “I would love to know the totality of what [Pompeo] did,” said Bryant. “For someone to lose 90 pounds in six months, you’re talking 15 pounds a month on average. No research shows it’s healthy to lose two and four pounds per week. Four times four is 16 pounds. It’s possible that it could happen, but I don’t see it happening by only working out 30 minutes a day.”Kazakhstan’s president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, has said troops from a Russian-led military bloc will begin their withdrawal from the country within two days. Tokayev asked for assistance from the Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO) last week to help him regain control, after unrest that left at least 164 people dead. The deployment, swiftly agreed to by the alliance, led to speculation that it could be used to create a permanent Russian foothold in Kazakhstan. However, Tokayev insisted the withdrawal would begin this week and would be completed within 10 days. “The main mission of the CSTO peacekeeping forces has been successfully completed,” he said, in an address to Kazakhstan’s parliament. Dmitry Peskov, spokesperson for the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said the troops would withdraw according to the requested timetable. “It is fully and completely the prerogative of the country which forwarded this request to the CSTO … It is their analysis, and we have no right to intervene in it,” he told reporters. Tokayev ordered a ruthless crackdown last week after protests over rising fuel prices were taken over by violent groups, who attacked government buildings and briefly seized the airport in Almaty, Kazakhstan’s largest city. He has described those involved as “terrorists” with shadowy foreign backers. The interior ministry said on Tuesday that 9,900 people had been detained in the aftermath of the violence. With the authorities back in control of the country, Tokayev made a range of announcements in an address to Kazakhstan’s parliament on Tuesday aimed at mollifying public discontent with the ruling elites. Tokayev noted that “a layer of wealthy people even by international standards” had appeared in Kazakhstan during the reign of his predecessor, Nursultan Nazarbayev, who ruled the country from 1991 to 2019 and handpicked Tokayev as his successor. Nazarbayev, 81, has remained absent from public view since the protests began, and Tokayev removed him from his position as head of the national security council last week. The extreme wealth accumulated by many of his family members and allies has contributed to the mood of protest in the country. Tokayev said these wealthy people, as well as profitable companies, would have to contribute to a new national fund, named For the People of Kazakhstan, which he planned to set up. “I believe that the time has come for them to give what is due to the people of Kazakhstan and to help the people on a systematic and regular basis,” he told parliament. Tokayev ordered the government to draw up a list of companies who would be required to contribute. Also on Tuesday, Tokayev nominated Alikhan Smailov as prime minister. Smailov was previously first deputy prime minister in the cabinet, which Tokayev dismissed last week. As well as personnel changes, authorities last week arrested the security services chief, Karim Masimov, a longstanding regime insider and former prime minister. His arrest, on suspicion of treason, has increased speculation that regime infighting was at least partly behind the violence of last week.Donald Trump’s elaborate plot to overthrow the democratically elected president was neither impulsive nor uncoordinated, but straight out of the playbook of another American coup attempt – the 1933 “Wall Street putsch” against newly elected Franklin Delano Roosevelt. America had hit rock bottom, beginning with the stock market crash three years earlier. Unemployment was at 16 million and rising. Farm foreclosures exceeded half a million. More than five thousand banks had failed, and hundreds of thousands of families had lost their homes. Financial capitalists had bilked millions of customers and rigged the market. There were no government safety nets – no unemployment insurance, minimum wage, social security or Medicare. Economic despair gave rise to panic and unrest, and political firebrands and white supremacists eagerly fanned the paranoia of socialism, global conspiracies and threats from within the country. Populists Huey Long and Father Charles Coughlin attacked FDR, spewing vitriolic anti-Jewish, pro-fascist refrains and brandishing the “America first” slogan coined by media magnate William Randolph Hearst. On 4 March 1933, more than 100,000 people had gathered on the east side of the US Capitol for Roosevelt’s inauguration. The atmosphere was slate gray and ominous, the sky suggesting a calm before the storm. That morning, rioting was expected in cities throughout the nation, prompting predictions of a violent revolution. Army machine guns and sharpshooters were placed at strategic locations along the route. Not since the civil war had Washington been so fortified, with armed police guarding federal buildings. FDR thought government in a civilized society had an obligation to abolish poverty, reduce unemployment, and redistribute wealth. Roosevelt’s bold New Deal experiments inflamed the upper class, provoking a backlash from the nation’s most powerful bankers, industrialists and Wall Street brokers, who thought the policy was not only radical but revolutionary. Worried about losing their personal fortunes to runaway government spending, this fertile field of loathing led to the “traitor to his class” epithet for FDR. “What that fellow Roosevelt needs is a 38-caliber revolver right at the back of his head,” a respectable citizen said at a Washington dinner party. In a climate of conspiracies and intrigues, and against the backdrop of charismatic dictators in the world such as Hitler and Mussolini, the sparks of anti-Rooseveltism ignited into full-fledged hatred. Many American intellectuals and business leaders saw nazism and fascism as viable models for the US. The rise of Hitler and the explosion of the Nazi revolution, which frightened many European nations, struck a chord with prominent American elites and antisemites such as Charles Lindbergh and Henry Ford. Hitler’s elite Brownshirts – a mass body of party storm troopers separate from the 100,000-man German army – was a stark symbol to the powerless American masses. Mussolini’s Blackshirts – the military arm of his organization made up of 200,000 soldiers – were a potent image of strength to a nation that felt emasculated. A divided country and FDR’s emboldened powerful enemies made the plot to overthrow him seem plausible. With restless uncertainty, volatile protests and ominous threats, America’s right wing was inspired to form its own paramilitary organizations. Militias sprung up throughout the land, their self-described “patriots” chanting: “This is despotism! This is tyranny!” Today’s Proud Boys and Oath Keepers have nothing on their extremist forbears. In 1933, a diehard core of conservative veterans formed the Khaki Shirts in Philadelphia and recruited pro-Mussolini immigrants. The Silver Shirts was an apocalyptic Christian militia patterned on the notoriously racist Texas Rangers that operated in 46 states and stockpiled weapons. The Gray Shirts of New York organized to remove “Communist college professors” from the nation’s education system, and the Tennessee-based White Shirts wore a Crusader cross and agitated for the takeover of Washington. JP Morgan Jr, one of the nation’s richest men, had secured a $100m loan to Mussolini’s government. He defiantly refused to pay income tax and implored his peers to join him in undermining FDR. So, when retired US Marine Corps Maj Gen Smedley Darlington Butler claimed he was recruited by a group of Wall Street financiers to lead a fascist coup against FDR and the US government in the summer of 1933, Washington took him seriously. Butler, a Quaker, and first world war hero dubbed the Maverick Marine, was a soldier’s soldier who was idolized by veterans – which represented a huge and powerful voting bloc in America. Famous for his daring exploits in China and Central America, Butler’s reputation was impeccable. He got rousing ovations when he claimed that during his 33 years in the marines: “I spent most of my time being a high-class muscle man for big business, for Wall Street and for bankers. In short, I was a racketeer for capitalism.” Butler later testified before Congress that a bond-broker and American Legion member named Gerald MacGuire approached him with the plan. MacGuire told him the coup was backed by a group called the American Liberty League, a group of business leaders which formed in response to FDR’s victory, and whose mission it was to teach government “the necessity of respect for the rights of persons and property”. Members included JP Morgan, Jr, Irénée du Pont, Robert Sterling Clark of the Singer sewing machine fortune, and the chief executives of General Motors, Birds Eye and General Foods. The putsch called for him to lead a massive army of veterans – funded by $30m from Wall Street titans and with weapons supplied by Remington Arms – to march on Washington, oust Roosevelt and the entire line of succession, and establish a fascist dictatorship backed by a private army of 500,000 former soldiers. As MacGuire laid it out to Butler, the coup was instigated after FDR eliminated the gold standard in April 1933, which threatened the country’s wealthiest men who thought if American currency wasn’t backed by gold, rising inflation would diminish their fortunes. He claimed the coup was sponsored by a group who controlled $40bn in assets – about $800bn today – and who had $300m available to support the coup and pay the veterans. The plotters had men, guns and money – the three elements that make for successful wars and revolutions. Butler referred to them as “the royal family of financiers” that had controlled the American Legion since its formation in 1919. He felt the Legion was a militaristic political force, notorious for its antisemitism and reactionary policies against labor unions and civil rights, that manipulated veterans. The planned coup was thwarted when Butler reported it to J Edgar Hoover at the FBI, who reported it to FDR. How seriously the “Wall Street putsch” endangered the Roosevelt presidency remains unknown, with the national press at the time mocking it as a “gigantic hoax” and historians like Arthur M Schlesinger Jr surmising “the gap between contemplation and execution was considerable” and that democracy was not in real danger. Still, there is much evidence that the nation’s wealthiest men – Republicans and Democrats alike – were so threatened by FDR’s policies that they conspired with antigovernment paramilitarism to stage a coup. The final report by the congressional committee tasked with investigating the allegations, delivered in February 1935, concluded: “[The committee] received evidence showing that certain persons had made an attempt to establish a fascist organization in this country”, adding “There is no question that these attempts were discussed, were planned, and might have been placed in execution when and if the financial backers deemed it expedient.” As Congressman John McCormack who headed the congressional investigation put it: “If General Butler had not been the patriot he was, and if they had been able to maintain secrecy, the plot certainly might very well have succeeded … When times are desperate and people are frustrated, anything could happen.” There is still much that is not known about the coup attempt. Butler demanded to know why the names of the country’s richest men were removed from the final version of the committee’s report. “Like most committees, it has slaughtered the little and allowed the big to escape,” Butler said in a Philadelphia radio interview in 1935. “The big shots weren’t even called to testify. They were all mentioned in the testimony. Why was all mention of these names suppressed from this testimony?” While details of the conspiracy are still matters of historical debate, journalists and historians, including the BBC’s Mike Thomson and John Buchanan of the US, later concluded that FDR struck a deal with the plotters, allowing them to avoid treason charges – and possible execution – if Wall Street backed off its opposition to the New Deal. The presidential biographer Sidney Blumenthal recently said that Roosevelt should have pushed it all through, then reneged on his agreement and prosecuted them. What might all of this portend for Americans today, as President Biden follows in FDR’s New Deal footsteps while democratic socialist Bernie Sanders also rises in popularity and influence? In 1933, rather than inflame a quavering nation, FDR calmly urged Americans to unite to overcome fear, banish apathy and restore their confidence in the country’s future. Now, 90 years later, a year on from Trump’s own coup attempt, Biden’s tone was more alarming, sounding a clarion call for Americans to save democracy itself, to make sure such an attack “never, never happens again”. If the plotters had been held accountable in the 1930s, the forces behind the 6 January coup attempt might never have flourished into the next century. • This article was amended on 12 January 2022 to rewrite a sentence in line with Guardian style guidance. Sally Denton is the author of The Plots Against the President: FDR, a Nation in Crisis, and the Rise of the American Right. Her forthcoming book is The Colony: Faith and Blood in a Promised LandA pair of “distinguished” dog-breeders were ordered to pay £400,000 by a judge for forcing animals to keep getting pregnant over at least six years. Karl Shellard, 43, and Victoria Shellard, 40, set up the unlicensed business called “PosherBulls” at their country home selling pups for up to £20,000 a time, Cardiff crown court heard. The couple forced breeding bitches to deliver more than one litter a year – breaking animal welfare laws, the court heard. They bred at least 67 litters over six years – with one dog named Coco delivering six litters within a four-year period. The Shellards were both fined £19,000 and ordered to pay back £372,531 – or face two years in prison. They were also ordered to pay court costs of £43,775. They made up to £372,000 selling bulldog puppies to customers through ads on a website and social media – and have more than £1m in assets. The court heard the pair were repeatedly told to apply for a licence from Vale of Glamorgan council but ignored the authorities. The prosecutor, Tim Evans, said the Shellards claimed to be “experienced breeders” and “leaders in distinguished bulldogs of all colours”. Karl Shellard claimed he had not sent off the licence application because they had been trying to sell their home and would need to change the address. He admitted practising dog breeding for six years despite not having a licence. Victoria Shellard said they would sell puppies for anything between £1,500 and £20,000. The pair admitted back to back breeding – where dogs had delivered more than one litter in a 12-month period. The court heard the crimes took place between 2014 and 2020 – with information on C-sections showing 43 litters had been delivered in just one year. An investigation revealed the Shellards attempted to avoid authorities by using “co-ownership contracts”, where they paid others to officially own or house the dogs. The pair pleaded guilty to breeding dogs without a licence and nine counts of failing to ensure the needs of a protected animal for which they were responsible. Investigations under the Proceeds of Crime Act revealed they made £372,531 illegally but had available assets of £1,041,714. Heath Edwards, defending, said the business became “nationally and internationally recognised” for the quality of the dogs which were “healthy and of unquestionable pedigree”. Judge David Wynn Morgan said: “You were running a puppy farm and doing it to make money, and you made a great deal of money indeed. “You could have run an extremely profitable business if you were properly registered but you’re going to pay the price for that folly.” The couple have three months to pay or receive 24 months in prison.I was fortunate to play a small part in a new study, just published in the journal Advances in Atmospheric Sciences, which shows that the Earth broke yet another heat record last year. Twenty-three scientists from around the world teamed up to analyze thousands of temperature measurements taken throughout the world’s oceans. The measurements, taken at least 2,000 meters (about 6,500ft) deep and spread across the globe, paint a clear picture: the Earth is warming, humans are the culprit, and the warming will continue indefinitely until we collectively take action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. We used measurements from the oceans because they are absorbing the vast majority of the heat associated with global warming. In fact, more than 90% of global warming heat ends up in the oceans. I like to say that “global warming is really ocean warming”. If you want to know how fast climate change is happening, the answer is in the oceans. But this paper was not merely an academic exercise. It has tremendous consequences to society and biodiversity on the planet. As oceans warm, they threaten sea life and the many food chains that originate in the sea. Warmer ocean waters make storms more severe. Cyclones and hurricanes become more powerful; rains fall harder, which increases flooding; storms surges are more dangerous; and sea levels rise (one of the major causes of rising sea levels is the expansion of water as it heats). How much did the world’s oceans warm in 2021 compared with the previous year? Well, our data shows that oceans heated by about 14 zettajoules (a zettajoule is 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 joules of energy). This is a mind-bending number, so it may help to use analogies. This is the equivalent of 440bn toasters running 24 hours a day, every day of the year. Another way to think about this is that the oceans have absorbed heat equivalent to seven Hiroshima atomic bombs detonating each second, 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. I have plotted the ocean heat, measured since the late 1950s, and the clear, persistent rise over the past three to four decades is unmistakable evidence of an Earth that is out of balance. The oceans are vast, and you need many measurements spread out across the planet to get a good sense of what is happening to the oceans as a whole. This study used hi-tech temperature sensors on autonomous buoys that rise and fall in the ocean waters as they make measurements. These sensors then send the data to laboratories around the world for analysis. In addition, we deployed high-quality temperature sensors from ships, temperatures from stationary buoys, and even strapped sensors to animals so we could measure temperatures from the water they traveled through. Our research was enabled by thousands of in-field researchers who are obtaining and processing the raw data. Without their contribution, studies like this would not be possible. We discovered that the temperatures are not rising uniformly across the planet. We found the fastest warming in the Atlantic, Indian and northern Pacific Oceans. In our work we also explore the question of why this pattern is emerging the way it is. Using climate model simulations, we directly tie various features of the ocean to human emissions of industrial pollution and greenhouse gases. These findings suggest that a similar pattern is likely to persist into the coming decades. The information we used is absolutely crucial for understanding the planet. You could say that we took the Earth’s temperature – and the Earth’s fever is getting worse. I asked my colleague Alexey Mishonov, a research scientist at the University of Maryland, about the implications of these findings. “Our results demonstrated that ocean warming is extensively penetrating deeper layers of the ocean,” Dr Mishonov said. “The resulting increase of the ocean heat content cannot be adequately assessed without real measurements. We need to continue our field missions and collect these data.” My new year’s resolution is to help the planet cool down. It’s getting hot in here and there is no sign things are going to change anytime soon. Collectively, we certainly have the technology to reduce greenhouse gases, but we have never really shown the will. John Abraham is a professor of thermal sciences at the University of St Thomas in MinnesotaScars left by the Covid-19 pandemic have deepened the global divide between rich and poor countries and will make it harder to find common cause in the fight against global heating, according to the World Economic Forum. A WEF report puts climate or environment-related threats in the top five slots in its list of the 10 long-term risks but warned a “vaccine divide” was making collaboration to limit temperature increases more difficult. Børge Brende, the WEF’s president said the report showed the cost of inaction on the climate emergency was far greater than the cost of action. “Our planet is on fire and we have to deal with it,” he said. In its annual global risks survey, the WEF – which has postponed its annual meeting in Davos until the summer because of the rapid spread of the Omicron variant – said the mood among its members was downbeat. Only 16% of those who responded to the survey said they were optimistic about the outlook for the world, and just 11% believe the global recovery will accelerate. Most respondents envisaged the next three years to be marked by either volatility and shocks or by a widening of the gap between winners and losers. Saadia Zahidi, the WEF managing director, said: “Health and economic disruptions are compounding social cleavages. This is creating tensions at a time when collaboration within societies and among the international community will be fundamental to ensure a more even and rapid global recovery. “Global leaders must come together and adopt a coordinated multi-stakeholder approach to tackle unrelenting global challenges and build resilience ahead of the next crisis.” Looking 10 years ahead, the WEF report found failure to act on climate change to be the biggest global risk, followed by extreme weather, biodiversity loss, natural resource crises and human environmental damage. Peter Giger, the group chief risk officer at Zurich insurance group, which helped to put together the report, said: “The climate crisis remains the biggest long-term threat facing humanity. “Failure to act on climate change could shrink global GDP by one-sixth and the commitments taken at Cop26 are still not enough to achieve the 1.5 centigrade goal. It is not too late for governments and businesses to act on the risks they face and to drive an innovative, determined and inclusive transition that protects economies and people.” The report said the economic fallout from the pandemic was adding to already existing pressures – such as widening digital, education and skills gaps – that risked splitting the world into different trajectories. “In some countries, rapid vaccine rollout, successful digital transformations and new growth opportunities could mean a return to pre-pandemic trends in the short term and the possibility of a more resilient outlook over a longer horizon,” it said. “Yet many other countries will be held back by low rates of vaccination, continued acute stress on health systems, digital divides and stagnant job markets. These divergences will complicate the international collaboration needed to address the worsening impacts of climate change, manage migration flows and combat dangerous cyber-risks.” Respondents to the survey said the two years since the start of the pandemic had led to heightened “societal risks”. Mental health had deteriorated, livelihoods had been damaged and social cohesion eroded, they said. Brende said the report highlighted the global nature of current and future challenges and urged countries to adopt a “prosper thy neighbour” rather than a “beggar thy neighbour” approach. “The pandemic doesn’t travel with a passport. We are not out of the woods yet,” he said.Around the holidays last year, when I’d been fielding lots of deep questions at bedtime about sickness and health and Zoom school and “pods,” I wrote my daughter an email, though she could not yet read: Scratching your back just now before bed, you sleepily asked, Mama, do you know anyone in the family who’s bold? I was like yes! You’re bold. And you said I am? And I said yes, you’re brave. And you said no no, like has no HAIR, mama. The first email I sent her, she was two. I’d texted a friend one day that, apropos of nothing, my daughter had started referring to people she loved – her aunt, her grandma, her friend at the playground – as “my little darling.” My friend wrote back, “You gotta find a way to remember that. Email her!” And I thought: Yes, in an age when the prospect of buying a physical scrapbook and getting out the glue stick and photo corners is about as realistic as my making it through the day without crushed Goldfish in my hair, I can send an email. So I opened up a new account and dashed off a note to my pint-sized Holly Golightly. And I keep dashing off notes, because the lift is pretty low; it’s one way to manage the morass of digital ephemera I collect on my children every day; and, like nearly every parent before me, I feel an inexplicable urge to preserve in amber the moments of childhood that are too charming to be forgotten. And it’s an urge that’s been documented for centuries. “The design of this little book is to supply a want, though perhaps an unknown one to many,” begins the preface of Baby’s Record: A Twofold Gift for Mothers and Children, published in 1889. “Most persons regret that the little items of babyhood, so interesting, to the parents at least, pass into oblivion.” What do I not want to pass into oblivion? Here’s a note from me, on the occasion of the morning of my 36th birthday: You tromped in, looked at me v closely, and said, Mama, I know it’s your birthday but you still look like you’re the same height. You still look just like you’re 35. Here’s another from my husband, sent – I realized when looking at the date – just a few hours before I started contractions with her little sister: Your mama told me that after you brushed your teeth this evening, she walked into your bathroom to find you brushing your nose, quite seriously, with an electric toothbrush. She said you shouldn’t brush your nose and you replied “Why not?” And she didn’t have a good answer. “Baby books are full of minutiae, capturing all sorts of stuff that doesn’t get recorded otherwise,” Russell Johnson told me when I reached him on Zoom. “There are gems throughout.” Johnson is a curator at the UCLA Library Special Collections. Through donations, and searching on eBay, he’s built up the university’s baby book collection to its current 1,900 volumes. The collection spans from 1872 – around when infant mortality started improving, but also when people started caring more about babyhood as a life stage – to the mid-twentieth century. So we’re in the 150th year, give or take, of chronicling baby lives in some way. The alleged purpose of these keepsakes has evolved over the years, Johnson explained. Well-to-do families of yore often used their pages to list gifts given to their babies. As scientific medicine grew and pediatrics was formalized as a specialty, mothers were encouraged to document metrics: height, weight, all the things we measure today at doctors’ visits. More recent books, whether those are physical or virtual, allow room for photos of sonograms, or hashtags. But all babybooks remain at heart an in-between document – part biography, part scrapbook; part data, part personal – that often says more about the chronicler than it does the chronicled. Take this mother in 1906, who wrote in one baby book from the archives: Five weeks have passed since I was born, Quite uneventful thus far each morn, But Today I go to Auntie I’s, A trip quite long for a girl my size. If my friend told me she’d been filling out a baby book in rhyming couplets five weeks post-partum, and from the POV of her baby, I’d scurry over with a magnum of wine and the phone number of my therapist. And no one – baby, mother, or century-removed observer – will ever care much about the fact that this baby visited her aunt at five weeks’ old. But the effort it must have taken! The love this mother must have felt, as she memorialized the monotony and wonder of the early days of parenthood – that’s what this entry is about. Only one friend of ours isn’t documenting her kids’ childhoods with emails or digital journal entries or iPhone notes. Her husband is fearful of big tech companies, rightly pointing out that he doesn’t want Google having a record of who his daughter is before she is of an age to understand and consent. I hear that. But I’m not sure raging against the machine in this particular way will protect my children from the ills of big tech, save for keeping secret that my daughter will be advertising target #1 for a new-to-market nose brush. As for how my millennial friends and I are evolving the practice of baby chronicling, my hope is that what the medium lacks in physicality, it makes up for in honesty. Photos are taken and preserved because they project some desirable image of the family. Metrics become irrelevant the moment they’re jotted down. Instead, these letters are time capsules, little intimate tidbits and clues of who my child will become, sent off to that future self, from who I once was. Johnson is often asked why people would ever give their beloved baby books away, such that they find their way to him. “Kids might not be that interested,” he said – underscoring that we parents write for us, even if we think we’re writing for them; that we leave behind a chronicle of our own lives, even as we think we’re leaving behind one of theirs. “I would hope that when you give these emails to your children, one thing they will be fascinated at is how interested you were in them.” My infant son has started to do something at bedtime. Right before I put him down, he’ll gaze up at me and start cooing, like a little dove, his eyes big and round in the dark. He’ll do it for a solid minute or so before exhaustion overpowers him, at which point he’ll stick his second finger in his mouth, turn his head to the side, and fall asleep. Years into the future, will he care that he once did this? Probably not. But I wrote a quick email to him about it this morning. Because yes, I’m interested, interested in every moment. Sophie Brickman is a contributor to the New Yorker, the New York Times and other publications, and the author of Baby, Unplugged: One Mother’s Search for Balance, Reason, and Sanity in the Digital AgeAs the last news programme came to a close and anchors bade farewell to their online audience on 3 January, Chris Yeung, the founder and chief writer of Citizen News, gathered together his staff and tried to strike an optimistic tone. “Remember our very best memories,” he said, dressed in a blue shirt with sleeves rolled up and a crimson jumper draped on his shoulders. “No one knows what will happen next. Don’t worry. Just remember the happy things.” It was the day 90 largely pro-establishment legislators were sworn in. The previous evening, the independent Chinese-language news outlet of five years said it was closing. It justified the decision citing a deteriorating media environment and concerns for the safety of its staff. It was a painful decision for Yeung and his editor-in-chief, Daisy Li, to make. “If I am no longer confident enough to guide and lead my reporters, I must be responsible,” Li said last week. “Can we work on some ‘safe news’? I don’t even know what is ‘safe news’.” She added: “What has changed is not us but the exterior, objective environment.” On 4 January, another outlet, Mad Dog Daily, followed suit and halted operations together with Citizen News. The latest developments came as no surprise to those who follow recent events in Hong Kong’s once-freewheeling media industry. An exodus of journalists and editors from the territory’s much-acclaimed news outlets, such as Cable TV and its public broadcaster, RTHK, in the last couple of years have alarmed free speech campaigners in the city and beyond. Barely a week ago, another Chinese-language outlet, Stand News, was forced to close after 200 police officers raided its office and detained seven current and former employees. Two former senior editors were charged with conspiring to publish seditious materials and denied bail. The Stand News arrests came a day after Jimmy Lai, the former owner of the popular tabloid Apple Daily, and six of its former journalists, were given new charges of “conspiracy to print, publish, sell, offer for sale, distribute, display and/or reproduce seditious publications”. Last June, the newspaper was forced to close. State media in Beijing called the newspaper a “rotten apple that plagued Hong Kong for 20 years”. Amnesty International said it was “the blackest day for media freedom in Hong Kong’s recent history”. Across Asia, the erosion of press freedom has repeatedly made headlines in recent years. In Myanmar, dozens of journalists have been jailed since last year’s military coup. In Thailand, an emergency decree to ban news that “incites fear” was announced after anti-government protests in 2020. And in the Philippines, the country’s most profitable broadcaster, ABS-CBN, was forced to shut down that same year. These incidents are a poignant reminder that even the most successful news outlets could not survive the authoritarian resurgence in the region. In Hong Kong, once a bastion of free speech within China’s territory, the intensified move against independent news outlets began shortly after Beijing imposed a controversial national security law in the summer of 2020. The legislation drew fierce criticisms from western capitals, from Washington to London. Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, however, said the closure of news organisations “cannot be directly connected” to press freedom in Hong Kong. She also rejected claims of a “chilling effect” in the city’s media landscape. The assaults on press freedom have continued since the Apple Daily saga. A few days after the tabloid folded, the city’s police chief, Raymond Siu, suggested that a “fake news” law would be necessary to tackle “hostility against the police”. His boss, Lam, announced a few weeks before that her administration was working on “fake news” legislation to tackle “misinformation, hatred and lies”. “The authorities are just adding more weapons into their pocket in order to stifle dissent,” Yeung said after Siu’s speech in June. “It looks very likely that this proposal of ‘fake news’ law will be put on the agenda in the next legislative session.” In recent years, the Hong Kong Journalists Association, which Yeung used to lead, has raised the authorities’ ire. Last autumn, the city’s new security chief, Chris Tang, accused the organisation of “breaching professional ethics” by backing the idea that “everyone is a journalist”. In December, Tang gave his full backing to the introduction of a fake news law. The psychological impact on Hong Kong’s journalists, once regarded as muckraking by many, is evident. A November survey released by Hong Kong’s Foreign Correspondents Club found that 84% of people surveyed thought the situation had deteriorated since the introduction of the national security law. Some of the respondents admitted to a degree of self-censorship. Beijing accused the trade association of “sowing discord”. “We are very nervous here for the future of media freedom in Hong Kong,” said Jemimah Steinfeld, a China expert at the London-based Index on Censorship. “It’s hard to believe today that until only recently Hong Kong was the place that journalists at foreign media went to if they wanted to report more freely on China. It’s devastating.” For young and ambitious Hong Kong journalists, the devastation has been personal. When the police raided Apple Daily’s headquarters in 2020, one of its staff reporters was angry. “I at first was too stunned to even react,” the reporter, Oscar, said in a Guardian documentary that year. “Then that turned into anger as I watched the events unfold.” Last June, when the nails had been hammered into the coffin of Apple Daily, he met a colleague at the subway platform to share their plans for the future. They greeted each other with a big hug and broke out in tears. “We have never done anything wrong. We have always been doing our part and working hard to make good news. Why did we end up this way?” he said. Now, at the age of 25, Oscar has put down his pen and works as a photographer in Hong Kong. He said he “grieved” when he left Apple Daily in June. “I [had studied journalism] in college for four years, worked for Apple Daily as part-timer then full-time [for] over four years. It was my dream and passion to be a great reporter, and I did work hard for it. But it turned out to be like this,” he said. The quick turn of events in his home city in recent years has saddened him. Months after mass street protests that began in 2019, the national security law came into force. The authorities claim such legislation is “necessary in order to secure the long-term stability and prosperity of Hong Kong”, but critics say it is used to stifle dissent and is draconian. There have been waves of arrests of individuals, from journalists to politicians, who disagree with Beijing and the Hong Kong government. According to Reporters Without Borders, close to two dozen journalists and press freedom campaigners have been arrested since the implementation of the national security law in June 2020. Among them, at least a dozen have been charged or are awaiting the trial. Some opposition politicians, including Nathan Law, once the youngest lawmaker in the history of the legislative council of Hong Kong, are now living in exile. For Oscar, his transition from a reporter to a photographer was a reluctant one. “This is not the decision I wanted to make, it is the times that forced me to stop being a reporter,” he said. “I still want to be a reporter from the bottom of my heart. I’m not afraid to sit in prison. But how about the people who work with me? Will they sit in, too, because of my work? How about my family and my girlfriend? They’d absolutely be heartbroken.” It is not only local Chinese-language news outlets that are feeling the chill. International news outlets such as the New York Times are already shifting their base to elsewhere in the region because, according to the US company, the national security law “unsettled news organisations and created uncertainty about the city’s prospects as a hub for journalism”. Senior officials are now sending letters to foreign news organisations, urging them to support the authorities’ actions. “If you are genuinely interested in press freedom, you should support actions against people who have unlawfully exploited the media as a tool to pursue their political or personal gains,” Hong Kong’s chief secretary, John Lee, wrote to the Wall Street Journal in a recent letter. “So far, western media still operates with a degree of protection but even this is eroding and many are now choosing Taiwan instead,” said Steinfeld. “The question is: to what extent will they be pushed out, or will they jump? Beijing has been killing the chickens to scare the monkeys, to quote the Chinese idiom, and it is really working.” At Citizen News, departing journalists have been pondering on their future in these uncertain times. On the eve of the closure, there were tears in the newsroom as well as well wishes. “We fought the good fight. We finished the course. We kept the faith,” one farewell card read.Mohamed Salah has insisted he is “not asking for crazy stuff” to extend his Liverpool contract. Salah has entered the final 18 months of his contract, an incentivised deal worth about £200,000 a week, and Liverpool will have to pay the most lucrative salary in their history to secure the prolific forward long term. Talks on an extension have been ongoing for months, with Jürgen Klopp involved and Liverpool agreeing new deals in the meantime with Virgil van Dijk, Alisson, Jordan Henderson, Trent Alexander-Arnold, Andy Robertson and Fabinho. Salah has stated repeatedly he wants to stay at the club that made him a global star but, in an interview with the latest edition of British GQ, maintains he is not making outlandish demands of Liverpool’s owner, Fenway Sports Group. The 29-year-old said: “I want to stay, but it’s not in my hands. It’s in their hands. They know what I want. I’m not asking for crazy stuff.” Salah, who is at the Africa Cup of Nations with Egypt, believes Liverpool’s offer should reflect what he has given to the club since his arrival from Roma in 2017. “The thing is when you ask for something and they show you they can give you something,” he said, they should, “because they appreciate what you did for the club. I’ve been here for my fifth year now. I know the club very well. I love the fans. The fans love me. But with the administration, they have [been] told the situation. It’s in their hands.” Klopp has described Salah as the best player in the world several times this season and the forward, who came seventh in the Ballon d’Or, admits it is his ambition to be recognised as such. “If you asked me if this was a drive for me to be here? Yeah, of course. I can’t really lie and say honestly I didn’t think about it. No, I think about it. I want to be the best player in the world. But I will have a good life even if I don’t win [the Ballon d’Or]. My life is OK, everything is fine.” Salah also reveals in the interview how he struggled mentally during a disappointing spell with Chelsea earlier in his career. He says: “It was so tough for me, mentally. I couldn’t handle the pressure I had from the media, coming from outside. I was not playing that much. I felt: ‘No, I need to go.’” • The GQ Global Sports Issue is available on newsstands and via digital download on 25 January 2022.Nothing lasts forever, as numerous proud old English rugby clubs can testify. Orrell, West Hartlepool, Wakefield, Waterloo, Rugby Lions, London Welsh … all of them have been in the top two leagues in the country in the past 25 years before disappearing off the radar when financial reality struck. The downward spiral, once it commences, can be desperately hard to arrest. Which begs a question: how will English domestic club rugby look 10 or 20 years from now? Here’s a fun piece of trivia for you: a time capsule was buried in Twickenham’s South Stand in 2006-07 containing, among other things, predictions of the future made by Rugby Football Union officials of the day. It is tempting to be flippant – will blazers really be back in fashion by 2042? – but futuristic change could yet arrive sooner than many people imagine. Inside the past week, two of England’s more knowledgeable club officials, independently of each other, have shared the same opinion with me: that rugby union, participation-wise, will have morphed into something akin to American football within a decade. If you are any good you will play professionally, semi-professionally or at a good level at university or college. Otherwise recreational men’s rugby will largely be limited to touch, tag and sevens. For many clubs from the Championship downwards this is an apocalyptic scenario. Some of them have been going for 150 years or longer. That is a hell of a lot of history to watch float down the local river. But check out the damage that Covid-19 continues to do to finances and participation numbers, and the loss of some long-standing pillars of the club community looks increasingly probable. It is increasingly hard, certainly, to argue with the view of an administrator involved in the ongoing review into the future of the Championship, the second-tier competition that has been allowed to wither on the vine, in terms of proactive promotion, for the past two decades. “We will probably see an NFL-type franchise professional game, a strong game in the universities and a first team club league but you probably won’t see a social and recreational game in the way we understand it,” suggests my informant, citing concussion fears and the increasing physical commitment required at all levels. “I won’t say recreational players are an endangered species but they’re certainly at risk.” Time to reach for my battered copy of the classic The Art of Coarse Rugby by Michael Green. Even then the author’s contention, when it was first published back in 1960, was that two types of rugby existed. The first kind was made up of “devoted enthusiasts who train like mad and don’t mind at all if someone tackles them at 30 miles per hour”. The rest play “Coarse Rugby”, instantly distinguished by the fact that “neither side is ever composed of 15 men. Most Extra Bs or Cs wouldn’t know what to do with 15 players. They would have to send three or four off before they could begin.” And so on and so forth. There is still fun to be had in playing abbreviated or different forms of the game but the post-Covid pips are increasingly squeaking for any club looking to operate at a decent semi-pro level. One recent survey suggested a fall from 259,600 active adult players in England in 2016 to only 95,100 at the end of last season. Covid and funding cuts have also left Championship sides touching the void. This month, after much deliberation, the Championship Review group will make recommendations to the RFU management board on what it believes the future should look like and its findings will be fascinating. There is an awful lot at stake for all concerned. The so-called “seamless” game, linking both ends of the English rugby pyramid, has never felt more precarious. The Premiership, currently with no relegation and due to expand to 14 sides next season, is a good competition but money is tighter than ever. No one wants to be demoted to the Championship where such losses will be magnified. But the Championship also has to mean something, both in terms of player development and in its own right. Ultimately it needs to be a league for good players to aspire to and for sponsors to embrace. And which sees ambition rewarded. The challenge for the RFU, as ever, is to square that vexed circle and find a collective vision that works for everyone. For now there is a moratorium on relegation from the Premiership until the 2023-24 season when a play-off with promotion and relegation is envisaged with one-up, one-down promotion and relegation, at least in theory, resuming the following season. As a result Twickenham is rejecting any mention of the phrase “ring-fencing” with negotiations – including more sharing of players between Premiership and Championship clubs and potentially second-tier sides in the Premiership Cup – apparently making headway. But are the priorities of a select few in danger of shaping the best interests of the majority? The health of English rugby cannot hinge primarily on the wallets of a few generous millionaires keen to win the Premiership, particularly with growing dissatisfaction again surfacing beneath the elite level. Some feel the RFU is trying to have its cake and eat it. There is unlikely to be any word before the end of February at the earliest, for example, as to how many sides will be promoted from the National Leagues this April. We do know the Championship will have 12 teams next season (this season’s bottom side will not be relegated) but, depending on whether Ealing Trailfinders or Doncaster Knights finish top and also satisfy the minimum standards criteria (another saga in itself) to go up, there is still no clarity over whether one or two sides will be promoted from National One. Or, even more pertinently, any firm guarantees about funding levels after 2024. Uncertainty, as a result, is rippling across the shires. If the RFU also foresees a gridiron-style future for rugby it should say so without delay and explain why that is good news. Because, for those left behind, the repercussions will be huge and, potentially, ruinous. If grassroots rugby union in England is to be salvageable in 2032, never mind 2042, there needs to be something left to save. • This is an extract from our email, the Breakdown. To subscribe and receive the full edition every week, just visit this page and follow the instructions.The pandemic may have left many of our best-laid plans in tatters, but according to Edward Slingerland, a philosophy professor and the author of Trying Not to Try, you can work at becoming more spontaneous. With this in mind, we would like to hear your experiences and advice for maintaining a sense of adventure. Have you made a conscious effort to escape a monotonous routine and seize the day? We would like to hear your experiences and advice for living in the moment. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Set in some densely forested, geographically-non-specific corner of Mexico, this very low-budget horror story features Autumn Reeser as suburban SoCal mom Carly Candlewood, who arrives for a holiday with her husband Andrew (Antonio Cupo) and young son Danny (Nicolas Madrazo). Together, they’re hoping to heal as a family after Carly’s recent miscarriage. Unfortunately, no one mentioned in the TripAdvisor reviews that the canals near the small hotel where the Candlewoods are staying have been haunted for years by a spooky ghost lady called La Llorona (Zamia Fandiño). The name relates to the fact that she’s always crying for her lost child, and her own way of dealing with bereavement is to steal other people’s kids, especially at night or at least when the camera has a red filter attached to create a murky, nocturnal look. What’s more, all the locals know about her, and a memorial wall nearby is plastered with pictures of missing children: an unpleasant echo of the legions of people abducted throughout the country in real life. La Llorona usually takes the form of an ectoplasmic, diaphanous figure with a flowing gown, generous embonpoint and a half-smashed face. But of late it seems she’s been gaining corporeality; the upside of which is that bullets seem to temporarily repel her. But her growing strength represents a near and present danger for little Danny, whom she keeps catching and then losing as Carly fights her off. Although it’s always a treat to see veteran character actor Danny Trejo doing his stuff – playing an ambiguous figure attached to the hotel – both he and most of the rest of the cast deliver their lines with the flat, enthusiasm-free cadences of an ensemble cheesed off with the size of their paycheques and the quality of the catering. The honourable exceptions are Fandiño herself and Mauricio Galaz as her lover, seen in a key flashback, who emote like they’re auditioning for the next hit telenovela. • The Legend of La Llorona is released on 17 January on digital platforms.For 156 minutes at the start of England’s second innings in Sydney, as he set about compiling the second-highest score of his Test career and propelled his team towards the draw that ensured they will avoid a series whitewash, Zak Crawley found himself experiencing something that not many English cricketers have managed in Australia this winter: having fun. It was not just for his team that the fourth Test represented the end of a miserable run, as in his first match of 2022 the 23-year-old shrugged off the poor form that had dogged him in 2021 to re-establish himself in the side with an impressive innings of 77. “It was not far off the most fun I’ve ever had on a cricket field,” he said on Tuesday. “I mean, that’s the reason I play the game, for days like that. I massively enjoyed it, absolutely loved it. Cricket, you get so many failures that you have to enjoy the good times. And when you’re playing nicely, it doesn’t get more fun than that.” Having scored an apparently career-defining 267 in his final Test of 2020 against Pakistan in Southampton, at which point he was averaging 48.41 after 12 international innings, Crawley floundered in 2021. Across the year he averaged 10.81 in 16 Test innings and 23.14 across 37 first-class knocks for Kent and country. “It’s all a great learning curve,” he said. “You tend to learn more from your failures than your successes and it wasn’t the year I wanted. We played some great opposition on some really tough pitches – I wasn’t too hard on myself in some regards. I learned a lot about myself and my game and I feel like I can push on from it and become a better player.” It is true that he faced some particularly difficult sporting challenges in 2021, from India in Ahmedabad to Australia with the wind in their sails in Melbourne. “Playing in India against that spin and then at the MCG in that final session [on the second day] – they’re the two hardest spells of cricket I’ve ever had by a long way and I wouldn’t have thought that it would get much harder than those two experiences. You’ve just got to take them on the chin and move on and learn from them.” While Joe Root, Jonny Bairstow, Rory Burns and Ollie Pope have first-class averages in the 40s or, in Pope’s case, 50s, Crawley’s languishes in the low 30s – 31.21 at present, down slightly since he made his England debut in December 2019. This he puts down to “the fact I’ve batted on poor pitches really my whole Championship career”. Unusually, his first-class average is worse – 29.15 – on his home ground of Canterbury. “I don’t think it’s a Kent thing,” he said. “Obviously I’d like the pitch at Canterbury to be a little bit better. I don’t think it’s unfair of me to say. But I think pretty much all the grounds I’ve played on have been pretty poor. I can think of about two or three where I’ve got to them thinking that this is a really good wicket. The pitches have been very favourable to bowlers my whole career so far so until that changes …” It is one of Crawley’s regrets that he has not “gone on to score big hundreds”, though he draws frequently on the memory of the one time he did. “I watch that innings frequently to be honest, when I’m going through bad form, because it’s a nice reminder that I’ve done it before and I can do it again,” he says of his 267. “Sometimes if you’re feeling a bit rough you can lose sight of the fact that you can play. I played really nicely that day, but I feel like I’m a better player now and that’s because of the failures I had last year. I learned a lot about myself, like what not to do almost. I would have liked to score a lot more runs, but for that I’m quite thankful.” Whatever happens in this week’s final Test in Hobart, given the way the tour has panned out everyone involved with the England squad will leave with some failures to learn from. “The majority of it has been top class and just how I expected it to be – quite hostile Australia crowds and a hostile Australian team who are very good in their own conditions,” Crawley said. “Unfortunately we haven’t performed quite at our best but it’s a great experience and hopefully – we’ll see how my career turns out – but if I’m back in four years’ time then this experience will be very beneficial.”Waiting, and waiting, and waiting. For a GP appointment, a routine screening, a vaccine. To see a clinician in A&amp;E, or for an ambulance to take you there. Waiting for a referral appointment, for the community nurse to arrive, for a care worker to call. The NHS waiting list feels endless. And all our leaders seem to do is tell us we must do our best so the health service doesn’t become overwhelmed. As a paramedic with more than 20 years in the ambulance service, I know we are not the only ones to cry, “We are overwhelmed.” Over the past three nights I’ve been working the 7pm-7am shift. Every evening, I’ve arrived at work to a list of more than 160 outstanding 999 calls. That’s more than 160 people waiting for an ambulance. Some have been waiting for longer than 12 hours; some will have life-threatening or life-changing conditions. Six hours into a recent shift, I attended an elderly woman who had fallen over seven hours earlier. She had fractures to her hip and wrist, and bruises to her face. In addition, she had suffered the indignity of being incontinent. But there is nothing new in this: in fact, stories like hers are a daily occurrence. How long must we wait for the situation to improve? The NHS and its patients need support. The ambulance service has been failing for years. Although Covid has shone a bright light on this, it alone did not create these problems. There are multiple reasons for failure. It’s clear we can’t blame the crews for these problems. Paramedics and call handlers turn out for 12-hour shifts knowing they’re unlikely to feel they have really made a difference. Over the past three nights, my colleagues told me of a 28-year-old man with groin pain and a woman who had eaten a muffin passed its best-before date and now felt some stomach discomfort. Why did they take priority over the woman on the floor? Why don’t those patients make their own way to hospital? Is it because our management doesn’t have the courage to say no to anyone? The frustrating result is that we let down the patients who need us most. Patients die while they wait for us to attend the out-of-date muffin case. In the south of England, many local ambulance stations have closed to make way for “super hubs”. So why are people still waiting? Local ambulance stations served local communities; now, with super stations, ambulances have to travel for 30 minutes or more to reach people. The idea is that larger towns, which have the largest call volumes, hit the target times in those areas. But the result is that patients in smaller communities – which don’t seem to matter as much – are left waiting. Another flaw is the system followed when answering a 999 call; the way calls and concerns from the public are prioritised and routed to front line staff. Among call handlers, it’s called “fire fighting”, which is funny because if you leave a fire waiting there is often nothing left to extinguish and it burns itself out. It can feel as though this is all part of some grand plan to eventually privatise the ambulance service. I feel deeply sorry for all the people who had to wait for us to arrive when they needed us, for those families who had a loved one die while they waited, and for those who will have to wait in the future. Frontline ambulance crews want our management to manage and take responsibility for their actions. We want more funding to clear the waiting lists and ensure we can help those who need it most. Unless the waiting list ends, the ambulance service, like a fire, will only keep going until it burns itself out. The Secret Paramedic works for the ambulance service in EnglandThe Duke of York has settled a £6.6m debt with a French socialite allowing him to sell a Swiss chalet as he faces escalating legal bills over the sexual assault civil lawsuit brought by Virginia Giuffre, according to reports. Isabelle de Rouvre, 74, who sold the property to Prince Andrew and Sarah, Duchess of York, in 2014 for a reported £18m, said: “The war is over. He has paid the money.” Andrew and his ex-wife had agreed with Rouvre that Chalet Helora in the ski resort of Verbier in the Swiss Alps, would be paid for in instalments. But Rouvre claimed the two failed to make the final £5m instalment. Initially Rouvre agreed the final instalment could be deferred until December 2019, with interest accruing, but the Yorks still did not honour the agreement despite repeated demands, it was reported. Rouvre launched legal action in May 2020 in Switzerland to recoup the £5m plus interest owed to her. Andrew is said to have finally paid late last year. Speaking to MailOnline, Rouvre said she had sold the house to the Yorks about two months ago. “That is the end of the story thankfully,” she told the website. “The war is finished. It is the end of the matter. I have nothing to do with it now. That’s all.” She added: “It was about six weeks ago that the matter was closed. It was November. The second payment needed to be paid and that payment is now done. That’s it. You can be sure that’s it. It’s done.” A source close to Andrew said: “I can confirm that the legal action has been halted and that the chalet is being sold – but otherwise no comment on private financial matters.” The prince is now selling the property as he faces the lawsuit brought against him by Giuffre, who alleges she was forced to have sex with the royal on three occasions after she was trafficked by the paedophile financier Jeffrey Epstein. Andrew has denied the allegations. His ex-wife and the couple’s daughters, Princess Beatrice and Princess Eugenie, stayed at the chalet over the New Year holiday. As a family, the Yorks had rented the seven-bedroomed chalet, which has an indoor swimming pool, for winter holidays before deciding to buy it as a nest egg for their daughters. Until the debt was settled, Andrew was unable to sell it. It is understood a buyer has been found and the sale is proceeding, but not yet completed. Andrew is awaiting a New York judge’s decision on his application to have Giuffre’s lawsuit against him dismissed.Marks &amp; Spencer was the UK’s fastest-growing food retailer in the run-up to Christmas as shoppers returned to the high street after last year’s lockdown, according to an independent report. The retailer, which lost out in 2020 because most of its stores are on high streets or in travel hubs which were affected by lockdowns, outpaced discounters Aldi and Lidl with sales growth of more than 9% in the 12 weeks to 26 December. The figures were provided by analysts at NielsenIQ and based on a survey of more than 14,500 households. M&amp;S only began selling food online, via Ocado, in August 2020. Lidl, which sells almost no food online, was the next fastest-growing retailer at 8.5% in the three months as it opened eight new stores in December. Aldi, which had claimed to be the UK’s best performer in the run-up to Christmas, was next on 4.8%, helped by new store openings. Nielsen said shoppers had made 27m more visits to grocery retailers in the run-up to Christmas 2021 compared with a year before, while online orders accounted for 11.3% of total grocery sales, down from 12.1% a year earlier. Mike Watkins, the NielsenIQ UK head of retailer and business insight, said: “All retailers had more shoppers than this time last year and most had more visits, even if spend per visit was a little lower at just over £21.” He said British consumers were increasingly heading in-store for a regular weekly shop as well as for last-minute purchases and that such behaviour was likely to continue. Nielsen said shoppers spent £7.1bn in the two weeks to 26 December, ahead of the £6.8bn expected and £6.7bn in 2020 when supermarkets rang up bumper sales with many high streets in lockdown and restaurants and cafes closed. The figures indicate a stronger swing to dining and drinking at home amid fears of the Omicron variant of the Covid-19 virus. Marks &amp; Spencer is due to report its official Christmas sales figures on Thursday, but its shares have ticked up in recent days amid hopes of a strong performance. Tesco also reports on Thursday while Sainsbury’s reports on Wednesday. Lidl said on Tuesday that its sales rose 2.6% in the four weeks to 26 December and were 21% up on 2019, before the pandemic. The company said sales of Christmas puddings were up 23% and sparkling wine up 24%, while lamb proved a popular alternative to turkey with sales up 21%. The retailer’s fastest-selling product in its non-food “middle aisle” was the Lidl-branded Christmas jumper with one sold every two seconds on launch day.A police standoff with a man who is believed to be armed and has barricaded himself inside his house with his eight-year-old son has entered a third day. Police attended the property in Coventry at 12.20am on Sunday to conduct a welfare check on a man and child. The 41-year-old man refused to come out of the ground floor flat, and armed officers have been seen pointing weapons towards the building as a large cordon remains in place. A spokesperson for West Midlands police said: “The 41-year-old has his eight-year-old son with him and there are some concerns for their safety. Several officers, including armed police and other specially trained officers, are at the scene to bring the incident to a safe conclusion.” Dozens of officers have been on the scene since Sunday as they aim to resolve the standoff safely, and specialist negotiators are continuing to speak to the man. Nearby Earlsdon primary school has remained closed for a second day, with pupils taking part in lessons from home. Several road closures are in place and residents within the police cordon have been told by officers to remain in their homes where possible, but to ask for an escort through the cordon if they need to go to the shops or work. Police said they have been visiting each address to update residents and offer assistance. In a update on Tuesday afternoon, the Coventry police commander, Ch Supt Pete Henrick, said: “We apologise for the continued disruption to everyone within the cordon surrounding Earlsdon Avenue North, but our priority remains the safety of those involved. “Your patience is appreciated and we will continue to update you as the situation develops.” Coventry city council said temporary accommodation was available to anyone unable to enter their homes, but a rest facility at the local library that opened on Monday has closed.A coalition of influential political activists in Georgia that boosted turnout in a state crucial to Joe Biden’s victory in 2020 is refusing to attend the visit planned on Tuesday by the US president and Kamala Harris to speak on voting rights. The group had warned the president and vice-president that they needed to announce a specific plan to get national voting rights legislation passed or risk their high-profile trip to Atlanta being dismissed as “a waste of time”. In remarks trailed by the White House, Biden will on Tuesday say Senate votes on voting rights legislation in “the next few days … will mark a turning point in this nation. “Will we choose democracy over autocracy, light over shadow, justice over injustice? I know where I stand. I will not yield. I will not flinch. I will defend your right to vote and our democracy against all enemies foreign and domestic. And so the question is where will the institution of United States Senate stand?” But on Monday evening, the coalition of activist groups – Black Voters Matter, Galeo Impact Fund, New Georgia Project Action Fund, Asian American Advocacy Fund, Atlanta-North Georgia Labor Council – along with James Woodall, the Georgia NAACP president, announced that “we will not be attending” when Biden and Harris speak. “Instead of giving a speech tomorrow, the US Senate should be voting tomorrow. What we need now, rather than a visit from the president, vice-president and legislators is for the White House and Senate to remain in DC and act immediately to pass federal legislation to protect our freedom to vote,” the groups said in joint statement. Biden and Harris will visit Atlanta to advocate for flagship bills, currently stalled, to protect voting rights, which are increasingly under threat across the US, including in Georgia. But many Georgia activists and organizers have made it clear they do not support using the state and its civil rights legacy as “a photo op” without a meaningful plan of action. “If this is just a rhetorical exercise, just an attempt to perform advocacy, then I think it might be a waste of time,” Nse Ufot, CEO of the New Georgia Project voting rights advocacy, told the Guardian before the news the coalition would stay away. Ufot said it was local organizers that helped deliver White House and Senate victories. She is also pushing for the elimination of the filibuster rule that requires 60 senators to bring laws to a vote, while the Democrats only have 50 seats and Republicans won’t support the voting rights legislation. “There needs to be a federal standard for elections or the 2022 midterms are going to be chaotic,” Ufot said. Last Thursday the coalition of activists released a scorching letter warning leaders not to travel without a “finalized plan”. It noted that Georgia voters “made history” to flip the state blue in November 2020, the first time it voted for a Democratic presidential candidate since 1992, with a huge turnout from Black voters, then elected Raphael Warnock and John Ossoff to give the party the edge in the Senate. The letter said: “In return, a visit has been forced on them, requiring them to accept political platitudes and repetitious, bland promises. Such an empty gesture, without concrete action, without signs of real, tangible work, is unacceptable. “As civil rights leaders and advocates, we reject any visit by President Biden that does not include an announcement of a finalized voting rights plan that will pass both chambers, not be stopped by the filibuster, and be signed into law.” The bills blocked by Senate Republicans are the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act and the Freedom to Vote Act. The latter would create a “baseline national standard for voting access”, according to the Brennan Center for Justice. The former, named after the late Georgia congressman and civil rights activist, would restore the protections of the 1965 Voting Rights Act, prohibiting states with a history of voter suppression from changing voting laws without federal approval, a provision removed by a 2013 supreme court decision. Georgia passed a new voter restriction law in spring 2021, dubbed “Jim Crow in the 21st century” by Biden. The Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, hopes to change the filibuster rules to pass voting rights legislation. But he faces opposition from the centrist Democrats Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, who also stand in the way of Biden’s Build Back Better bill. Cliff Albright, executive director of the Black Voters Matter Fund, said speeches without a plan of action could send the message the administration believes it’s possible to continue to “out-organize voter suppression”. “That’s just a bad strategy,” Albright said. “It’s not that we don’t want the president talking about these issues, but we don’t want it to just be a photo op.” Woodall, the Georgia NAACP president, said activists understand the challenges but it’s time for the White House to figure out how to make change. “We understand civics. We get it. They’re not senators and there are processes in place, like the filibuster, that require reform. But, that’s not our job,” Woodall said. “Our job was to get Ossoff and Warnock elected and to ensure that Donald Trump was not the president … Biden won and it was all because of what we did here in Georgia. Now, we’re asking them to do their part, which is to protect democracy.” Bishop Reginald Jackson of the AME church, who pushed Georgia-based Coca-Cola and Delta Air Lines to criticize voter suppression, said he “strongly supports” the visit. “They’ll be coming at a time when our democracy and its future is at great risk,” he said. But Ufot warned that if election integrity isn’t protected: “We’re talking about losing a generation of voters who think this is a Banana republic and their vote doesn’t matter.”Welcome to Pushing Buttons, the Guardian’s gaming newsletter. If you’d like to receive it in your inbox every week, just pop your email in below – and check your inbox (and spam) for the confirmation email. If you’ve followed gaming news over the past couple of years, it has been impossible to avoid the many appalling stories about workplace harassment and discrimination that have emerged as part of a long-overdue reckoning in the games industry. As a woman who’s worked in the games media for over 15 years, I can only say that I have been grimly unsurprised by the revelations. The consequences that women face for speaking out on these issues has meant that until recently, few were willing to do so publicly. Last month, however, marked a turning point, as Riot Games paid out $100m in a settlement to more than 2,000 women who brought a case against it for gender discrimination. Other scandal-hit publishers and developers will be quaking in their boots. It is not an exaggeration to say that workplace harassment is endemic in the video games industry. Off-colour humour, boys’-club mentality and sexist or racist ‘banter’ might once have been written off as “studio culture” (I have heard this with my own ears), but companies are now facing consequences for failing to protect their employees from the harmful people who have unfortunately found a home in game development. At this point, few of the biggest companies in gaming remain entirely untouched by allegations and lawsuits. So what is it that can actually be done to ensure that the people making games can count on a decent working environment free of creeps and bullies, especially at huge studios comprised of hundreds or thousands of people? Perhaps unsurprisingly, it is difficult to get executives at big video game companies to comment on this. But I spoke to EA’s Chris Bruzzo, who as the company’s chief experience officer was put in charge of creating a more positive culture both for EA’s employees and its players, and seems committed to the task. “It was about four years ago that we as a leadership team spoke very clearly to the whole company about not tolerating harassment, abuse or misconduct,” he says. “We have made significant investments and seriously stepped up consequences in our offices all over the world, to ensure that people who feel that they’ve been harassed or abused get heard … I myself have exited several people from the company in the past five years.” EA has 11,000 employees globally, which of course increases the odds of someone, somewhere behaving inappropriately on any given day. Bruzzo acknowledges that there is a tremendous amount of work to be done to ensure a safe and welcoming work environment for everyone, but believes that the biggest companies in games have the resources to combat harassment at the source. Unconscious bias training is now mandatory at EA, reporting tools allow anyone to flag issues they may be experiencing, and the company has also diversified its hiring; as of this year, EA is one of few companies to have closed its gender pay gap, according to its internal reporting. When somebody is told that they’re breaking the code of contact, he says, they will generally apologise and change their behaviour. “When you tell people about what they’re doing and the harm it’s causing others, intentionally or unintentionally, 9 times out of 10 that’s all you gotta do.” Bruzzo tells me that he was previously himself the victim of a toxic working environment, involving a boss who was a bully, and so has first-hand experience of the toll it can take. “This person would call me late at night or on the weekends and scream and yell, threaten to fire me; in large meetings they would question why I was even at the company or why I was born,” he says. “I had to take anxiety medication, my health was deteriorating … it was pretty serious. When I resigned, people said, we didn’t know that you couldn’t take it. This is very personal to me.” There are, in Bruzzo’s opinion, three things that the biggest companies in gaming need to prioritise if things are going to change for the better. “First we have to really set the expectation, be on the record, that we will no longer be bystanders; and second we need great tools for investigating and enforcing. Third and most importantly we have to take concrete steps towards improving diversity and inclusion, in our company and in our games … We’re not going to get the kind of real gains we need to get until we start to hire our employees in a way that eliminates more biases and creates diversity.” I agree entirely that if actual, lasting change is going to be effected in the games industry, it needs to be a priority for every company that makes games. People known to be toxic can’t be allowed to simply bounce from studio to studio. Lip-service to diversity can’t take the place of actual investment of serious time, money and effort in rooting out problem people and solving hiring biases. It’s an expensive problem to solve – but given the legal, reputational and share-price cost to publishers and developers who have let these issues run riot, it’s going to be much more expensive to ignore it. What to play It’s unlikely that you’ve escaped Wordle so far this year, a super-simple online word game that went from totally unknown to ABSOLUTELY EVERYWHERE in the last month, but if you’re still wondering what all those wee squares in your social media feeds are, this is it. It’s extremely simple: go to the Wordle website every day and try to guess a new five-letter word. You have five guesses and it’ll tell you which letters you got right. What’s particularly endearing about this puzzle game, as Simon Parkin explains in his review, is that it was made by a guy called Josh Wardle last year as a gift for his partner, and remains entirely unmonetised. Given how wantonly capitalistic the games industry mostly is, that makes for a nice change. What to read A few weeks ago this newsletter took a critical look at the sketchy economy behind Roblox, the wildly popular game platform that’s valued at over $40bn and used daily by tens of millions of kids. For the Observer, Simon Parkin uncovered several truly alarming stories of abuse, exploitation and grooming from the platform’s young developers, which only highlights the urgent need for more scrutiny of these platforms. Speaking of kids and online safety, the UK’s data watchdog is “seeking talks” with Facebook owner Meta because a bunch of parents bought their kids an Oculus VR headset over Christmas and were shocked to discover that it has no parental controls, and apps like VRChat are basically unmoderated, resulting in a lot of inappropriate conversations with minors. I donned my Quest 2 headset and returned to VRChat after a couple of years’ absence to discover somewhere that reminded me of the wild west of the early internet: random, full of trolls and dominated by edgelord humour. So, pretty much like most other places online. Given what we all know about Facebook, and given how endemic toxicity is in all online worlds, at this stage I highly doubt that any big tech company has the will or the means to make the virtual world universally safe and pleasant. E3 – the June event at which every company that makes video games traditionally whips up a frenzy of hype for whatever’s next – will again be digital-only this year. For me, that means three days of sitting in front of a laptop watching an overwhelming barrage of game trailers and trying to calibrate what’s most interesting, as opposed to three days of running around a big sweaty conference hall in LA watching an overwhelming barrage of game demos and trying to calibrate what’s most interesting. For the wider games industry, this raises questions about whether these huge in-person events will ever return, and whether they should. The developers of forthcoming run-away-from-the-zombies game Dying Light 2 have proudly announced that it will take at least 500 hours to 100% complete it. The Internet has reacted to this news with either excitement or a kind of dead-eyed existential ennui, depending on the age and life circumstances of the player in question. What to click Take-Two acquires FarmVille creator Zynga in £9.4bn deal Tux and Fanny review – a surreal lo-fi treasure of a game VR worlds are no better or worse than anywhere else online Question Block This week’s question comes from Pat McGibbon, who asks: As a keen gamer and also a hobbyist language learner, I often change the settings to play games in a foreign language. Do any other readers do this, or am I the only one? You’re definitely not the only one, Pat, because I am also a huge language nerd and I also do this! It’s how I learned one of the Japanese alphabets: in order to navigate the menus in the weird PS2 games I used to play on import as a teen, I had to be able to read katakana. I played the first Mass Effect with German subtitles to make myself feel better about playing it instead of studying for my German degree. The Yakuza games helped me keep up my Japanese for a while after living there. In Assassin’s Creed I switch to the “native” language of the game wherever possible. When you’re a native English speaker it can be really difficult to find films, TV or music to absorb in another language, because English is the global default – but plenty of games have full voicing in several languages, and I find that because you’re actually doing stuff in games rather than just watching, some of it actually sticks. If you’ve got a question for Question Block or anything to say about the newsletter, email us on pushingbuttons@guardian.co.uk.Boris Johnson’s government has shown “a carelessness” about ethical standards, the head of the independent committee on standards in public life has warned, as the prime minister’s ethics adviser indicated he plans to push for stronger investigatory powers. Jonathan Evans, a crossbench peer and former director general of the security service, told MPs that a string of controversies, including over alleged lockdown-breaching government parties, and the financing of renovations to Johnson’s flat, risked undermining public confidence. His comments to the public administration and constitutional affairs committee (PACAC) came as Christopher Geidt, Johnson’s independent adviser on ministers’ interests, indicated to the same committee that he expected his powers to be expanded, including the ability to initiate his own investigations. Geidt’s comments, in a letter to the chair of the PACAC, the Tory MP William Wragg, follow his strong criticism of the prime minister last week after it emerged Geidt had not been shown crucial evidence during his formal investigation into the flat renovations. Questioned by Wragg before the PACAC, Evans said that overall, the system to enforce ethical standards in governments was “very weak in comparison to where we believe it should be”. He pointed to a series of recent issues, including the most recent revelation that during the first lockdown a top official invited more than 100 Downing Street staff to a “bring your own booze” party, one reportedly attended by Johnson. Evans said: “We’ve seen a whole series of issues over the last few months: the Owen Paterson affair; the attempt to change the rules over standards and investigations in the middle of the investigation into Mr Paterson’s actions; the questions around the redecoration of Downing Street; the very bad processes that were clearly in place for keeping Lord Geidt properly informed; the Greensill affair; and now party-gate. “All of those, I think, have demonstrated that there is at least a carelessness amongst people in government over standards issues, and possibly more than that.” Newspaper headlines and polling indicated such subjects “have reached what they call cut-through” with the public, Evan added. Evans called for investigations into alleged misdeeds to happen automatically, and to be published promptly, pointing to the long delay over a finding about the home secretary, Priti Patel, and claims she bullied officials. “One of the issues that arose in respect of the investigation into bullying investigations for Priti Patel was that there was a very, very long delay between the conclusion of the investigation and the publication of it. And I think that undermines trust.” As Evans was speaking, the PACAC published a letter from Geidt, who criticised Johnson last week for failing to disclose a WhatsApp exchange with the Tory peer who funded a makeover of the Downing Street residence during an initial investigation. The 6 January letter was in response to one from Wragg, who had asked Geidt whether in future he should be able to initiate his own inquiries, without the permission of the prime minister. Geidt indicated he would be pushing for this. The episode of the missing messages “shook my confidence precisely because potential and real failures of process occurred in more than one part of the apparatus of government”, he wrote. “These failures were not, in my view, due to a lack of investigatory powers, but rather they showed insufficient care for the role of independent adviser. “I would expect by the time of my next annual report in April to be able to describe the role of independent adviser in terms of considerably greater authority, independence and effect, consistent with the ambitions for the office that the prime minister has set out.” • This article was amended on 14 January 2022 to correct a mishearing of evidence Lord Evans gave to PACAC.Maya Angelou has become the first Black woman ever to appear on a US quarter, after a coin featuring the late poet and activist’s image went into circulation on Monday. The quarter features an image of Angelou with her arms uplifted, a bird in flight and a rising sun behind her, with a portrait of George Washington on the “heads” side. The US Mint said the image of Angelou was “inspired by her poetry and symbolic of the way she lived”. The poet and writer, who died in 2014, was the author of I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, in which she wrote about the racial discrimination she experienced growing up. The author of 36 books – and the recipient of more than 20 honorary degrees – she read her poem On the Pulse of the Morning at Bill Clinton’s 1992 inauguration, and was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Barack Obama in 2010. “Each time we redesign our currency, we have the chance to say something about our country – what we value, and how we’ve progressed as a society. I’m very proud that these coins celebrate the contributions of some of America’s most remarkable women, including Maya Angelou,” said Janet Yellen, US treasury secretary. The Angelou quarter is the first in the US Mint’s American Women Quarters programme, which will include the physicist and first female astronaut Dr Sally Ride and Wilma Mankiller, the first female principal chief of the Cherokee Nation, later this year. The American public was invited to submit names of iconic women for the programme after a bill put forward by Democrat congresswoman Barbara Lee. “I will forever cherish the private moments I had the privilege to share with Maya, from talking in her living room as sisters to her invaluable counsel throughout the challenges I faced as a Black woman in elected office,” said Lee. “I am proud to have led this effort to honour these phenomenal women, who more often than not are overlooked in our country’s telling of history. If you find yourself holding a Maya Angelou quarter, may you be reminded of her words, ‘be certain that you do not die without having done something wonderful for humanity.’”A Home Office accommodation provider is making urgent improvements to flats for asylum seekers in the prime minister’s constituency after the Guardian exposed poor conditions there. Eighteen flats in Uxbridge, west London, housing dozens of asylum seekers, were found to be rife with damp, mould, water leaks and pest infestations. The Home Office admitted that the conditions “clearly fall short of the high standards we expect from our contractors”. Hillingdon council said conditions in the properties were under investigation. The Guardian has also received complaints about asylum accommodation in a central London hotel used by the Home Office to house asylum seeker families. Problems reported there includs severe bed bug infestations, water leaking through the ceiling, electricity faults, and a fire in a ground-floor annexe last month that caused the evacuation of the hotel. Both of these sites are managed by a private firm, Clearsprings, on behalf of the Home Office. As more complaints are made about conditions in some of the asylum seeker accommodation run by Clearsprings, it has emerged that the company’s three directors were paid increased dividends last year of £7m between them. The previous year the dividend was £1m, according to accounts filed at Companies House. The accounts show that the company’s operating profit increased from £796,304 in January 2020 to £4.4m in January 2021. Along with its Home Office work – the 10-year accommodation contract runs until 2029 – the company also has a five-year contract with Kent county council until 2023. Clearsprings declined to comment on the dividend payout. Hillingdon council carried out urgent inspections of the Uxbridge flats on 22 December. The asylum seekers told the Guardian that a flurry of activity followed the article, with contractors sent round to deep clean and redecorate some of the accommodation. Some of the asylum seekers received an undated note from Clearsprings after the article, which stated: “We will be vacating everyone … urgently. Once we find suitable accommodation. This might possibly happen next week. I advise you pack your belongings.” Some have now been offered alternative housing in east London and Yorkshire. Stuart McDonald, the MP for Cumbernauld, Kilsyth and Kirkintilloch East, condemned Clearsprings. He said: “Outsourced asylum accommodation has been a total disaster from the outset. Clearsprings’ accounts suggest that the ‘new’ contracts awarded in 2019 have simply proved to be a goldmine for the owners of Clearsprings and others – despite the fact that the asylum seekers they accommodate have continued to endure totally unacceptable conditions. The scandal of outsourced accommodation must be stopped.” Hannah Marwood, of the charity Care4Calais, which is providing support to asylum seekers in the Uxbridge flats and the central London hotel, said: “These are not isolated incidents. Supporting thousands of asylum seekers across the country, we see the conditions some are forced to live in and the huge toll living in these conditions takes on people who have suffered painful and traumatic past experiences. The government should treat every life with respect and dignity, not allow its contractors to cut corners, seemingly for profit.” A Clearsprings spokesperson said about the Uxbridge flats: “We can confirm that work to the property is ongoing and it is hoped this will be concluded as soon as possible.” Commenting on the problems at the central London hotel, the spokesperson said: “Clearsprings Ready Homes works closely with its delivery partners to ensure that safe, habitable and correctly equipped accommodation is provided. Whenever issues are raised, or defects are identified, Ready Homes will undertake a full investigation and ensure that those issues are addressed.” A Hillingdon council spokesperson said: “This is a live case being investigated by our private sector housing enforcement team, so we can’t disclose further information at this stage.” A Home Office spokesperson said in response to complaints about conditions in the central London hotel: “We are dealing with unprecedented pressures on the asylum system, but despite this, we continue to ensure the accommodation provided is safe, comfortable and secure.” Home Office sources acknowledged there had been bed bug infestations and electrical problems at the hotel, which the sources said had now been resolved.Two Marcus Rashford moments versus Aston Villa on Monday night to sum up his thus-far lost season. No 1: Manchester United are leading the FA Cup tie – somehow – 1-0 towards the end of the first half. A high ball is hit to the striker. Old Trafford has just sucked in a collective breath at witnessing a moment of clumsy, errant, how could Rashford miscontrol that, from a similar pass. But, this time, he brings the ball down slickly and finds Edinson Cavani. Cue surprise all round; the point here the shock felt that the 24-year-old executed smoothly and as expected a difficult but regulation skill for the high-performance, highly remunerated footballer. No 2: towards the end of the game United are still – somehow – leading. Mason Greenwood has a shot parried by Emiliano Martínez and as the goalkeeper scrambles to gather the rebound, an at-close-quarters Rashford refuses to press the Villa keeper. Instead, like a man deep in contemplation, out for a walk of serious soul-searching, United’s No 10 gazes at the action a few yards away and ambles on. The point, again, being the dislocation, the jarring sight. Is someone offside, maybe? Is this why Rashford seems oblivious? No, a replay confirms that a player whose attitude casts him as a future United captain is so self-immersed he cannot rouse himself to chase down a ball in front of the Stretford End. It was not supposed to be this way. This is the season when Rashford would be pain-free, unhampered by a longtime shoulder problem, having refused surgery to play on until after England’s run to the Euro 2020 final. The procedure took place later in July, ruling out Rashford until United’s 4-2 loss at Leicester City on 16 October. He scored, as he did in the next game (3-2 at home to Atalanta) and two games later (3-0 at Tottenham). But, since then, zero. This is all very strange because when news of his surgery emerged, Rashford explained how his output had dipped because of the pain. “I didn’t want to let anyone down but ultimately looking at some of my performances towards the end of last season I felt like I was. When I step on the pitch I always give 100%. Physically my 100% just wasn’t possible. It’s been a hard one but I’m coming back physically and mentally stronger.” So far, though, he hasn’t. So far he seems less strong. What, then, is eating Rashford? He has gone 11 matches without a goal – his poorest run since 2016-17, a first full season in the team. His minutes-per-goal record this season – 282 – is the worst of his career, as is the 0.7 chances created per game. More unquantifiable yet a glaring, inescapable truth to most witnesses is how a player with a zest for his adored home-town club and an admirable social conscience that brings an inner contentment carried the look, against Villa, of a man simply not enjoying being Marcus Rashford, Manchester United footballer. This is odd to observe. It may be a temporary thing, of course: a mid-season rut Rashford will fight (his spirit is not in doubt) to reverse. The Villa display may soon be placed in an understandable perspective; may come to be viewed as an on-the-night happening; a self-perpetuating phenomenon in which, as touches went awry, passes were mis-hit and Rashford’s usual purr into pockets were a chug into traffic, he became caught in a spiralling, ever-decreasing circle of inward frustration. Maybe. But, for his sake and a seriously misfiring United, the sparkle has to be rediscovered. Quickly. Ralf Rangnick’s team may have only one defeat under him in seven outings but the opposition who failed to beat them – Crystal Palace, Young Boys, Norwich, Newcastle, Burnley and Villa – have been middling, at best. The sole loss was to a Wolves who came to Old Trafford to play and tore United apart. Rashford is not the only player whose performance graph is a downward slash but his is the one of the steepest angle. It is not too late, of course: a campaign heading for the annus horribilis file could yet be halted and changed. There is precisely half the Premier League season left for United – 19 matches. There are at least two more Champions League games – against Atlético Madrid in the last 16. There could be five more FA Cup ties. Rashford is good enough to transform the campaign into an annus mirabilis. Can he do so?Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, has warned Boris Johnson “he can run but he can’t hide”, as the prime minister declined to answer questions over a “bring your own booze” gathering in the Downing Street garden during the first lockdown. The paymaster general, Michael Ellis, was sent to the House of Commons to answer Rayner’s urgent question about the drinks event on 20 May 2020. Labour has been pressing the prime minister to “come clean” since a leaked email from his principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds, obtained by ITV News, invited colleagues to “make the most of the lovely weather” and have some “socially distanced drinks”. Rayner said: “There’s no need for an investigation into the simple central question today: did the prime minister attend the event in the Downing Street garden on 20 May 2020?” Ellis apologised to MPs “for the upset that these allegations have caused”. He confirmed that the investigation being carried out by the senior civil servant Sue Gray will consider Downing Street gatherings on 15 and 20 May 2020 – but sidestepped further questions. Ellis said Gray’s report would “establish the facts, and if wrongdoing is established there will be requisite disciplinary action taken”. But Rayner insisted: “The public have drawn their own conclusions. He can run, but he can’t hide.” Johnson has declined to say whether he and his wife, Carrie, attended the event – five days after they were pictured at a separate outdoor gathering, which ministers have insisted was work-related. Asked whether Johnson would resign if he was found to have broken the law, Ellis said the prime minister was “going nowhere,” and “retains the confidence of the people in this country”. Ellis also raised the prospect that Gray’s work might be “paused” if the Metropolitan police launched an investigation into the events. “As with all internal investigations, if evidence emerges of what was potentially a criminal offence, the matter would be referred to the Metropolitan police and the Cabinet Office’s work may be paused,” he said. The Met confirmed on Monday night that it was in contact with the Cabinet Office over the allegations. Johnson’s official spokesperson told journalists on Tuesday the prime minister had “full confidence” in Reynolds, who would be “continuing in his role”. He insisted repeatedly that further questions would have to wait for Gray’s report. At one point in the Commons, the Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle, rebuked Labour MPs for heckling Ellis, saying: “He’s got a tough enough job as it is: don’t make it harder for him!” Veteran Conservative backbencher Peter Bone said he had confidence in the prime minister; but called for Gray’s report to be completed quickly. The Tory MP Christopher Chope asked: “Why can’t all the dirty linen be washed at once? Why are we getting this dripfeed of parties? Surely the civil service must have known that there was a party on 2 May?” Earlier, the health minister Edward Argar admitted the public would be “upset and angry” at the revelations in the leaked email from Reynolds. In a tacit acknowledgement of the strength of feeling, he said he had not attended any parties and had been aware of the regulations, “not least because I was a health minister who’d helped draw them up”. It came as the former Scottish Conservative leader Ruth Davidson called for an immediate explanation from Johnson, rather than questions being deferred to Gray’s inquiry. “This line won’t survive 48 hrs. Nobody needs an official to tell them if they were at a boozy shindig in their own garden. People are (rightly) furious. They sacrificed so much – visiting sick or grieving relatives, funerals. What tf were any of these people thinking?” Davidson tweeted. About 30 to 40 people are said to have attended the 20 May gathering, with food and wine set out on tables, but it is understood some staff expressed reservations at the time. On the same day, Oliver Dowden, the culture secretary, had reminded the public at a press conference: “You can meet one person outside of your household in an outdoor, public place provided that you stay 2 metres apart.”Rough sleepers in England can be offered cash and food vouchers if they agree to having a Covid jab, the government has confirmed. Eddie Hughes, the minister for rough sleeping, said councils could use part of the government’s £28m protect and vaccinate scheme to incentivise vaccinations for those on the streets, in the first scheme of its kind in the UK. The disclosure, first reported in the Local Government Chronicle, comes amid growing impatience within government circles with people refusing to take up the Covid vaccine offers. While the UK has one of the highest vaccine uptakes in the world – with more than 85% of adults double-jabbed, according to government data – millions are yet to have a full vaccine course. The homeless population has been especially hard hit by Covid-19, with one in 50 deaths among this group related to coronavirus in 2020, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). The government’s suggestion of possible incentives was described by Hughes at a ministerial webinar with council leaders and ministers on 17 December. Speaking after the levelling up secretary, Michael Gove, Hughes said people who slept rough were a group with very low levels of vaccination and there was likely to be a degree of vaccine hesitancy. “So we’re making an additional pot of money available to incentivise vaccinations for this group. This funding will help local authorities and their partners to use their understanding of the needs of rough sleepers to increase the vaccination take-up. “Incentivisation will be at the discretion of local authorities but could include transport, subsistence, childcare and support workers’ costs. So I want to be clear, you will have considerable support to do this,” he said. Reacting to the government’s plans, Andrew Bridgen, the senior Conservative MP for North West Leicestershire, said he would be deeply uncomfortable if it meant a straightforward transaction of cash for a jab. “I am not sure if that is informed consent,” he said. “It sounds like induced consent. It is like offering food to someone in need and then taking it away if they are vaccine-hesitant. That would be wrong. “I would not be averse to offering snacks and then discussing the risks of vaccination,” he added. “But any threat of withholding food if they refuse a vaccine is not right.” Adam Holloway, the Conservative MP for Gravesham, who went undercover in a documentary to expose homelessness in London, welcomed the move. “We have to do everything we can to persuade this group of people to do what they can to get vaccinated,” he said. “There is a risk because many are drug addicted and have mental health issues. Usually, I would have a problem with giving money to people living on the street. “But this plan appears to be a good move given that so many are not in good health and are vulnerable to the virus.” A spokesperson for the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said: “The discretion given to councils include[s] the ability to offer cash or food vouchers as incentives for vaccination.” Many people who are homeless or sleeping rough are likely to have underlying health conditions. These are likely to be under-diagnosed or not properly reflected in GP records. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) advised in March that local teams consider a universal offer to adults experiencing homelessness and rough sleeping alongside those in priority group 6. They should also be offered the vaccine without the need for an NHS number or GP registration. At the webinar, Hughes said the protect and vaccinate scheme was a further development of “Everyone In”, the March 2020 initiative providing safe accommodation for rough sleepers. “We’ll be building on the success of that programme, which gave us the opportunity to work with people that we haven’t previously been able to reach. Hopefully, this will now allow us to provide accommodation to those particularly vulnerable people, but the pre-eminent element is getting people vaccinated,” he said.As a lot of people in Boris Johnson’s life have discovered, there is a point where he has simply broken too many things for the relationship to be put functionally back together again. Is he at that point with the British public, or even with the Conservative party? Many are getting a really addled whiff of Humpty Dumpty off the latest revelations, that the prime minister himself attended a “mass gathering” in the Downing Street garden during the first lockdown. This May 2020 BYOB drinks party, to which more than 100 people were invited, kicked off a mere 55 minutes after that day’s designated cabinet minister had given a national press conference insisting that people in England could only meet one person from another household outdoors, so … what was the party theme? Let them eat cheese and wine? Come as the last scene in Animal Farm? Spellbindingly, Johnson yesterday refused to even admit he’d been at the drinks party, his smile twitching and his eyes swivelling as he cowered in some vaccination centre and gibbered: “All that, as you know, is the subject of a proper investigation by Sue Gray.” Had he been interviewed by Sue Gray? “All that is a subject for investigation by Sue Gray.” I’m afraid the only sane response to this is: what?! What are you even talking about? Did you or didn’t you go to a big party in your garden, you smirking fibreglass toby jug? Or do you also have to wait for some veteran civil servant to tell you whether or not you put your pants on the right way round this morning? Honestly mate, just MAN UP. Johnson’s turn as “prime minister” seems to have moved past the sarcastic air quotes phase. This feels a lot like government by the crazy-face emoji, tongue lolling out and one eye boggling bigger than the other. Any Tory MP who voted for this galaxy-class liar to become leader should remember they were wrong on probably the biggest call of their career, and consider resigning before the next election to go and work for a charity/arms dealer. Speaking of manning up, I wonder if the organisers managed to find any ladies to attend this 20 May party? I mean, I’m not saying that people who do well under Johnson are mainly guys who spent a significant part of the past decade masturbating to Game of Thrones. No wait – I am. But one of my favourite things about the one Downing Street cheese-and-wine “work meeting” that we have an actual photo of is that the only two women I can see in it are Carrie Johnson and Gina Coladangelo. Remember, girls: if you want to work at the heart of government, you need to be either a man, or in a relationship with a man who does. If you can dream it, you can do it! Back to the BYOB party, though – sorry, I know you need flashcards to keep your rule-breaking Downing Street pandemic bashes in order – which was organised by Johnson’s principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds. Apparently Reynolds now wants to get back to the diplomatic service, and perhaps the Middle East, and there is some talk about him being made an ambassador. You know, like when you or I break the rules and mess up spectacularly at work, and they make us an ambassador. Two days after the May BYOB party, the story of Dominic Cummings’ rule-breaking trips to Durham and Barnard Castle broke, which you’d think would have given these people a lifelong unforgettable lesson in just how incandescent the public were about elite rule-breaking. (And yet, given all the Downing Street parties which followed that Christmas, they somehow forgot it.) But in May 2020, who could have predicted that a potential 100-person boozy gathering could piss the general public off? Who could have predicted that people who’d watched their family members die on an iPad then buried them with only permitted numbers of mourners at graveside funerals would have an issue with it? No one at the party, apparently. In which case, every single one of them is in the wrong job and should resign and go and work for a thinktank/be our man in Havana. Incredibly, even the Met are finally “in contact” with the Cabinet Office over the latest party revelation. So do settle down to another episode of this farce, which might be entitled NO RUSH, PLOD. Yet again we have to ask: where were the multiple police officers who were stationed in and around the Downing Street complex when this BYOB party was happening? Did they notice at least 30 people having a booze-up, three hours after their force’s official social media account was reminding people of the rules? If not, maybe they could consider their positions/go on the sick for two years then retire at 53 with a full pension. Smartphones mean most people can check photos to see what they were doing on 20 May that year. I note this party occurred fairly soon after a Met officer told me to stop playing cricket in the park with my children, on the basis that cricket is “sport but not exercise”. Admittedly, I don’t care to run singles (I see myself as the Chris Gayle of Kensington Gardens), but let’s not forget how officious police forces up and down the land were at the time. What so many hundreds of thousands of us will also never forget, alas, are our own darker stories: graveside funerals; Zoom funerals; funerals after which no gathering was allowed by law. Just weeks before 20 May, a 13-year-old boy had died alone in a London hospital, separated from his family, who were also unable to attend his funeral because they were adhering to isolation regulations. Every single person at the Downing Street party would have known that story. But I am afraid this goes even further than shame and deceit. It is increasingly unignorable that these serial exposés of No 10 culture are taking place against a backdrop of growing conspiracism in this country. Significant numbers of people turned to online misinformation over the pandemic, and a lot of previously soft conspiracism is now calcifying in deeply concerning ways. More are being sucked down those rabbit holes all the time. I say sucked; but every one-rule-for-them revelation amounts to a push. After all, when people repeatedly see the duplicity and double standards of those in command, is conspiracism really such an irrational response? The tragedy is that we will all end up paying for the breakdown in trust, both in ways which are already obvious, such as rising anti-vax sentiment, and in ways we cannot yet predict. But they are coming, and Boris Johnson’s way of doing business has hastened them. How can we counter some people’s conviction that “The Man” is lying to them, when the man is so often shown to be lying? Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistBurke Shelley, founder, frontman and bassist with Welsh rock trio Budgie, has died aged 71. His daughter Ela Shelley announced the news, saying he died in his sleep at a Cardiff hospital, with no cause of death stated. Born John Burke Shelley in Cardiff in 1950, Shelley formed Budgie in 1967 with guitarist Tony Bourge and drummer Ray Phillips. They released their debut album in 1971, and by 1974 they had reached the UK Top 30 with their fourth album In for the Kill! Powered by Shelley’s remarkable, high-pitched singing voice, the band married blues to a galloping heavy rock sound alongside peers such as Black Sabbath and Led Zeppelin, and helped to pioneer the heavy metal that flourished in the 70s and 80s – though they were also given to quieter moments of pristine beauty. Their most celebrated song Breadfan, from 1973’s Never Turn Your Back on a Friend, combined both moods in one song – it was frequently covered by Metallica in live shows, with a version included on their compilation Garage Inc. Soundgarden, Van Halen, Megadeth and Iron Maiden would also go on to cover Budgie songs. Budgie were also known for humorous and vivid song titles such as You’re the Biggest Thing Since Powdered Milk and In the Grip of a Tyrefitter’s Hand, and equally striking album art, with fantastical vistas by Roger Dean (also known for his sleeves for Yes and others). The band saw their success wane somewhat in the late 70s as their lineup – always featuring Shelley – frequently changed, but they had a second flush of fame in the early 1980s as the new wave of British heavy metal they helped to inspire came to fruition. The albums Nightflight and Deliver Us from Evil returned them to the UK charts, and they supported Ozzy Osbourne’s debut solo tour across Europe in 1980. Their career waned again in the mid-80s and the band only occasionally toured during the next two decades, but re-formed to record a final album, You’re All Living in Cuckooland, in 2006. Shelley suffered from a number of health conditions in later life. As well as having connective tissue disorder Stickler syndrome, an emergency heart operation in 2010 damaged his singing voice, and his right leg was injured during surgery.Bruce Willis continues his campaign of reputation self-ruin – not that he has that far to fall – with this cruddy, derivative action thriller that pits two cops – one being Willis, the other Swen Temmel – and a bereaved war veteran played by Chad Michael Murray, against an eclectic assortment of drug smuggling miscreants. In a semi-tropical rural locale somewhere in the southern US (Puerto Rico served as the actual location), cops David (Willis) and Cal (Temmel) make a mess of busting some drug dealers. Although David gets injured and caught by the miscreants, Cal hares off after Violet (Kate Katzman, ripping off Margot Robbie’s bleached foundation and dark lipstick look from The Suicide Squad) and her super-violent bottle-blond boyfriend (Zack Ward). They end up at the farmhouse of Eric (Murray), who recently managed to kill his wife and young daughter in a car crash by not keeping his eyes on the road. Although obviously a terrible driver, Eric isn’t such a bad shot and soon he teams up with Cal to save David by taking down the bad guys, whose numbers keep increasing for the first half of the film, and then decreasing in the second as they’re picked off. Willis does a lot of sitting around being handcuffed while bleeding, which nevertheless fails to wipe that permanent smug sneer off his face. The endless bouts of fisticuffs and gunplay are interspersed with fitful plot padding and grim attempts at banter between assorted groups of characters – but never more than five at once because that would presumably have been too expensive. The constant soundtrack of bland, light metal guitar thrashing just adds to the pain. • Killing Field is released on 17 January on digital platforms.What’s a good, easy winter breakfast that isn’t porridge? Sarah, Ludlow This sounds like a job for Guardian perfectionist Felicity Cloake, who has been working her way through a buffet of breakfasts in the name of research for her latest book, Red Sauce, Brown Sauce: A British Breakfast Odyssey (out this summer). “Beans on toast, obviously,” she says. “Quick, filling and delicious.” Cloake might customise the tinned stuff with Worcestershire or chilli sauce, or smoked paprika or wilt in a handful of baby spinach. “Or make your own baked beans from tinned beans [eg, haricot] with a glug of extra-virgin olive oil, a spritz of lemon juice and some chilli flakes or chopped herbs.” If oats float Sarah’s boat, but porridge doesn’t, Cloake suggests stirring in some spiced stewed apples or rye flakes the night before. Alternatively, use oats (plus chopped nuts and cinnamon, say) in pancake batter, or sprinkled over morning muffins. Guardian baker-in-residence Benjamina Ebuehi is partial to an apple, cardamom and buckwheat number, for which she sifts 130g buckwheat flour, 75g caster sugar, a teaspoon of baking powder, half a teaspoon of bicarb and a pinch of salt into a bowl. In a separate bowl, she whisks an egg, 60g melted unsalted butter, 100ml milk, a teaspoon of vanilla extract, a half-teaspoon of crushed green cardamom pods and a grated peeled apple. Fold the wet ingredients into the dry, then dollop into a muffin tray lined with paper cases. “Top each one with a cube of apple, pushing it into the batter a little, and add a sprinkling of oats, pumpkin seeds and demerara sugar.” Bake at 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7 for eight minutes, then turn down to 180C (160 fan)/350F/gas 4 and bake for eight to 10 minutes until risen. You’ll then have breakfast sorted for days. It’s a truth universally acknowledged that most breakfast binds can be solved with eggs. Omelettes, Cloake says, are “quicker than porridge, and infinitely customisable”, while chef Josh Katz favours shakshuka. “It’s a dish rooted in simplicity, but you can play around with it,” says the chef-owner of Carmel in London. “At its core are lots of garlic, onions, peppers and spices [paprika or cumin, say] softened in olive oil, then [add] tomatoes, be that puree, tinned or fresh. Reduce, then balance with sugar and season.” Make some wells, crack in your eggs, then pop a lid on the pan and, once cooked, top with chopped coriander, spring onions, yoghurt, tahini or whatever else you fancy and have got to hand. Alternatively, turn dinner into breakfast. If you’ve got any leftover mash knocking about (and didn’t overdose at Christmas), there’s bubble and squeak, which should be topped with an obligatory fried egg. “Or cook extra rice when you’re making dinner and turn it into fried rice the next morning with an egg and some chopped veg,” Cloake adds. “All of these things feel like a big hassle, but actually can be on the table in 10 minutes, and – bonus! – a frying pan is a lot easier to wash up than a porridge pot!” • Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.comTwo Los Angeles police officers were fired for ignoring a robbery call so they could attempt to catch a character in a game of Pokémon Go, according to court documents. Louis Lozano and Eric Mitchell were asked to respond to a robbery in progress with “multiple suspects” at a Macy’s in south-west LA, but failed to respond to radio calls. An investigation revealed that Lozano and Mitchell heard the call but chose to ignore it in favor of pursuing a nearby Snorlax, a Pokémon character. A video system in the pair’s car revealed that Mitchell managed to capture the Snorlax before the pair drove to a location where the Togetic character had been spotted. On arrival, both Lozano and Mitchell managed to capture the Togetic. The incident occurred in April 2017 but details were revealed by an appeals court on Friday. Vice first reported on the case. Lozano and Mitchell were fired following an investigation, but appealed. The court upheld their dismissal. The recording from Lozano and Mitchell’s car captured the pair discussing Pokémon Go, an augmented reality mobile game where users travel to different locations. According to court documents, minutes after the officers were asked to respond to the Macy’s robbery, “Officer Mitchell alerted Lozano that Snorlax ‘just popped up’ at ‘46th and Leimert’.” The court reported: “After Mitchell apparently caught the Snorlax – exclaiming, ‘Got ’em’ – petitioners agreed to ‘[g]o get the Togetic’ and drove off. “When their car stopped again, the [digital in-car video system] recorded Mitchell saying, ‘Don’t run away. Don’t run away,’ while Lozano described how he ‘buried it and ultra-balled’ the Togetic before announcing, ‘Got him.’ “Mitchell advised he was ‘[s]till trying to catch it,’ adding, ‘Holy crap, man. This thing is fighting the crap out of me.’ Eventually Mitchell exclaimed, ‘Holy Crap. Finally,’ apparently in reference to capturing the Togetic.” The video system recorded Mitchell adding: “The […] guys are going to be so jealous.” The officers argued that the recording should not have been used in their disciplinary proceeding, and said they had been denied the protections of the Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights Act. The court disagreed. Bulbapedia.net, a community-sourced Pokémon encyclopedia, describes Snorlax as a “huge, bipedal, dark blue-green Pokémon with a cream-colored face, belly, and feet”. Togetic, Bulbapedia says, is a small flying Pokémon that can “sense the kindness in other people”.Boris Johnson faces a crisis over the latest revelations after weeks of reports about alleged lockdown-flouting parties at Downing Street and elsewhere in government – and he is now at the centre of them with reports that he and his wife, Carrie, attended one such event on 20 May 2020. Here are some of the questions facing the prime minister. Did he know the party was being organised? An email leaked to ITV’s Paul Brand that has sparked the latest questions does make this seem likely. From Martin Reynolds, Johnson’s principal private secretary, it told No 10 staff: “We thought it would be nice to make the most of the lovely weather and have some socially distanced drinks in the No 10 garden this evening.” The use of “we” is notable – Reynolds is a civil servant rather than a political appointee, and it would seem curious if he made the arrangement without at least Johnson’s tacit acceptance – not least because it was being held in a space which is, among other uses, Boris and Carrie Johnson’s personal garden. Who else was invited? Reports say Reynolds’ email went out to about 100 Downing Street staff, with between 30 and 40 people attending in the end. People who were there told the BBC that the event involved a long table being placed in the garden, holding drinks and snacks, including crisps and sausage rolls. This appears, without any ambiguity, to be a social event – Johnson will need to say how this could happen. Did Johnson and his wife attend? Witnesses have told the BBC and others that both the Johnsons were there. The prime minister will be asked repeatedly about this, and how long they stayed. One of the curiosities of the case is that, because the garden forms part of their official residence, the couple would not have broken any Covid rules by having a social drink there – were it not for the 30 or so others also attending. Did any other ministers attend? The invitation appears to have been sent only to No 10 staff. However, Downing Street has previously confirmed that at the event featuring wine and cheese five days earlier, Matt Hancock, the then health secretary, was present. No 10 insists that the gathering was a work-based meeting after a press conference led by Hancock. One minister particularly in the frame in terms of knowing about the 20 May event could be Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, given his official residence is also inside Downing Street. If he was at home that evening, he would be expected to have at least noticed several dozen people drinking in the garden. What is Johnson’s defence? So far, we don’t know. Johnson has not been sighted since the new revelations emerged, and the only line from ministers and the prime minister’s official spokesperson is that people should wait for the investigation into the wider issue of parties, which is being led by a senior civil servant, Sue Gray. There is, in truth, little in the way of a credible defence if the narrative implied by the email is correct. At the time of the alleged party there were no specific regulations against distanced, outdoor work meetings, hence Downing Street’s argument that the 15 May event, later shown in a photograph sent to the Guardian, was colleagues gathering for professional reasons. Reynolds’ email would seem to demolish such a defence this time. Might Johnson have misled parliament? Labour certainly believes so. After the news about the Reynolds email, the party sent out a list of times when Johnson told MPs in the Commons, amid earlier allegations, that he had been assured that all Covid rules were followed. If it was known that Johnson attended the 20 May event, and that it was as described in the email, then the prime minister would appear to have been deliberately untruthful.Less than a third of Post Office workers who applied for compensation under a government scheme in the wake of the Horizon IT scandal have received a payout offer, almost 17 months after it closed, MPs have been told. The Horizon IT system installed by the Post Office and supplied by Fujitsu falsely suggested there were cash shortfalls, leading to 736 unsafe convictions for theft, fraud and false accounting in one of the biggest miscarriages of justice in British legal history. The historical shortfall scheme (HSS) was set up in 2020, with a closing date for applications in August of that year, to compensate Post Office workers who had not been convicted but who had instead been forced to replace missing funds from their own pocket. Appearing before the House of Commons business, energy and industrial strategy committee on Tuesday, the chief executive of the Post Office, Nick Read, said that there had been 2,500 applications to the HSS but only 777 offers had been made. He said the size of the panel dealing with claims was doubled in October, and was bullish about future progress. “From my perspective, we will get to 50% by the end of March and we will get to in excess of 95% by the end of the calendar year … I hope therefore that we will ensure that as many of those individuals who have come forward will be compensated and/or their families if not the individuals themselves.” Separately, those who have had a criminal conviction overturned are entitled to an interim compensation payment of £100,000, but Read said only 57 people had received the sum so far. He explained that this was because only 72 of the 736 people whom the Post Office acknowledges as having an unsafe conviction have had them overturned so far, despite attempts to contact them all. Read told the committee that the Post Office had not managed to contact 126 of the 736, while 214 had not responded to letters. Asked why they might not have responded, Read replied: “There will be many individuals who will want to put it behind them and won’t want to revisit it.” The postal affairs minister, Paul Scully, went further in his evidence to the committee. “There is a mistrust in this entire process, not just with the Post Office but with government, with everybody, because they’ve had 20 years of absolute hell,” he said. “So why would they trust authority in general?”On Monday, Michael Gove stood up in parliament and made a promise that was long overdue: no person living in a building higher than 11 metres in England will be forced to pay for dangerous cladding to be removed from their building. The announcement by the secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities is a huge victory for cladding campaigners, but the fight is not over. His was a point so obvious that it shouldn’t need making. However, the government has dragged its heels in the years since the Grenfell Tower tragedy, which led to hundreds of thousands of leaseholders facing the prospect of having to pay tens of thousands of pounds to fix previously unknown safety defects with their buildings. Gove is now the fourth housing secretary to attempt to fix the building safety crisis in the four and a half years since the fire at Grenfell. His announcement is the first major intervention since February last year, when his predecessor, Robert Jenrick, announced further grant funding for the replacement of dangerous cladding on buildings taller than 18 metres, alongside a loan scheme for those living in buildings between 11 metres and 18 metres high. The new plan will see the loan scheme, detested by leaseholders and many Tory backbenchers, scrapped. Cladding remediation of medium-sized buildings will instead be paid by developers at an estimated total cost of £4bn. Developers have until March to sign up to a deal that will see them make annual contributions to cover these costs. They must also fully fund cladding work on buildings that they played a role in constructing. Those who do not sign up to the deal are being threatened with public contract bans, planning restrictions and legal action. Previous government interventions have done little to solve the problem, which has continued to engulf more people who discover they are living in an unsafe building when they or one of their neighbours try to sell. The scandal has resulted in financial ruin for thousands of leaseholders. Many of them are young, first-time buyers, such as Hayley Tillotson, who was forced to declare bankruptcy last year due to mounting fire safety bills. Like many others, she had been asked to pay hundreds of pounds a month for a round-the-clock fire patrol to watch her building. Some residents have resorted to carrying out their own waking-watch patrols in order to reduce costs. Monday’s announcement may well mark a turning point for those affected by the scandal. Leaseholders have picked up on a notable change of tone since Gove, a high-profile appointment to the newly rebranded department for “levelling up”, took office in September last year. Before Gove, ministers repeatedly said that leaseholders will be forced to bear some of the costs of remediation work. On Monday, Gove promised to introduce legal protections to prevent leaseholders from paying anything. This is undoubtedly a huge victory for leaseholders. Darren Matthews, who is facing a bill of £97,000 to fix various issues with his flat in a 13.4-metre high building, told me he is “cautiously optimistic” and praised Gove, who he said has spent more time with campaigners than his predecessors. Cladding campaigners have worked tirelessly for several years now to see this moment come to reality. Lucy Brown, who is living in a block taller than 18 metres with flammable cladding, said that a “slow week” sees her spending roughly 30 hours on building safety campaigning on top of her day job and bringing up three children. She told me she is “more hopeful” after Monday’s announcement. However, Brown, like many other leaseholders, also points to some of the gaping holes in Gove’s plans. Currently the plan only seems to cover the cost of cladding replacement, which makes up a small fraction of the building safety work required, with leaseholders also being charged for things such as missing firebreaks and flammable insulation. The plan also still excludes those living in blocks below 11 metres, who have been hit with fire safety costs. As the housebuilders were quick to point out, Gove’s plan focuses heavily on developers, while the Grenfell inquiry has shown that cladding and insulation manufacturers have just as much to answer for. Let’s also not forget the role successive governments have played in the scandal (combustible materials are still not banned on buildings below 18 metres despite pleas from the Grenfell community). David Cameron’s “one in, two out” policy on new regulations is just one example of how successive governments since the Thatcher era have created a regulatory environment that was so easily gamed by the construction industry at a time when fire brigade budgets were being slashed. Some have questioned the timing of Gove’s announcement, which focuses public attention on big developers, just as the Grenfell inquiry turns its attention to the role of government in the tragedy. There’s also the question of the practicalities of Gove’s plan. The government has used tough words with the industry before – for instance, when it said it would “name and shame” freeholders who owned buildings with dangerous cladding – to little effect. A letter from the Treasury to Gove’s department, which was leaked to Newsnight last week, showed the former has authorised “a high-level ‘threat’ of tax or legal solutions in discussions with developers”, but has not yet agreed to any new measures. Meanwhile, it said Gove’s department’s budget, which includes social housing spend, must act as a “backstop” if developers fail to cough up. Even if developers do agree to the plan, the anguish for leaseholders is far from over. Funding has been available to remove cladding from buildings higher than 18 metres for some time now, but work is yet to start on many of them, including that of Brown, in her tower block with her three children and her yet-to-be assuaged concerns. In the meantime, she has been forced to run through fire safety drills with her children. Her youngest daughter won’t sleep in her own room any more as she is too worried about a fire happening in the middle of the night. Lucie Heath is the deputy news editor of Inside HousingBus services in England used by hundreds of thousands of passengers are poised to be slashed when emergency Covid funding expires at the end of March, transport authorities have warned. Passenger numbers on buses have dropped sharply from 80% of pre-pandemic levels to less than 60% since the rise of the Omicron coronavirus variant and the introduction of work-from-home advice in December, leaving firms reliant on recovery grants to run services. Bus firms, which have to give six weeks’ notice to withdraw a route, are compiling lists of services to be scrapped after 31 March. Many services depend on local council subsidy in places where bus operators cannot make a profit. But authorities now do not expect to find money to maintain such routes, typically serving isolated communities or hospitals and running outside peak hours. Buses in regions whose budgets have to cover fixed-cost transit systems, such as Tyne and Wear which has the Metro, are expected to be hardest hit. The funding crisis comes amid a driver shortage, affecting buses as well as the HGV and logistics sector. About 6,700 bus drivers are needed, with roughly 10% of positions vacant, according to the bus industry group, the Confederation of Passenger Transport (CPT). But while the Department for Transport has tried to rush through recruitment of lorry drivers, “there is no equivalent strategy for the driver shortage crisis on the buses”, says Jonathan Bray, director of the Urban Transport Group. A plan is urgently needed, he argues, “to prevent short-term driver shortage challenges leading to long-term bus service cuts”. The pandemic, driver shortage and financial gap spell a “perfect storm” for buses in 2022, according to Paul Tuohy, the chief executive of Campaign for Better Transport: “Covid has dealt a body blow to the bus industry, and without further government intervention we are likely to see severe cuts to services up and down the country.” The pandemic struck at a cruel moment for a sector that finally believed it was making political headway after a difficult decade in which more than 3,000 local authority-supported bus services were axed or truncated. Pleas for a national bus strategy were granted by ministers at a London conference in February 2020 – an event that instead made headlines for featuring the first confirmed case of coronavirus at a Westminster event. The strategy, entitled Bus Back Better, was published in 2021 framed with a prime ministerial pledge for £3bn in funding to transform services. However, the industry believes it has been left shortchanged. The autumn budget confirmed only £1.2bn, although the government says it will still have given £3bn in “new spending” on buses in this pandemic-hit parliament. Meanwhile, the commitments in the strategy would actually require a £7bn investment, according to the CPT. Among those encouraged by Boris Johnson’s professed support for buses was Tracy Brabin, the first elected mayor of West Yorkshire, who submitted an improvement plan for central funding after being elected this year. “A good service where you can rock up and expect a bus in a few minutes, not just in city centres but across the region, will be absolutely transformational,” she says. Instead though, operators are now “extremely anxious” and looking at reducing routes where patronage is lower, Brabin says: “Inter-community, inter-town bus networks fall by the wayside.” West Yorkshire stepped in to save one route recently, the 205 from Pudsey to Dewsbury, which Arriva wanted to cut, at a cost of £120,000 a year. However, for cash-strapped councils, with soaring care bills also vying for funds, such outlays can only be exceptions. “A better bus network is vital for us in West Yorkshire … I’m a user, a passenger, and it’s not good enough. We need government support,” says Brabin. “My concern is that the £3bn we were promised has been reduced – and a lot of that money is being used to hold up the existing service rather than transform it as we wanted to do.” The driver shortage has left people ever more frustrated. Brabin recently waited at a Leeds stop alongside a man whose bus for Cottingley failed to show. “When that bus doesn’t come, he’s got to wait another hour. Half an hour later I passed him on a different service and he was walking. It’s bad for family life, it’s bad for mental health – people don’t have ownership of their lives because it is dependent on whether the bus will come or not.” In Tyne and Wear, passengers are having to check online if their bus home will run, with daily short-notice cancellations. Tobyn Hughes, managing director of Transport North East, said: “Confidence in services is already low, and driver shortages were affecting reliability even before the latest round of Omicron.” However, Hughes says current woes are “nothing compared to what could come at the start of the next financial year. Unless there’s more money, it’s very likely that 10% to 17% of services will be cut.” The prognosis is grim around England: Transport for the West Midlands forecasts a £50m shortfall in bus funding after March without government intervention. Bus operators in the region have already notified them that they plan to cut eight routes, carrying 37,000 passengers a week. While rural routes have been hardest hit over the last decade avross Britain, city bus services are at particular risk where light rail and tram systems also require subsidy. Hughes’ budget has to cover the Tyne and Wear Metro, whose emergency funding will likewise expire in March: “There is a £20m shortfall. It has very high fixed costs. Transit systems will adapt but not overnight. We can’t reduce the costs on the Metro quickly – but you can on buses, unfortunately for those involved. “We are desperate for the government to pull its finger out and tell local authorities what, if any, Covid-19 support there will be for bus and light rail services after March.” A Department for Transport spokesperson said: “We have provided unprecedented levels of funding for the bus sector during the pandemic, including the £1.5bn coronavirus bus service support grant and the ongoing £226.5m made available under the bus recovery grant. “As Omicron cases rise, we are closely monitoring the effect of new restrictions on passenger levels and services, working with the bus sector to understand their potential impact.” For many passengers already suffering cancellations from driver shortages, it will be hard to countenance further cuts. “We don’t have people to drive our buses. In the last six months complaints have soared,” said Dawn Badminton-Capps, director for England of passenger complaints organisation Bus Users UK. “Mainly services failing to show – and people getting wet and cold. In a city another bus might run soon – but for communities in places like rural Norfolk, that missing bus is it for the rest of the day. “We have people who say their employer is getting the hump and questioning if they can stay in the job. It’s not tenable for people to rely on buses if they won’t turn up.”Coffee Break Languages Radio Lingua was among the first to recognise the potential of podcasts for language learning, launching Coffee Break Spanish in 2006. Now the network has a huge range of free materials for learners at every level – and not just Spanish but also French, German, Italian, Chinese, Swedish and English. Each episode follows the structure of a lesson, with native speakers talking as they would on the streets of Paris or Cologne, and an experienced teacher to explain it all. With episodes running for 20 to 30 minutes, it is easy to make practice part of your daily routine. Absolute beginners should start at season one. Run to the Top There are many podcasts that rhapsodise about the joys of running, or debate which gels will fuel your best ever marathon – but if you are just starting, you’re probably more concerned with the need-to-know. Run to the Top, hosted by Claire Bartholic is perfect for beginners who are yet to make running a habit. Advice is always offered with the sensible caveat that “no two runners are the same”, and is inclusive of different goals and experience levels (discussion of weight loss, for example, is restricted to dedicated episodes). I have been a regular Parkrunner for years, and take a tip or two from each episode to try on a Saturday morning. If you are not yet at that stage, Couch to 5K really is as effective as everyone says. If you have the specific goal of training for a marathon, Marathon Training Academy comes highly recommended. I myself cannot speak to its effectiveness. Ten Percent Happier If you have struggled to take meditation from a sticking plaster you reach for in moments of crisis, to a regular practice, Ten Percent Happier may help. Host Dan Harris wrote the 2014 bestseller of the same name about how he came to find “self-help that actually works” after having a panic attack on live television. His podcast includes interviews with experts on how to make mindfulness a part of daily life: from approaching tough conversations to managing work stress and finding self-acceptance. Many of the guided meditations are only 10 minutes long. The Beginner’s Garden Jill McSheehy’s “gardening adventure” began eight years ago, when her family was adjusting to a single income. She wanted to learn how to grow her own fruit, vegetables and herbs to save money, but encountered a steep learning curve. In 2017, she started this podcast to share what she had learned with others. McSheehy’s commitment to experimenting, in her 3,000 sq ft plot in Arkansas, sees her learn alongside her listeners. Recent episodes share the results of her attempts to deter cabbage caterpillars, and growing potatoes, tomatoes and onions. What Should I Read Next? On this “literary matchmaking podcast”, host Anne Bogel talks to a listener about their “reading life”: the books they never wanted to end, the ones they couldn’t finish, and what is stopping them from reading more regularly – then makes suggestions for what they might read next. It’s refreshingly realistic on how reading can be something many of us struggle to make time for, as much as we may love it. Bogel makes unpretentious recommendations, leading her guests to a book that they can’t wait to read, rather than one they think they should. You will inevitably end up reading more. I loved an idea from a recent episode of a birthday challenge of reading one book for every year of your life – I’ve got three months to finalise my list of 31.Catholic and Jewish leaders in Rome have condemned an “offensive and unacceptable” funeral procession in which the coffin was draped in a Nazi flag and mourners gave the fascist salute outside a church. Photos and video of of the Monday funeral service published online showed about two dozen people gathered outside the church as the swastika-draped coffin emerged, shouting “presente!” with their right arms extended. In a statement on Tuesday, the vicariate of Rome strongly condemned the scene and stressed that neither the parish priest nor the priest who celebrated the funeral, had known what was going to transpire outside after the funeral mass ended. It called the swastika-emblazoned Nazi flag “a horrendous symbol irreconcilable with Christianity”. “This ideological and violent exploitation, especially following an act of worship near a sacred place, remains serious, offensive and unacceptable for the church community of Rome and for all people of good will in our city,” it said. The statement quoted the parish priest, the Rev Alessandro Zenobbi, as distancing himself and the church from “every word, gesture and symbol used outside the church, which are attributed to extremist ideologies far from the message of the gospel of Christ”. Italian news reports identified the deceased as a 44-year-old former militant of the extreme rightwing group Forza Nuova, who died over the weekend from a blood clot. Pope Francis is technically the bishop of Rome but delegates the day-to-day management of the diocese to his vicar, Cardinal Angelo De Donatis. Rome’s Jewish community expressed outrage that such events could still happen more than seven decades after the end of the second world war and the fall of Italy’s fascist dictatorship. “It is unacceptable that a flag with a swastika can still be shown in public in this day and age, especially in a city that saw the deportation of its Jews by the Nazis and their fascist collaborators,” the statement said. After a raid on Rome’s Jewish neighbourhood on 16 October 1943, more than 1,000 of the Italian capital’s Jews were deported, most to the Auschwitz death camp in Nazi-occupied Poland. Only 16 returned. The Jewish community statement on Tuesday said the funeral incident was “even more outrageous because it took place in front of a church”. A similar incident took place outside another Rome church in March last year.The heroes of Barnsley’s coronavirus pandemic are cast in bronze in the heart of the town centre. A nurse, a carer, a teacher, a volunteer and a police officer are depicted on the gleaming new sculpture, along with the words: “Barnsley’s fierce love holds you forever in its heart.” Bereaved families were among the hundreds of people at the memorial’s unveiling in November. And in Barnsley many people are grieving. The South Yorkshire town has recorded more deaths from Covid-19 than anywhere else in the UK per head of population: a toll of 972 so far, but the number still rises. The news that one of Boris Johnson’s top officials hosted a “bring your own booze” party in Downing Street in May 2020, when the UK was in the strictest stage of lockdown, was met with fury, dismay and cynicism in the town on Tuesday. “It’s disgusting,” said Audrey Myers, 61, serving customers at Pickles Fine Foods. “It’s one rule for us and another for them. If you’ve got money and power you can do what you want.” While appalled by the revelations, no one who spoke to the Guardian believed Johnson would face serious repercussions for allegedly attending the apparently lockdown-busting party. “I know what should happen,” said Myers. “He should resign. But he’s not going to. He will get away with it.” She added: “It’s not fair but it doesn’t matter what I think – it’s not going to change anything.” Mick Bishop, 59, is one of thousands of former Labour voters in South Yorkshire who ended years of political tradition and voted for Johnson’s Conservatives in December 2019. He was furious about the No 10 garden party. “It’s disgusting. People aren’t going to stick to the rules when they hear stuff like that,” he said, although he added that it was not likely to change how he would vote at the next general election. Bishop, who has sold CDs and watches on Barnsley market for a decade, said the news would embolden people to drop their guard against Covid, just as the region’s infection rate passes the peak of the Omicron wave in London: “People aren’t wearing masks like they used to. If anyone challenges them they will say: ‘Boris Johnson does what he wants so I will.’” Like many of the UK’s post-industrial towns, Barnsley has had a stubbornly high infection rate since the pandemic began. Coronavirus has thrived in places such as Barnsley, with its multigenerational households and large number of public-facing workers. The town currently has the seventh-highest infection rate in England, although the vaccination programme has slowed the risk of death and serious illness. But four more people have died of Covid in Barnsley since Christmas Day. James Higginbottom, 24, lost his grandfather to coronavirus in October 2020. The 77-year-old was one of the more than 175,000 victims of Covid in the UK. Like thousands of people across the country, his family were not allowed to visit their dying relative in his final days. Their only contact was a daily update from “incredible” staff at Barnsley hospital, Higginbottom said, and a final painful telephone call between father and son. “When you see revelations like [the Downing Street party] about the people making the rules flagrantly disregarding it – it’s disgusting, it’s disappointing,” he said. Higginbottom, who was elected as a Labour councillor last May, said he was dismayed Johnson had not come clean about whether he attended the May 2020 party, as several witnesses have alleged. “This is not about politics. This is about people’s lives and people who are grieving and are rightfully angry about what’s going on. We have a saying in Barnsley: ‘Don’t piss on my shoes and tell me it’s raining.’ That’s what it feels like the prime minister is doing.” At Mike’s Cards in the market, Rebecca Dawson, 43, said she had always disagreed with the need for lockdowns and the Downing Street party proved she was correct. “Boris having a party speaks volumes to how much they fear Covid. They weren’t exactly in fear of their lives, were they?” Others said they were sick of the near-daily torrent of allegations about rule-breaking by members of the government. Some were supportive of Johnson – one market trader, who did not want to be named, praised the prime minister for doing a “superb job” – and blamed the media for supposedly whipping up a storm. Stephen Price, the owner of EB Price &amp; Son, which has sold fruit and vegetables in Barnsley for 65 years, said it was time for the media and public to move on from Covid rule-breaking controversies. “If this had come out three months into the pandemic I would appreciate the uproar, but I do feel it should be put to rest,” said Price, 68. But he added that did not mean a free pass for the prime minister. “I think he’s politically damaged at the moment. There’s been too many cases like this in recent months. The public are the ones who will ultimately decide [Johnson’s fate],” he said.A west-to-east “tidal wave” of Omicron infections risks submerging health systems across Europe, the World Health Organization has said, warning that more than half the region’s population will be infected with the variant in the next two months. Hans Kluge, the WHO’s Europe director, said the region had recorded more than 7 million new cases in the first week of 2022, double the rate of a fortnight previously, with more than 1% of the population catching Covid-19 each week in 26 countries. Kluge said the variant had been reported in 50 of the Europe region’s 53 states and was becoming dominant in western Europe. “At this rate, more than 50% of the population in the region will be infected with Omicron in the next six to eight weeks,” he said – a scale of transmission he described as unprecedented. The variant would hit hardest where inoculation rates were lower, such as central and eastern Europe, Kluge predicted, saying he was “deeply concerned” that as Omicron moved east, “we have yet to see its full impact in countries where vaccination uptake is lower, and where we’ll see more severe disease in the unvaccinated”. In Denmark, he said, where Omicron cases had “exploded in recent weeks”, the Covid-19 hospitalisation rate for unvaccinated patients during Christmas week had been six times higher than for those who were fully vaccinated. Despite evidence that Omicron is affecting the upper respiratory tract more than the lungs, causing milder symptoms than previous variants, the WHO said it was too soon to start treating the coronavirus more as an endemic illness. Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, suggested on Monday that Covid-19’s evolution could be tracked as if it were a flu, without recording every case and without testing all people presenting symptoms, because its lethality had fallen. However, Catherine Smallwood, the WHO’s senior emergency officer for Europe, said that phase was still “a way off”, adding more stable and predictable transmission would be required before Covid could be seen as endemic. “We still have a huge amount of uncertainty and a virus that is evolving quite quickly, imposing new challenges,” she said. “We are certainly not at the point where we are able to call it endemic. It may become endemic in due course, but pinning that down to 2022 is a little bit difficult at this stage.” Kluge said that while vaccines provided “good protection” against severe disease and death, rising hospital admissions were “challenging health systems and service delivery in many countries … and threaten to overwhelm them in many more”. He said countries not yet hit by the Omicron surge had “a closing window of opportunity to act now” by protecting their most vulnerable citizens, as well as doing their utmost to ensure healthcare and other key workers could keep services running. Governments in these countries should mandate high-quality masks in all closed and indoor spaces and ensure full vaccine series and booster doses were given as early as possible, especially in the health and essential services sectors, he said. “Where the Omicron surge has begun, the priority should be to avoid and reduce harm among the vulnerable, and minimise disruption to health systems and essential services,” Kluge said. “This means prioritising vulnerable people for primary course and booster doses, advising them to avoid closed, crowded spaces, and offering the possibility to work remotely wherever possible until the infection surge passes.” PCR testing should be prioritised for individuals at risk of severe disease and critical workers, he said and rapid tests should be deployed more widely, again “prioritising contacts at high risk of infection and at high risk of severe outcome”. After moves by several European governments to shorten isolation and quarantine periods to prevent economies grinding to a halt, Kluge said such decisions should be taken “only when essential to preserve critical service continuity”. Shorter isolation and quarantine times should also be conditional on negative tests, he said, adding that in general all such decisions “must be taken with careful weighing of the risks and benefits of doing so”. Keeping schools open had “important benefits for children’s mental, social and educational wellbeing”, he said, urging governments to review protocols on testing, isolation and quarantine of classroom contacts to minimise disruption to learning. However, he said Omicron’s greater transmissibility meant authorities should prepare for a mix of online learning and in-class attendance.As she balanced a canoe upside down on her shoulders, crossing from one stretch of water to the next with her eyes just about able to peek under the bow, Camara Chambers knew what it meant to be supremely happy. In that moment, she may not have been really sure where she was going, but as far as she was concerned, Chambers was exactly where she was supposed to be – getting lost in the great, wide outdoors of her adopted homeland – Canada. City hikes are a great way for people to get to know Toronto, says Chambers London born and bred, Chambers was 25 when she arrived in Toronto a decade ago, eager to swap the “rat race life” she’d been living in England. Of all the changes that have come in the years since, her transformation into an avid outdoors-woman remains, to her, the most surprising and rewarding. “Growing up in north London, we just weren’t a very outdoorsy, let’s-go-camping family,” says Chambers, a senior manager at Ryerson University’s leadership lab, having previously led Volunteer Toronto, Canada’s largest volunteer centre. “Experiencing nature in that way wasn’t part of my experience. But here I’m able to go to so many beautiful places in the evenings and weekends. It hits me all the time what real work-life balance I have.” From top left: Chambers exploring Ontario’s waterways; out with a Let’s Hike TO group; and on a walk with her partner Graham. Photograph: above, Cole Burston/Guardian Chambers says that within weeks of arriving she knew she “had found her place”. Now she makes it her business to go to a lot of wonderful locations – and she doesn’t go alone. After catching the hiking bug early on in Ontario, she began to lead treks for others. This year she founded her own walking group called Let’s Hike TO, with TO standing for Toronto, Ontario. It’s aimed particularly at people of colour and newcomers to the city and province. She leads walks through the parks and ravines that pepper Ontario’s biggest city but also through urban settings, too, such as Toronto’s Insta-tastic Distillery District. Once home to a whisky distillery, its cobblestone streets are now lined with galleries, restaurants and boutiques. After a good hike, Chambers likes to raise a glass at the Rorschach Brewing Co, one of Toronto’s many craft breweries. Photograph: Cole Burston/Guardian Today Toronto is known for its breweries, and is said to be home to more than 70, each producing their own craft beers, with many offering tasty eats in cool locations. At the end of a guided walk, Chambers likes to head to one of her favourites, the Rorschach Brewing Co, where beers such as Truth Serum IPA and Decadence await. “A big part of the reason I do Let’s Hike TO is to see the look of wonder on newcomers’ faces, and also on Torontonians’ faces when I show them a part of the city that they didn’t know existed,” says Chambers. Looking ahead to 2022, she’s aiming to take walkers out of the city and farther afield. Ontario’s outdoor adventures are truly limitless, from far-flung Thunder Bay on Lake Superior in the north to the wetlands of Killarney provincial park and all the way south to Toronto’s doorstep. Chambers has already done her share of exploring far and wide, but is keenly aware there is still so much more to see. Top: the awe-inspiring beauty of Thunder Bay. Above: the endless waterways of Algonquin park make it a magnet for canoeists. Photographs: top left and above, Getty Images; top right, Alamy Her list of favourite places begins at the location of that canoe adventure, Algonquin provincial park, a three- to four-hour drive north-east of Toronto. The vast park is Canada’s oldest and boasts more than 2,400 lakes formed when ice age glaciers retreated. All of which makes it perfect for what Canadians call “portaging” – paddling a canoe with camping gear and supplies through its stunning waterways, then carrying the canoe overground to the next body of water and jumping in again. “Learning how to actually carry an I-don’t-even-know-how-many-pounds canoe on my back to get it between two lakes and doing it for a week – just a fantastic experience,” Chambers smiles. “As I say to my partner Graham: I’m a girl from London … and here I am!” Here are some of her top tips for adventurers: Algonquin provincial park “My favourite place to go hiking or just to be outdoors is Algonquin. It’s the most perfect place for short hikes, long hikes, camping. In winter, you can throw on some snowshoes and just get lost in nature. The park and the region is famed for amazing wildlife and I’ve had to listen as friends returned from trips and spoke of deer, turtles, moose and even bears they’ve seen up there. So far I’ve had no such luck! I took a friend from London and the whole time she was eager to see a bear. I said: ‘You’re never going to see a bear!’ And even though a ranger told us there’d been lots or sightings, we didn’t spot one. I’m still on the lookout but I’d much prefer to see a moose.” From moose to bears, Algonquin is renowned for its wildlife. Photograph: Getty Images Muskoka South-west of Algonquin, Muskoka is the heart of what Torontonians call “cottage country” – lake-side cabins and laid-back resorts nestled in nature, with little hamlets and towns speckled in between that are perfect for exploring. At picturesque Muskoka, visitors can while away lazy days. Photograph: Shutterstock “Muskoka is magical,” says Chambers. “My parents visited a few years ago and I wanted to give them a taste of the relaxed country life. We rented a car and zipped up to Muskoka and spent the day in the sunshine on a boat cruise, and stopped for doughnuts at The Bakery in Gravenhurst. It was the perfect way to see a very different part of Ontario. Most people don’t know it, but the summers here are beautifully hot (think Caribbean weather). It’s a great area to stay in and relax, and to rent a canoe or kayak to go exploring.” Outdoor gems around Toronto “The thing I love about Toronto and the area around it is that there are so many landscapes. You have beaches – I adore the Toronto Islands in Lake Ontario, right beside us in the city. From them you see gorgeous views of the skyline. No one appreciates how good the skyline is until they get a vantage point like that. Another real favourite of mine is Ashbridges Bay park, which is right on the lakefront, and has places where you can walk, cycle or swim. Top: Ashbridges Bay park offers wildlife and stunning skyline views. Above: the Cheltenham Badlands. Photographs: Alamy. “But you don’t have to go far to feel as if you are in a different world. If you drive just to the north-east of the city you’ll find yourself in desert-looking terrain, a place called the Cheltenham Badlands, which is incredible. I imagine it looks like the surface of Mars – this blood-red colour in rolling hills. It’s great to go in autumn as the colours are changing, and there’s a fantastic cidery nearby called Spirit Tree that’s not to be missed.” The Spirit Tree cidery, a place for artisanal cider and rustic dining Niagara-on-the-Lake Niagara Falls attracts the crowds and it’s clear why. A breathtaking wonder of the world that offers a feast of adventure activities such as jet boat tours up the Niagara River, zip-lining over the falls or the chance to join an unforgettable boat tour up close to the foot of the falls. Top: the Bruce Trail, Canada’s longest footpath, starts near Niagara-on-the-Lake, below. Photographs: Getty Images/Alamy For a change of pace after all that excitement, Chambers loves the quaint, historic nearby town of Niagara-on-the-Lake, a gem of an escape close to the starting point for the Bruce Trail, Canada’s oldest and longest footpath stretching 560 miles (900km) across Ontario wilderness. “The falls themselves are beyond gorgeous but Niagara-on-the-Lake is an amazing base for exploring all the wineries nearby and has great hikes too,” she says. “The town itself looks as if it belongs in the 1800s. I genuinely thought it was a movie or TV set. You’re waiting for someone to call: ‘Action!’.” Above and top left: a snowy day in a Toronto park brings back happy memories of a winter trip to Wiarton, top right. Photographs: above and top left, Cole Burston/Guardian; top right, Getty Images Georgian Bay “Another part of Ontario that I love is Wiarton. It’s a small village nestled on Georgian Bay, three hours’ drive north-west of Toronto, where I took a trip a winter or two ago. The bay was frozen over and it was stunning to see snow for as far as the eye could see. There is a section of the Bruce Trail in Wiarton that is like walking through Narnia. Snowy, mystical, and stunning.” Pelee Island “I visited Pelee Island, in Lake Erie, a couple of years ago with some friends and loved seeing a different side of the province. The nature reserves there are havens for birds and wildlife. It’s where I saw a snake for the first time in real life. Trust me, there was a lot of screaming!” Pelee Island (top) is where Chambers saw her first snake, and is a haven for birds. The island’s lighthouse, dating from the 1830s, was restored about 20 years ago. Photographs: Enviro Foto, Alamy Much as she enjoys reminiscing about her Ontario experiences to date, Chambers’ eyes light up when she talks about how much there is still to explore and see. She’ll likely be bringing plenty of fellow newcomers along for the journey. To discover more about Ontario’s amazing outdoors, head to destinationontario.com/ukTaiwan’s air force has suspended combat training for its F-16 fleet after a recently upgraded model of the fighter jet crashed into the sea in the latest of a series of fatal accidents. The island’s air force announced earlier that an F-16 fighter jet went missing over the sea off western Taiwan on Tuesday afternoon, 30 minutes after it took off from the southern Chiayi air base for routine training. President Tsai Ing-wen issued instructions to “spare no efforts” in the search and rescue mission and “to further clarify the cause of the accident”, her spokesperson said. Last week, Taiwan launched a three-day drill to show its battle readiness amid heightened military tensions with China, which claims the island as its own and has not ruled out using force to unite it with the mainland. On Tuesday, in investigating the latest incident, the island’s rescue command centre said witnesses had seen the aircraft crash into the sea and helicopters and ships were searching for the pilot. The air force inspector-general, Liu Hui-chien, said the aircraft had only recently been upgraded to the “V” version, with new weapons systems and avionics. Combat training for the F-16 fleet had now been suspended, he added. In November 2020, Taiwan grounded all its F-16 fighter jets for safety checks after a single-seat F-16 flown by a 44-year-old pilot disappeared from radar at an altitude of 6,000ft (1,800 metres) two minutes after taking off from Hualien air base in eastern Taiwan. Less than three weeks before that incident, a pilot was killed when his F-5E fighter jet crashed into the sea during training, prompting a similar grounding. Last year, two F-5E fighters, which first entered service in Taiwan in the 1970s, crashed into the sea off the south-east coast after they apparently collided in midair during a training mission. With Reuters and Agence France-PresseOver the course of her first full season as a full-time professional on the WTA tour, Emma Raducanu will come to experience all too much frustration and disappointment as she adjusts to life on the road. In Sydney, in her opening tournament of the season, Raducanu endured her first experience of such emotions as she was dismantled 6-0, 6-1 by Elena Rybakina of Kazakhstan in 55 minutes. Afterwards, while Raducanu swiftly complimented her opponent, she explained her expectations had been low. She was still only just finding her way back after testing positive for Covid in December. She said she had not played for 21 days in total since then and had only just started to play points. She had already withdrawn from what should have been her first tournament of the year in Melbourne. “It’s tough but it’s good because I’m very proud and happy that I put myself out there,” she said. “I could have easily said it’s too soon and just play next week, but I wanted to really test where I’m at and obviously give myself some competitive points and matches. I think this will help put me in a better place for next week.” Regardless, Rybakina is one of the most talented young players on the WTA and she possesses a destructive game. Also, she arrived in Sydney having reached the final in Adelaide last week, losing to Ashleigh Barty. She was ready and she simply dominated, lasering winners from all parts of the court. Raducanu has played very few players with the shotmaking ability of the Kazakh. Her sheer pace, weight and depth continually rushed the 19-year-old, who contributed to the one-sided scoreline by struggling with her serve. Rybakina thundered through the first nine games of the match and it was only when Raducanu was trailing 6-0, 3-0 that she finally clinched her first game, forcing a backhand error from Rybakina with some defence on game point. With a game finally on the board, Raducanu pumped her fist and smiled towards her supporters and her team. “I simply wasn’t going to lose love and love,” she said. “So that was my motivation.” No more games would come Raducanu’s way, but she picked up her bags and looked to see how she could improve. “After the match I got a box of balls and went straight to the practice court. I felt like I could have done some things better in the match, and I wanted to try and fix it straight away, just leave with a better feeling about it. So, yeah, we went on court.” In her first match of the season Raducanu lost, badly, but she finished her obligations with a smile on her face. “Yeah, I was just fighting,” she said. “At the end of the day I just want to keep putting myself out there. Even if I keep getting knocked down and it’s just about getting back up and basically just falling in front. You’re one step better. You learn more.” In the first match of the night session in Sydney, Andy Murray won his first match of the season to move into the second round with a brisk 6-3, 6-1 win over Viktor Durasovic. Murray will next face Nikoloz Basilashvili, who he defeated at Wimbledon last year. While Murray did not catch Covid in the off-season, and was one of the few players who travelled to Abu Dhabi not to do so, he said his time off was also disrupted anyway as he caught a “bad cold” and didn’t train for 10 days. But Murray is now in Sydney with his new coach, Jan de Witt, and as he discussed their arrangement, he made his ambitions clear. “Obviously what both of us want is results,” he said. “I don’t know obviously how long I’ll be able to compete for. I know that injuries can happen at this stage in your career and having been through what I have been through the last few years, so, you know, I want sort of instant results.”When any crisis faces the country, it falls to the government to act, and to do so swiftly. So with the energy crisis, we need the government to stop the dither and delay of the last decade and act. In contrast, Labour has already put forward a bold plan to levy a windfall tax on oil and gas producers, who have made billions in this crisis, to limit the expected price rise in April. Our package would save most households about £200, and we would also target extra support to 9 million of the lowest earners, pensioners and the squeezed middle, taking up to £600 off their bills. But crisis response is about learning the long-term lessons, not just taking short-term action. Of course, there is a global dimension to this crisis, but the British people have a right to ask why we have been hit so badly. In no other country have 28 energy suppliers gone bust – consumers will have to pick up the tab with £100 on bills and rising. They also have a right to ask why our energy system seems so vulnerable to the volatility of international markets and why we have a social safety net that seems so weak and inadequate. This crisis is a parable for the problems of Tory Britain. First, just as the banking crisis of 2008 exposed the deep flaws at the core of British capitalism, the present crisis is a symptom of the Conservatives’ failure to properly manage our energy policy or regulate markets. Despite warnings from Labour and others at the time, they allowed the UK’s last major domestic gas storage facility to close in 2017 and they ignored repeated warnings that the drive to increase competition in the energy market was being pursued at significant risks to consumers and, in fact, loosened regulations in the middle of the decade. Second, while some people will tell you that the move towards green energy is the cause of the crisis we face, the truth is the opposite. It’s is our dependence on fossil fuels that makes us more vulnerable and the government’s climate delay that has left us less resilient. Take energy efficiency. A proper home insulation plan could have significantly reduced household energy demand, and therefore our reliance on gas. But we have had systemic failure from the government, with the abolition of the zero carbon homes standard, the disastrous green deal and the chaotic Green Homes Grant. Emissions from buildings are as high now as they were in 2015. We have also seen an effective moratorium on onshore wind, cuts to solar subsidies and the stalling of the nuclear programme. All have made us less resilient. Third, we cannot divorce this crisis from the wider economic model we have. This crisis exposes the deep insecurity that is now baked into the British economy. Even before this crisis, too many people were living from paycheck to paycheck and without proper savings. And it is not just those on the lowest incomes; many middle-income earners have also seen their economic security undercut by rising prices, too. The answers on offer from both wings of the Conservative party are inadequate. Dumping the green transition overboard would not just invite climate disaster but make us far more vulnerable as a country, because we would remain reliant on fossil fuels with all the instability we have seen. Nor can we have any confidence that this government can provide the long-term solution we need. It speaks volumes about the Conservative party, its defence of vested interests and its refusal to stand up for working people that it is opposing the windfall tax and the measures it would fund. A Labour government will bring the long-term changes we need. We need to take a step back and look at the way the energy system works in its entirety. That’s about the regulation of the market, but more broadly about how we have a grid, transmission, generation and supply system that can properly meet the demands of affordable energy bills, security and the climate transition. There are crucial questions to address, including the way that the price of electricity is still tied to gas, the need for clean energy storage and how we have a grid that can be ready for a zero carbon energy system. We will drive further and faster towards an urgent and just transition. We have pledged to put in place a £6bn a year retrofit and zero carbon housing programme every year over the next decade. Led by local authorities, our aim is to help insulate the 19 million homes in Britain that fall below adequate standards. This could cut households’ bills by up to £400 a year and reduce our emissions. And we would drive forward all the sources of zero carbon power we need. Fundamental to changing our country in the way we need to is fixing a broken economic model of low wages and low growth, leading to deep economic insecurity. That is where the Green New Deal and Labour’s £28bn-a-year climate investment pledge must be transformational. We will support and create good, unionised jobs in industries from offshore wind manufacture to a national nature service. The energy crisis is the product of a decade of Conservative failure. There is a new future to shape for our country if we take bold action. A Labour government would stand up to vested interests and put working people first. That is the way we will build an economy that is more prosperous, sustainable and secure for all. Ed Miliband is the shadow secretary of state for climate change and net zeroHere’s your report: Algeria had 67% possession there, and 18 efforts on goal to Sierra Leone’s nine, but it’s hard to dispute that the West African side were worth a point. Algeria need to find another gear, particularly with Ivory Coast to come, and it looks like we have another tense, tight tournament on our hands. And with that I’ll bid you farewell. Thanks for your company. Bye. Sierra Leone’s players go into a defiant celebratory huddle in which Bangura addresses his men with pride and emotion. And though the second half was a more conventional Goliath v David siege, they created the better chances in the first period and showed enough in every area of the pitch to suggest they’ll ask questions of their other Group E opponents too. Ivory Coast are up next for them on Sunday, in the same stadium. As for Algeria, they remain a fluent, talented passing side but they lacked composure in front of goal and were flat for considerable spells before their substitutions gave them some much-needed urgency. Slimani and Brahimi disappointed, leaving Mahrez and Belaili having to do too much of the creative work. They didn’t look like champions today. And that is indeed it. The holders are held, the underdogs celebrate, as well they might. A well merited point. … Bounedjah meets it with a firm header but it’s straight at the keeper. That’s gonna be it. 90+2 mins: Algeria win a corner after a shot from the right loops behind … 90+1 mins: Bensebaini gets inside the area on the left again, cuts inside but his low shot at the near post is again smothered by the excellent keeper, Kamara. 90 mins: we’ll have only the three added minutes. 89 mins: Another long ball is poppe forward for Bounedjah but he can’t quite reach it and is offside anyway. 87 mins: It’s a siege now and Bensebaini forages into the left but again Sierra Leone find a way to clear. Their defence has been excellent, Caulker prominent among them. 86 mins: Algeria press again, and Benrahma misses a golden opportunity; a fine slick move ends in a rightwing cross for the unmarked West Ham man, who doesn’t fully connect and his shot is wide. No excuse for not hitting the target there. 84 mins: Sierra Leone sub: Kaika for Turay. 83 mins: Sierra Leone’s Kevin Wright is being carried off for treatment, while West Ham’s Said Benrahma is coming on for Algeria, replacing Belkebia. 81 mins: Chance for Mahrez! Bounedjah, who’s made a difference since coming on, gets clear down the left of the area and chips back a cross for the unmarked Mahrez whose low volley is turned behind by Kamara for a corner. 79 mins: There’s a creeping sense of panic about Algeria now, reflected in the manager Djanel Belmadi’s visible anguish on the bench. They’re dominating possession but it’s not quite a siege. 77 mins: Booking: Bangura goes into the book for flailing arms at Boulaya 76 mins: Sierra Leone sub: Alhaji Kamara hobbles off to be reeplaced by Fofanah. 75 mins: … once again it’s worked swiftly from right to left by Mahrez for Belaili who darts into the area before a challenge that has him appealing for a penalty. But it’s a corner, which is worked out to Mahrez on the right, and his cross is headed over by Bounedjah. 73 mins: Sierra Leone win a free-kick in a good position on the left. Bundu whips it in and it has to be headed out for a corner, which is overhit and wasted and Algeria break … 72 mins: Sierra Leone do attack now and after an impressive run from right to left by Quee, Bundu hooks the ball back from the right but Algeria scramble clear. 68 mins The increasingly influential Belaili seizes on a poor ball out of defence to slip in Bounedjah just inside the area but again Sierra Leone scramble clear. Apart from the disallowed effort, it’s been pretty much one-way traffic this half. 67 mins: Bounedjah is in the thick of it early on with some trickery inside the box after a pass from Belaili. A minute later, Bendebka misses a gilt-edged chance when the ball is deflected out to him by the keeper but Caulker deflects the shot wide for a corner. Heroic defending. 64 mins: Algeria subs: all change up front with Feghouli, Brahimi and Slimani off for Boulaya, Bounedjah and Bendebka 62 mins: Mahrez finds Belaili on the left, he slips in Brahimi but the cross, which shaves the top of the bar, is deemed to have drifted out of play. Goal kick. 62 mins: Interesting and absorbing though this game has often been, this tournament needs some goals. 60 mins: Algeria have an overlap on the left as the ball reaches Brahimi, but he can only cut inside and fire low at the keeper. Algeria’s decision-making and finishing hasn’t always been the best today. 58 mins: Belamri’s long ball forward has Kamara charging out of his area again to head clear from Slimani. Algeria come again though, pressing more aggressively than earlier, before a rash challenge from Brahimi concedes a foul and gives Sierra Leone a breather. 55 mins: This one eventually culminates in an overhit Mahrez cross that goes out for a goalkick. Algeria definitely stepping it up this half though. 54 mins: Mahrez is busy on the right now skipping to the byline on the right and forcing a corner, which is eventually worked back out right again to Feghouli who wins another corner... 53 mins: Kei Kamara muscles through on the right of the are to meet a long ball but he can’t bring it fully under control and his “effort”, such as it is, drifts out for an Algeria goalkick. 51 mins: Brahimi misses Algeria’s best chance so far! Slick interplay results in a dinked ball forward from Mahrez finding Brahimi who chests it down but hits it at the keeper. Mahrez looks a lot busier now. 49 mins: Brahimi plays a nice one-two with Belaili down the left and gathers the ball again inside the area but though he wriggles and jinks, Sierra Leone won’t give him the space for an opening and the danger is averted. 48 mins: A ball from the left finds Kamara, comically unmarked, and he forces it home, but he was offside, as VAR confirms. 47 mins: Belaili has gone down after being caught by Bundu, who does the old “he dived ref” symbol, but it’s a free-kick to Algeria. It’s knocked long for Mahrez on the left and his cross is easy pickings for Kamara, who’s been commanding. Peep! Off we go again. The teams are back out. Algeria are making a sub. Benlamri coming on in defence for Bedrane, who was on a yellow card. If the score stays like this, Ivory Coast will perk up. The other heavyweights in Group E open their campaign against Equatorial Guinea tomorrow and will fancy their chances of winning the group. Elsewhere, Group D’s opening fixtures take place later today with an intriguing looking encounter between Nigeria and Egypt, followed by Sudan v Guinea-Bissau. Talking of Egypt, here’s a Mo Salah Liverpool contract story: the Premier League soap opera is always with us: A busy end to the half as Mahrez clips Slimani in and Kamara has to dash out and clear, and Sierra Leone swiftly break into Algeria’s own area before the cross is hit clear. And that’s it for a decent half of football. Sierra Leone have been excellent, denying Algeria space and causing them some bother on the break, enough to have them thinking an upset is eminently possible here. Algeria’s celebrated midfield and attackers have shown glimpses of their obvious slickness and class but haven’t really clicked or consistently carved their opponents apart. All to play for in the second half. 45 mins: two minutes will be added, as Slimani scuffs a low ball in from the right aimed at Brahimi and the keeper gathers. 44 mins: The crowd may be rattling around a bit in a vast bowl like this but there’s a decent atmosphere. Out on the left Algeria win a corner when Brahimi skins Quee, who has the last touch before it goes out. But the Sierra Leone press pushes Algeria back again from it. 43 mins: And now the Sierra Leone keeper Kamara is down after a tussle for possession by the byline with Slimani. But he’s OK to continue. 42 mins: The London-born, Sweden-based Wright gets down the left this time, and his cross is met by two attackers colliding with each other and Algeria clear. 40 mins: Turay has another raid down the left, getting plenty of freedom to roam, and cuts inside before slicing his shot across goal. Sierra Leone have now had six efforts at goal to Algeria’s three. Not a bad return from 30% possession. 38 mins: Belaili beats Quee for pace on the left and wins a free-kick for Algeria in a dangerous position when he’s pulled back. He takes the free-kick too, whipped towards the near post but headed out. 36 mins: Another Sierra Leone attack. A ball from the right is headed across the area then out to John Kamara, who can’t keep his shot down. It sails over. 34 mins: Booking: Algeria’s Bedrane is booked for going in with his elbow on Bundu, who needs a bit of physio examination. 33 mins: Mahrez gets hold of a long probing ball down the right but Kevin Wright holds him off tenaciously by the byline and concedes no more than a corner. His corner is overhit, cleared and Algeria have to work it out from the back again. 31 mins: Another Sierra Leone break, again down the left, Turay goes it alone and has a firm shot saved by M’Bolhi to his right. They’ll be extremely pleased with this performance so far, the west Africans. 29 mins: Sierra Leone break again and swift interplay puts Bundy clear of Atal on the left, who cuts inside but blooters his subsequent shot miles over. He had options there too, and chose the wrong one. 28 mins: Bensebaini concedes a free-kick on the right after being beaten for pace. It’s headed clear and it looks as if Turay has blundered a promising position when the ball is knocked forward and though he looks offside no flag is up, and he miscontrols out. 26 mins: Mahrez almost plays in Slimani with a lovely curling ball from the right but the keeper gets there first. Just. 25 mins: Brahimi shows some midfield trickery but is well hustled and bustled by Caulker and his ball out left is headed out for a throw, which comes to nothing, which all rather illustrates Sierra Leone’s effectiveness so far. And Algeroa’s frustrations 24 mins: Slimani sets up Belaili for a shot from distance but it’s straight at Kamara. A bit of a waste. 22 mins: Sierra Leone win a free-kick on the left just outside the area. Bundu bends it in, it’s a good delivery to the far post and the header from Bangura is just wide. That’s twice they’ve threatened seriously from crosses. 21 mins: there’s either a helicopter or a storm or some other interference causing a bit of a racket. 20 mins: Feghouli wins a throw out on the right in a promising position. From it, the enterprising Atal manages to get to the byline and cross but the keeper Mohamed Kamara gathers 17 mins Brahimi skips clear down the left, cuts inside to find Brahimi but Sierra Leone’s press is solid and Algeria are pushed back. They’ve not yet had a really clear and obvious opening. 15 mins: Sierra Leone are competing well in midfield, winning their tackles and not afraid to move the ball swiftly, but Algeria are enjoying the lion’s share of possession, as might be expected. 10 mins: … it’s a mere corner. Belhaili swings it in, it’s cleared and we have a break in play as Alhaji Kamara goes down after a clash of heads with Bensebaini. He’s OK to continue. 9 mins: Algeria slow it down a bit and enjoy a spell of midfield possession but Sierra Leone keep their shape and deny them a way through. Algeria do eventually find a way through with Atal who marauds forward from right back and his cross is turned behind for a corner, from which another is won after a shot is deflected wide – by a hand, Algeria think, but no dice. We’re having a VAR check anyway … 6 mins: Another Algeria attack as Brahami plays in Mahrez down the right, he sprays it out left and the subsequent cross is too high for Brahimi. Sierra Leone respond and Bundu meets a decent low right wing cross with a firm shot that isn’t far wide of the near post. They’re not sitting back. 3 mins: It’s a lively old start as Mahrez slips in Slimani with a beautifully judged pass on the inside right but after rounding the keeper, Slimani finds the angle too tight and fires into the side netting. 2 mins: Sierra Leone knock it long, and the flick-on causes a moment of alarm for Algeria and after a poor back pass concede an early corner, but the ball in is easily gathered by M’Bohli in the Algeria goal. 1 min: Algeria kick off and stroke it around for half a minute before a long ball forward is headed out for a throw by QPR’s Kakai. And the attack fizzles out with a foul on Sierra Leone’s Quee by the byline. Peep! Algeria v Sierra Leone is go! The teams are on their way out. There aren’t loads of people in the stadium. There looks to be a regimentally socially distanced Sierra Leone band over on the far side. And it’s time for the anthems. Fancy a quick stadium tour? Who doesn’t. Both teams appear to be setting themselves up in a 4-3-3, with an attacking looking Algerian lineup featuring Mahrez, Belkebia and Belaili in the midfield three behind Brahimi, Slimani and Feghouli further forward. There’s some serious experience in there. Sierra Leone have also gone with a front three, with two of their four Kamaras – Kei and Alhaji – alongside Mohamed Buya Turay. Steven Caulker is in at centre-back. Algeria: M’Bolhi, Attal, Mandi, Bedrane, Bensebaini, Mahrez, Belkebla, Belaili, Brahimi, Slimani, Feghouli. Subs: Benlamri, Tougai, Bounedjah, Bendebka, Boulaya, Oukidja, Zorgane, Chetti, Benayada, Amoura, Benrahma, Halaimia. Sierra Leone: Mohamed Kamara, Kakay, Steven Caulker, Bangura, Wright, Quee, John Kamara, Bundu, Kei Kamara, Turay, Alhaji Kamara. Subs: Medo Kamara, Fofanah, Williams, KaiKai, Dunia, Ibrahim Sesay, Mansaray, Idris Kanu, Kallon, Isaac Caulker, Abu Dumbuya, Musa Kamara. Afternoon everyone. Today’s first match has a definite magic-of-the-cup vibe, pitting as it does the defending champions and second-favourites Algeria against a Sierra Leone side who’ve not qualified for the finals of this tournament since 1996. To use western-centric metrics, 16 of Algeria’s squad play in Europe, including the likes of Ryad Mahrez, Ismaël Bennecer, Saïd Benrahama and Islam Slimani while Sierra Leone’s 10 Europe-based players include Wealdstone’s David Sesay, QPR’s Osman Kekay and Gaziantep’s Steven Caulker, formerly of QPR, Cardiff and Spurs. (Caulker is an interesting and admirable character, having battled addiction and mental health issues in the past and had some interesting things to say about playing in Turkey and dealing with the pandemic when we caught up with him in 2020.) So everything points to Algeria this afternoon extending a remarkable unbeaten run that stretches back to 2018. They also come into the tournament freshly honed by their Arab Cup victory last month and a warm-up win over a strong Ghana side. As well as Mahrez, Bennaci and Youcef Belaïli can make things happen for them and they should have too much for Sierra Leone. And yet this is often a tight tournament and, as we saw yesterday as Senegal laboured to a last-gasp victory over Zimbabwe, little can be taken for granted. Every game so far has had only one goal separating the sides and tournament football can be a great leveller. Even so, it’ll be tough for a Sierra Leone side who have played only two games in the past six months (a draw with Ethiopia and defeat by Comoros) due to Fifa sanctions relating to crowd trouble and government interference. Look out for Kei Kamara up front, who is a goal short of the country’s goalscoring record, currently held by Mohamed Kallon. Today’s game takes place at the brand new 50,000-capacity, $232m Japoma Stadium in Douala, which opened only last month. Let’s hope it gets a reasonable filling today. Kick-off 1pm GMT.Kuumba-Toudie Heath – Baraka (1969) The biological son of saxophonist Jimmy Heath, brought up by Dizzy Gillespie sideman James Forman, James Mtume was raised in jazz. His first appearance on record was on the 1969 album Kawaida, credited to his uncle, drummer Albert Heath – and on subsequent reissues to Herbie Hancock or Don Cherry, both of whom perform on it. But, really, Kawaida is Mtume’s album: he wrote every track bar one, and it was his interest in the pan-Africanist theories of Maulana Karenga that informed the project. It ranges from intense free jazz to more becalmed modal outings: Baraka falls into the latter category, a perfect introduction. Miles Davis – Mtume (1974) Mtume first came to prominence as percussionist in Miles Davis’ early 70s band, which was still causing controversy decades later – for years, it seemed no Davis documentary was complete without someone, usually critic Stanley Crouch, decrying them as either a cluttered noise or a craven capitulation to commercial forces. It has to be said, there exist more obviously craven capitulations to commercial forces than the music on 1974’s incredible Get Up With It, an album Mtume is all over. Listen to his congas fluttering, as one writer put it, “like bats” during the stunning, subdued, ambient-inspiring Duke Ellington tribute He Loved Him Madly – but let’s go with the track named in his honour, which Mtume powers along. Lonnie Liston Smith &amp; the Cosmic Echoes – Sais (Egypt) (1974) Saxophonist Sonny Rollins recorded it first, Mtume’s own 1977 version went on for 22 minutes, but the best take on his Afrocentric jazz tribute to Ancient Egypt might be the one on Lonnie Liston Smith’s Cosmic Echoes album: a blissful eight-minute drift, powered by an insistent bassline, garlanded with spacey synth and electric piano. Mtume – Umoja (1977) Just as his career as a R&amp;B songwriter and producer was taking off, Mtume put out one final burst of spiritual, Afrocentric jazz, the album Rebirth Cycle. Never reissued legally and unavailable on streaming services, a bootleg or YouTube are your only real options, but it’s worth checking out: the lengthy version of Sais is great, and the collection of shorter, soul-influenced tracks on side two – including Umoja – are fabulous, complete with vocals from Jean Carne of Don’t Let It Go to Your Head fame. Roberta Flack &amp; Donny Hathaway – Back Together Again (1980) Recruited for Roberta Flack’s band, Mtume made it his business to reignite the singer’s relationship with troubled duet partner Donny Hathaway, encouraging them to record his ballad The Closer I Get to You together. A huge hit in 1978, it paved the way for an album-length follow-up to 1972’s Roberta Flack &amp; Donny Hathaway, but Hathaway’s erratic behaviour caused Mtume to temporarily abandon the sessions: hours after taping his vocal on Back Together Again, Hathaway returned to his hotel and killed himself. It seems extraordinary that such a transcendent, life-affirming piece of music could have emerged from such desperate circumstances, but Back Together Again is 10 minutes of euphoric disco glee. Stephanie Mills – Never Knew Love Like This Before (1980) As the 70s turned into the 80s, Mtume and songwriting/production partner Reggie Lucas – another former Miles Davis alumnus – transformed singer Stephanie Mills from a Broadway star, who spent five years in the cast of The Wiz, into an R&amp;B chart regular. The four albums they made with her are packed with highlights – What Cha Gonna Do With My Lovin’, Starlight, Two Hearts – but the commercial peak was the Grammy-winning Never Knew Love Like This Before: pillow-soft, lushly orchestrated mid-tempo disco, inspired by the birth of Lucas’ first child. A few years back it was used, to heartbreaking effect, in the second series of Pose. Mtume – So You Wanna Be a Star (1980) The debut album from Mtume’s own R&amp;B project dealt in classy funk and luscious ballads – check out the oft-sampled Love Lock – but the group really hit its stride as disco gave way to the more electronic sound of boogie. The highlight of Mtume’s second album In Search of the Rainbow Seekers, So You Wanna Be a Star blends opulent strings, muted horns and Chic-ish guitar with sharp, needling synth. It would be intriguing to know if Mtume and Lucas had anyone specific in mind when they wrote the lyrics, which pick apart a celebrity heading for a fall (“your entourage sure looks shady”): whoever it’s about, the results are both sophisticated and sassy. Phyllis Hyman – You Know How to Love Me (1981) Before hooking up with Mtume and Lucas, Phyllis Hyman had worked with a succession of fantastic writers and producers – Skip Scarborough, Earth Wind &amp; Fire’s Philip Bailey and, on her heart-stopping sleaze anthem Loving You Losing You, Thom Bell. But the sound of 1981’s You Know How to Love Me is the definition of what Mtume called his “sophistifunk” style: rhythms aimed at the dancefloor, “pretty melodies”, a hint of jazz still lurking somewhere in the mix. It’s a toss-up as to whether the title track or Under Your Spell is the best thing here, but if the former deserved to be a far bigger hit – which was pretty much the story of the under-appreciated Hyman’s career – it nevertheless rightly became one of her signature songs. Mtume – Juicy Fruit (1983) Mtume didn’t endear himself much to the burgeoning hip-hop scene by loudly demanding in the late 80s that artists who were sampled got paid, but that didn’t seem to stop people actually sampling him: at the last count, Mtume’s biggest hit – a ballad that stripped his sound back to little more than a drum machine, a synth, a scattering of guitar and some dubby echo – has been borrowed over 100 times, by everyone from Stetsasonic to Jennifer Lopez, but most famously on the Notorious BIG’s 1994 smash Juicy. Wrigley attempted to sue over the title, before Mtume explained to their lawyers the song had nothing to do with chewing gum – “it’s about oral sex” – an experience he later described as “one of the highlights of my life”. Mtume – New Face Deli (1986) Mtume’s Theater of the Mind album was effectively James Mtume’s farewell to the music industry. Almost entirely electronic, it sounded perfectly of the moment, but the cynical lyrics, unmistakably the work of a man who’d grown up in the politically militant Black Power era, suggested someone who’d had enough of pop in the 80s – MTV comes in for a bashing – and indeed of the Reagan 80s themselves. New Face Deli finds him railing against plastic surgery as a “cop out”, perhaps with one eye on the era’s biggest black star – “who said a big nose was ugly? Who said a thin nose is in?” He shifted into working in theatre the following year: R&amp;B’s loss.I am a veteran reader of Enid Blyton’s Faraway Tree books. I read them first growing up, and revelled in the thought of the different magical lands that could be reached at the top of an enormous tree – the Land of Take-What-You-Want! the Land of Goodies! Imagine being able to ask for an ice cream of any flavour, and going for sardine, as Connie did. Or flying on a dandelion seed in the Land of Giants. I dreamed of using a Slippery-Slip – the huge slide which goes down the centre of the tree. I imagined biting into a Hot Cold Goodie, or sucking a toffee shock. I wanted to creep past the Angry Pixie, watch Dame Washalot empty her buckets of water over Mr Watzisname (how much washing did she really need to do?), and make friends with Silky and Moonface. Then I read the books to my eldest child – and found myself not as charmed as I’d hoped. The Saucepan Man in particular was a little creepy and as ever with Blyton, there’s editorialising to be done while reading out loud, if you don’t want the girls to be told to stand aside for the boys. But! I could see how much she loved the stories, and so I read them again to my middle child, and then again to my youngest, and I found myself reluctantly acknowledging the Faraway Tree’s charms once more. After all, I’m not the target audience any more, and all three have been entranced by it. For each of them, The Enchanted Wood has been the title that moved them across from picture books to chapter books as a bedtime story. And every time, as we’ve begun it, I’ve watched that spark of imagination kindle in their eyes, as the children (in my day Jo, Bessie and Fanny, now Joe, Beth and Frannie) enter the wood, and hear the “wisha, wisha, wisha” of the trees whispering their secrets to each other. So I’m delighted to hear that there’s going to be a new Faraway Tree story, by the mighty Jacqueline Wilson – the first in 75 years, and the first by an author who is not Blyton. Wilson seems perfect for the role – she’s already given us retellings of What Katy Did, Five Children and It and The Railway Children, and she was “a huge fan” of the books as a kid. “I had such fun writing a brand-new Faraway Tree book,” says Wilson in the announcement. “I read the three original Enid Blyton books many times as a child, marvelled at all the adventures and wished I could be Silky’s best friend and share Moonface’s toffee shocks. It’s a privilege to be able to write about Blyton’s iconic characters and invent new children and magical creatures of my own for new readers to enjoy.” In Wilson’s story, which is published in May, three new children find the Enchanted Wood while on holiday – Milo, Mia and Birdy. They meet Silky and her crew, and travel to the Land of Unicorns. “But not every land is so much fun. Danger looms in the Land of Dragons. Will Moonface’s magic work in time to save the children?” says publisher Hachette. Yes, undoubtedly it will, but this is news that will win the heart of my dragon-obsessed bookaholic eight-year-old, and a book I’ll be reading to my five-year-old as soon as it’s out. The 11-year-old will undoubtedly see herself as far too grown up for it these days – but I wouldn’t be surprised if she finds herself in the vicinity, come story time.The world’s first transplant of a genetically altered pig heart into an ailing human is a landmark for medical science, but the operation, and the approach more broadly, raise substantial safety and ethical concerns. Surgeons at the University of Maryland Medical Center spent eight hours on Friday evening transplanting the heart from the pig into 57-year-old David Bennett, who had been in hospital for more than a month with terminal heart failure. It was an exceptional procedure. Doctors considered Bennett to be facing near-certain death and deemed him too ill to qualify for a routine human heart transplant. As a last resort, the medical team sought emergency authorisation from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to transplant a heart from a genetically altered pig. The heart came from a the pig created by Revivicor, a spin-out from PPL Therapeutics, the UK company that created Dolly the Sheep in 1996. Now under US ownership, Revivicor’s pigs are engineered to avoid immune rejection. Among the genetic alterations made are tweaks that remove a sugar molecule from the tissues that provokes organ rejection. The FDA approved the operation, along with the team’s proposal to use an experimental drug to prevent Bennett’s body from rejecting the organ. On Monday, doctors at the hospital said Bennett was awake and breathing on his own, but it was too soon to call the operation a success. Doctors are waiting to see how Bennett fares in the coming days, weeks and hopefully months. The prospect of harvesting organs from animals to save human lives has a long and chequered history. Advocates see the approach as a way to slash waiting lists for desperately ill patients, while animal rights activists see it as dangerous and ethically abhorrent. In the 1960s, US doctors transplanted chimp kidneys into more than a dozen patients, all but one of whom died within weeks. In the 1980s, a premature baby in California received a baboon heart but died three weeks later. The main risk is immune rejection: even with organs from human donors, recipients need constant immunosuppression to prevent their bodies from attacking the transplants. While Revivicor’s pig heart is designed to be less prone to immune rejection than standard animal organs, it is unclear how well it will be tolerated by the body. Because the organ comes from another species, Bennett will need more potent immunosuppression than usual, which comes with its own medical risks. Recent work on such donor animals has focused on pigs because, although they have different immune systems to humans, the animals’ organs are very similar. While much of the effort has been directed at making pig organs invisible to the human immune system, it is far from the only challenge. In the 1990s, scientists all but abandoned their work on donor pigs when they realised that retroviruses lurking in the animals’ DNA could potentially infect human cells. That raised the worrying prospect of transplanted organs spreading infection to the vulnerable patients who received them. Research has been under way to overcome the problem, by taking genome editing to another level. After tweaking pig DNA to remove molecules that trigger immune rejection, scientists have made precision alterations that remove dozens of retroviruses from pig tissues in the hope the organs will be safer when they are eventually transplanted. How well animal organs work will be for clinical trials to decide, rather than one-off operations. Many biotech companies are moving cautiously, setting up trials to check whether the organs are safe and effective, first in other animals and then in humans. For those with failing organs, the hope for now remains with the generosity of human donors.The Metropolitan police have been accused of “deferring to the powerful” by not investigating Downing Street parties held in apparent breach of lockdown rules. The force on Monday said it was in touch with the Cabinet Office in light of “widespread reporting relating to alleged breaches of the Health Protection Regulations at Downing Street on 20 May 2020”. The statement came after the leak of an email from one of the prime minister’s top officials inviting more than 100 Downing Street staff to a “bring your own booze” party during the first coronavirus lockdown. One senior police source with close knowledge of the regulations said the May 2020 gathering in the garden of No 10 organised by the prime minister’s aide was a clear breach of the regulations in force at the time. “A booze-up in the garden is not in keeping with the regulations,” they said. Jane Connors, the acting deputy assistant commissioner, who leads for the Met on coronavirus enforcement, was on Tuesday considering the Met’s next steps, and whether the force needed to abandon its policy of not retrospectively investigating alleged Covid breaches, amid warnings the stance is sapping public trust in policing. The Met is also facing court action to try to force it to justify its failure to act. The Good Law Project said it had started legal proceedings over the Met’s refusal to investigate reports of a Downing Street party on 18 December 2020. The campaign group said that in letters between it and the Met, police said they had “relied on the government’s assurances that no rules had been broken” and “there would have been no point in interviewing Number 10 staff about the parties because they would have refused to answer questions that exposed them to a risk of prosecution”. Jolyon Maugham, the director of the Good Law Project, said: “You can have the rule of law, or you can defer to the powerful. But you can’t have both. Cressida Dick’s cat will know that multiple criminal offences were committed. It shames the Met, and ultimately all of us, that she refuses to investigate.” The Met faces further questions about whether its officers knew of the May 2020 gathering as it took place and potentially could have taken action then. The Green party peer Lady Jones said the invitation to the May 2020 garden party, sent by Johnson’s top aide, Martin Reynolds, was troubling. “This garden party raises big questions for the Met police, as their officers must surely have monitored this gathering via their security cameras and been aware of the rules in place at the time,” she said. “The police are losing public trust with their attitude that there are lots of rules for us and no rules for Conservative ministers. Did Martin Reynolds consult with Met police officers about the Covid restrictions, or inform them of the event?” The Met have so far said only that they are aware of the latest revelations and in touch with a Cabinet Office inquiry conducted by the senior civil servant Sue Gray. She could choose to refer matters to the police, it is understood. The force is mindful that any penalty for a breach would only be a fine, but parliament did give it the power to investigate allegations up to three years after they took place. For other relatively minor offences the time limit is six months. Downing Street said Gray’s inquiry would be “paused” if the police decided to conduct their own investigation. The prime minister’s official spokesperson on Tuesday said: “I think the Cabinet Office has been clear that they’re in contact with the police and obviously the police have the ability to start an investigation should they see fit to do so. “That would then pause the work that has been done by the Cabinet Office team.”Silvio Berlusconi has reportedly threatened to withdraw his Forza Italia party from Italy’s governing majority if the current prime minister, Mario Draghi, is elected president later this month. The scandal-tainted media tycoon, who served four times as prime minister, is in Rome from Tuesday on the hunt for votes as he ramps up his own presidential campaign. The secret ballot by more than 1,000 parliamentarians and regional representatives begins on 24 January and is expected to go through several rounds before a successor to Sergio Mattarella, who steps down on 3 February, is elected. There are no official candidates in Italy’s presidential elections, although party leaders usually try to agree on a candidate. Berlusconi, 85, is a favourite among the rightwing parties for the seven-year-mandate. However, Draghi, who is credited with restoring stability in Italy, as well as keeping the broad coalition in line, is tipped as the frontrunner. According to reports in the Italian press, Berlusconi said that without Draghi as prime minister, “Forza Italia would leave the majority”. Draghi’s potential promotion risks bringing general elections forward by a year. In a poll released on Tuesday, more than 50% of Italians said Draghi was the person most fit for the job, while 39% supported Berlusconi. Berlusconi, who was temporarily banned from public office after a tax fraud conviction in 2013 and is still being tried for allegedly bribing witnesses in an underage prostitution case connected to his notorious “bunga bunga” sex parties, has reportedly been bombarding parliamentarians in the lead-up to the ballot in what the Italian press has described as his “Operation Squirrel campaign”. Antonio Tajani, the deputy Forza Italia leader, said Draghi needed to remain prime minister and that with Berlusconi as president, “the government would be solid”. Draghi hinted in December he would be prepared to accept the role if elected. However, he began a press conference on Monday night by vetoing questions about the presidential race. “Only Draghi can do this [prime minister] job,” Tajani told La Stampa. “Without Draghi it’s impossible to have a unity government … we’re participating in this government because of Draghi.” Tajani said Forza Italia’s withdrawal from government would be inevitable if Draghi moved to the presidential palace. “The majority would implode,” he said. Italy’s president has a largely ceremonial role, albeit with the power to resolve political crises, pick prime ministers and call early elections. Mattarella was forced to step several times to resolve crises, including calling on Draghi to form a unity government last February after the administration led by Giuseppe Conte collapsed. Analysts believe Berlusconi will struggle to garner enough support for his bid, even if he is noted for his shrewd “vote-buying skills”. On the eve of his campaign, he posted a photo of himself and his girlfriend, Marta Fascina, a Forza Italia politician, on Instagram, alongside the message: “Happy birthday.” Fascina turned 32 on Sunday.The best things about running or jogging are that it costs very little (for basic kit), doesn’t eat into the day, lifts your mood, and can take you to parts other sports cannot reach. No surprise, then, that an estimated 7 million people across the country (almost one in 10 of us) have taken up running since Covid started. So we’d like to know where your favourite runs take you in the UK (and Europe now that things are opening up a little) – maybe a city park, a cross-country course or a beach. If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. The competition closes on 18 January at 9am Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The risk of a hard landing for large parts of the global economy is rising as countries struggle to cope with the triple threat of Covid-19, inflation and higher interest rates, the World Bank has said. In its half-yearly forecasts, the Washington DC-based Bank said it expected a “pronounced slowdown” in growth in the next two years, with the less well-off parts of the world especially hard hit. David Malpass, the World Bank’s president, called for action to reduce the debts of poor countries and said he was “very worried” about the permanent scarring of development caused by the pandemic. He said: “The world economy is simultaneously facing Covid-19, inflation, and policy uncertainty, with government spending and monetary policies in uncharted territory. Rising inequality and security challenges are particularly harmful for developing countries.” With the Bank predicting a slowdown in growth from 5.5% in 2021 to 4.1% this year and 3.2% in 2023, Malpass added: “Putting more countries on a favourable growth path requires concerted international action and a comprehensive set of national policy responses.” The Bank said the rapid spread of the Omicron variant suggested the pandemic was likely to continue disrupting economic activity in the near term, while a marked deceleration in the world’s two biggest economies – the US and China – would reduce exports from emerging and developing economies. “At a time when governments in many developing economies lack the policy space to support activity if needed, new Covid-19 outbreaks, persistent supply-chain bottlenecks and inflationary pressures, and elevated financial vulnerabilities in large swathes of the world could increase the risk of a hard landing,” the report said. Malpass said many countries were already facing an education “hard landing”, pointing out that in poor countries the number of 10-year-olds unable to read a simple text had risen from 53% to 70% in the past two years. “Deep debt relief is needed,” Malpass said. “If we wait too long it will be too late and it won’t be successful.” The Bank said growth in advanced economies was expected to decline from 5% in 2021 to 3.8% in 2022 and 2.3% in 2023 – a pace of expansion that would still be enough to restore output and investment to their pre-pandemic trend. By the end of next year, all advanced economies were expected to have achieved a full recovery in output. Growth in emerging and developing economies was expected to drop from 6.3% in 2021 to 4.6% in 2022 and 4.4% in 2023, leaving output 4% below its pre-pandemic trend. For fragile and conflict-affected countries, output would be 7.5% below its pre-pandemic trend, while in small island states it would be 8.5% below. The Bank said rising inflation – which hits low-income workers particularly hard – was constraining monetary policy. “Globally and in advanced economies, inflation is running at the highest rates since 2008. In emerging market and developing economies, it has reached its highest rate since 2011. Many emerging and developing economies are withdrawing policy support to contain inflationary pressures – well before the recovery is complete.” At a time when immunisation rates in the world’s poorest countries are below 10%, the World Bank said the immediate priority was to ensure vaccines were deployed more widely. But it said there was also the need for long-term support to tackle setbacks in development progress, such as rising inequality. “In a time of high debt, global cooperation will be essential to help expand the financial resources of developing economies so they can achieve green, resilient, and inclusive development,” said Mari Pangestu, the Bank’s managing director for development policy and partnerships.PLAY IT BACK If there is a manager suited to the VAR era, it is $tevie Mbe. The explosive badge- and camera-kissing celebrations of his glorious playing career are long forgotten now he is a grim-faced manager with the pitchside manner of Lord Ferg confronted with a copy of Thatcher: the Downing Street Years. Perhaps conditioned by those moments when he maybe got a little bit too amped before giving the ball to Demba Ba/nobbling Ander Herrera mere seconds after coming on, he does not celebrate until the VAR lady sings. He knew. Everyone knew. Even The Fiver knew. Somewhere amid that scrambled Aston Villa ‘equaliser’ at Old Trafford on Monday night would be a minor infringement that might rule out Danny Ings’ bundle home, and with it would go the chances of Prince William, David Cameron, Tom Hanks and Geezer Butler’s chance of their knees getting all trembly on the road to Wembley. As it turned out, the refs in the video bunker had to rewind the footage almost as far as Peter McParland’s charge on Ray Wood in the 1957 FA Cup final to rule out the goal, and it turned out an NFL-style blocking manoeuvre from Jacob Ramsey on Edinson Cavani sometime amid 1979’s Winter of Discontent had saved Manchester United’s blushes. United got lucky. Very lucky, since Big Red’s performance had been absolute bloody rubbish. Again. This time there wasn’t even an emotional return for Phil Jones to distract from just how teeth-grindingly badly United had played. Fans of their rivals may draw sweet joy from United’s continuing travails under Wreck-It Ralf Rangnick, but there’s an extra dimension to the team’s mediocrity; they are duller to watch than a documentary on the history and evolution of the micrometre screw gauge. Those terrestrial stations sharing the FA Cup rights may beware televising United’s fourth-round tie with Middlesbrough for fear of driving the viewership towards repeats of Grand Designs and Poirot. Aside from just about everything, what’s wrong? Bruno Fernandes looks less a new Cantona than the second coming of David Bellion. Raphaël Varane’s previous palmarès counts for little when he plays like the second coming of William Prunier. Marcus Rashford, booed for not chasing a ball he perhaps may not have reached in any case, is proving that becoming one of Britain’s leading humanitarians at a young age is not mutually exclusive to being a desperately out-of-form footballer. Teenager Anthony Elanga eventually came off the bench to zip around with a zest beyond United’s lethargic senior pros, as rumours swirl they think Ralf and his coaches aren’t up to the job. Their sense of irony appears in yet shorter supply than entertainment. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I can see that my ownership has caused unrest within the club and the fans. I want the best for the club and I think the best for the club is that it is now passed on to new owners. My team is speaking to certain credible bidders and I am happy to speak to others” – Oldham supporters may not want to hold their breath, but owner Abdallah Lemsagam claiming to want out should spark some lesser-spotted celebrations around Boundary Park. FIVER LETTERS “The FA Cup third round never fails to deliver the drama and romance for which the world’s oldest knockout competition is famed. Rubbish teams come up against superior opposition and on occasion, they prevail. Never has Monday night’s Manchester United v Aston Villa clash better illustrated the joy of this tournament” – Lindsay Williams. “I would like to raise a query with the Fiver IT department, though no doubt it will be one of your relatives; living in the basement, swigging Tin, hiding from the light, mining for Bitcoin and NFTs (whatever they are). The problem is this: since new year, The Fiver has been going straight to my junk folder. It’s just a bit too inconvenient to have to retrieve it from there. Is this a recommendation for your work? Is there anything I can do or can you improve things your end?” – Jonathan Dobson. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Lindsay Williams. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Konyaspor and former Turkey defender Ahmet Calik has died in a car crash, aged 27. The Football League has no plans to investigate Liverpool over a number of false positive Covid-19 tests which led to the postponement of their Milk Cup semi-final first leg against Arsenal last week. Meanwhile, Mo Salah has been getting his chat on with a fancy lifestyle magazine in which the subject of his Anfield contract negotiations handily came up. “I want to stay, but it’s not in my hands,” he cooed. “It’s in their hands. They know what I want. I’m not asking for crazy stuff.” Sierra Leone are celebrating after holding reigning Afcon champions Algeria to a 0-0 draw in their opening game. Kazuyoshi Miura, 134, will continue his professional career for another year after moving to Suzuka Point Getters on loan from Yokohama FC. “I am grateful for the opportunity to play here and will do my best to contribute to the club on the pitch,” he cheered. And Chesterfield chief suit John Croot says the club had to shell out £4,500 for the pleasure of VAR being in use at their FA Cup defeat to Chelsea. “We got a letter from the FA the week before saying that the cost of it would be deducted from the expenses of the game, so between us and Chelsea we had to pay over £9,000,” tooted Croot. “It was a bit of a shock to me, if I am honest.” RECOMMENDED LOOKING David Squires reflects on a weekend of FA Cup shocks, from Tyneside to Aggborough, via the Humber. STILL WANT MORE? Our men’s and women’s transfer window interactives have just got a whole lot shinier. Kylian Mbappé’s wish to leave PSG for Real Madrid shows it’s an unhappy band of galacticos in the French capital, writes Jonathan Liew. Marcus Rashford is short of form and confidence at Manchester United: Jamie Jackson picks out two moments from the FA Cup win against Villa that sum up his lost season. “It’s improved the atmosphere”: Paul MacInnes canvasses opinion from fans on the recent safe standing trials in the Premier League. Martin Laurence looks at which strikers Newcastle should be buying this month. Who will lead the line for USA! USA!! USA!!! at the Human Rights World Cup? Graham Ruthven looks at the contenders. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! TO THE NATIONAL LEAGUE SOUTHUpon the announcement of Hollywood legend Sidney Poitier’s death, I sent out a tweet that featured my favorite photo of him. The photo in question shows a shirtless Poitier, wearing dark sunglasses like Miles Davis on the cover of ’Round About Midnight, playing the saxophone alongside jazz man Sonny Stitt, while standing in the street, surrounded by a community of appreciative onlookers, otherwise known as “the people”. The reason I dig this photo so much is because it offers a more complex image of Poitier than the one that had come to define him at the height of his fame in Hollywood. I have never been able to confirm the context of this photo, but I have always assumed that it was taken while he was preparing for his role as the expatriate horn player in the film Paris Blues. Whatever the circumstances, though, the image itself suggests an authenticity, a certain street credibility that is much more complex than the conveniently integrationist symbolism that his persona has so often been reduced to. By the late 1960s Sidney Poitier was the biggest box office draw in America. With movies like In the Heat of the Night, To Sir With Love and Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner, his films had become their own genre. Accomplishing this was no small feat. When Poitier began his career, most movies featuring predominantly Black casts were musicals. Black men who appeared in otherwise all-white films tended to be represented as inarticulate, child-like buffoons; racial clowns who scratched when they didn’t itch and laughed when nothing was funny. Poitier’s rise to the top of the Hollywood mountain changed this. He was often the lone Black person moving through hostile white spaces. His refined, erudite and dignified image was a counter to the coonery and buffoonery that figures like Stepin’ Fetchit, Mantan Moreland, Eddie “Rochester” Anderson, and Willie Best had previously represented. Like so many elite mid-century jazz musicians, Poitier wanted people to see him as an artist, not as a stereotypical entertainer. And in this he succeeded. When perhaps his most famous character, Virgil Tibbs from In the Heat of the Night, demanded that the racist southern white cops put some respect on his name, “They call me Mister Tibbs!” Poitier was like Muhammad Ali who had demanded the same thing in the ring and in real life. In the film, the character of Endicott took offense to the fact that the “uppity” Tibbs had actually spoken to him as an equal, instead of like the fawning obsequious fool that he expected him to be. So, Endicott slaps Tibbs across the face for getting out of what he perceived to be his place. But quicker than the blink of an eye, Tibbs responded in kind, slapping the taste out of Endicott’s mouth, as it were. The “slap heard round the world” – this legendary cinematic moment when Poitier’s stardom afforded his character the opportunity to retaliate against a white man without fear of retribution – demonstrated that just because he was known for playing these proper gentlemen on screen, he could still handle his business, if need be. Poitier’s image in film has often been associated with that of Dr Martin Luther King Jr; Poitier won the Academy Award for best actor the same year that King won the Nobel prize. But in this instance, when Tibbs slapped Endicott back, the character that he would most be associated with demonstrated that there were multiple layers to his complex persona. He may have reminded some of MLK, but in the late 60s when the civil rights movement was being challenged by assertions of Black Power, Virgil Tibbs did not turn the other cheek. Here he had more in common with Malcolm X than he did with Dr King, despite what his measured persona may have lead some people to believe. Seeing In the Heat of the Night as a kid left an indelible imprint on my adult mind. Being a distinguished gentleman did not mean accepting humiliation, literally or figuratively. Demanding that those celluloid racists respect him and showing them that he could maneuver in a variety of ways said to me that being well-rounded and multidimensional, defying categorization, mixing supreme intellect with authenticity was indeed the way to go. This is what Tibbs, Poitier’s larger cinematic persona, and especially that photo of him playing the sax in his shades, surrounded by Blackness, came to stand for. Many years after I initially saw Poitier in this groundbreaking film, I had the distinct pleasure of meeting him. In the late 1990s Poitier was the commencement speaker at the USC School of Cinematic Arts where I have spent the last 30 years of my professional life. Watching him as a kid, the lone Black man navigating labyrinthine white spaces, was comparable to the occupational life I found myself living in the rarified spaces of academia. Exhibiting a gentlemanly manner coexisted alongside an understanding that not everyone agreed that I actually belonged in such an elite space. Like Virgil Tibbs, I could be diplomatic, but as that hilarious malt liquor ad from the 1980s said, “Don’t let the smooth taste fool you.” Standing on the graduation stage in full academic regalia, as I placed a PhD hood on a newly graduated doctoral candidate, thinking about how the people who created all of this higher education pomp and circumstance most certainly never imagined that a cat like me would be representing in this way, I turned around to see Poitier approaching me, with his hand extended, smiling broadly. His words, “Nice to meet you, Dr” echoed as I shook his hand. As we stood there, I absorbed the magnitude of the moment. He offered multiple compliments and pleasantries, as gracious in life as that of his persona. We shared a knowing laugh. But this was Sidney Poitier, not Virgil Tibbs. He understood what this all meant, and so did I. Things that are understood often need not be articulated. Sidney Poitier was a giant of American culture. He stands as one of the most important figures in the history of Hollywood, without question. The monumental legacy of Poitier’s style is evident in those that he influenced. Be it the career of contemporary Hollywood royalty Denzel Washington, or that of the nation’s first Black president, Barack Obama. Sidney Poitier, the distinguished gentleman of cinema was groundbreaking, inspirational, cool, complex and authentic as well. The era he represented is long gone, but the foundation he laid is one we’re still building on. Rest in power! Dr Todd Boyd is the Katherine and Frank Price endowed chair for the study of race and popular culture at the USC School of Cinematic ArtsDear prime minister, On 20 May 2020, my dad’s death certificate was being signed. We were arranging his funeral 30 years too early. He had passed away four days earlier, having contracted Covid-19 on his way to work as a key worker in Wigan. We sat by his side and watched. In September of last year you looked me in the eyes in the Downing Street garden and told me you had done everything you could to save him. You saw photos of his last days that no one had ever seen before. It is now clear that whilst my dad’s death certificate was being signed and me and my younger sister were grieving alone, dozens of people were gathered, clutching a bottle they had been invited to bring, in the same place you told me you had done everything you could. You can only imagine the pain, anguish and anger this news has brought to me and those of us lost a loved one to Covid-19. To make matters worse, when asked about this event by Sky News you laughed, smirked and seemed to treat it as one big joke. Put simply, your response has added unnecessary additional hurt to those of us still grieving and who could not even hug our family and friends whilst we buried our loved ones. I had to stand and watch my grandparents break down over a hole in the ground, terrified that if I went near them, they would catch Covid and die, too. I call on you now to apologise for that additional hurt caused by your response. To fail to do so would simply demonstrate to the bereaved community we have never been further from your thoughts. This morning, your ministers across news outlets maintained the frankly laughable notion that it would be impossible to know whether you yourself attended this event of 20 May 2020. This notion adds insult to injury. You know whether you were present. Your team will know whether you were present. The dozens who gathered that day know whether you were present. Two have already confirmed that you were. More will surely follow. It is simply a matter of common decency and respect for not only us or the British people, but the office you hold as prime minister of the United Kingdom to tell us all whether you attended this flagrant breach of your government’s own rules. My dad didn’t have much in his life, but he had his integrity and a sense of right and wrong that he passed down to me. If you did wrong and attended this party, or knew of it happening, do the right thing and own up to it before any investigation forces you to, not after. Yours sincerely, Hannah Brady On behalf of Covid-19 Bereaved Families for JusticeChristopher David Lutu, 28, never thought his caring, passionate big sister would die from Covid at the age of just 37, weeks away from receiving her first jab. Fila Lutu had worried about getting vaccinated because she had previously suffered bad reactions to injections, but landing a new job with the NHS had persuaded her to make an appointment. Unfortunately, it was too late. She returned to their home in Chadwell Heath, east London, from a visit to France on Sunday 12 December, and by the Monday she had started coughing. On the Wednesday, she tested positive, and booked a PCR test for Thursday. From there, she deteriorated quickly. On Friday 17 December the family called an ambulance but her condition was not considered serious enough at that point. It took her collapsing on the bed from pain in her heart to be admitted to a local hospital. Overnight, her heart swelled, and in the morning she had a cardiac arrest, from which she died despite attempts at resuscitation. Her brother said medical staff were uncertain whether the heart attack was a complication of Covid or the result of an underlying condition aggravated by the virus. Fila Lutu’s death is one of more than 175,000 that make up a grim milestone for the UK. The Office for National Statistics on Tuesday reported 176,035 deaths where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate since March 2020. The figure differs significantly from the government’s official count – which passed 150,000 deaths over the weekend – and uses the criterion that patients have had a positive test within the 28 days before their death. Lutu said: “It feels like she’s been snatched away from us, because she was an amazing person in the family. It’s going to leave a hole.” He recalled how growing up as the eldest sibling in a family of nine, Fila “always put the needs of other people before herself”, getting a job at Pizza Hut to support the household, and bringing back leftover pizza and chicken wings. She had planned to channel her drive and perseverance into a career as a life coach, and had recently completed a course and set up her own business. “She wanted to inspire other people to become better versions of themselves,” Lutu said. Although the family are devastated by their loss, Lutu hopes that, even after her death, Fila will still be able to help people. He is fundraising for the local hospital in her memory, and hopes that her experience will encourage others to get vaccinated as quickly as possible. “I’d say, if you’re going to get it anyway, do it as soon as possible and don’t delay it, because we don’t know if it would have changed anything.” For Taylor Syme, 20, this Christmas was supposed to be about enjoying time with family in their home town of Falkirk. Instead, she, her three siblings and their children spent the holidays desperately hoping that their 42-year-old mum, Kelly-Anne Syme, and their grandma, who is still in hospital, would survive their Covid infections after the entire family caught the virus in December. Syme said her mum, who was vulnerable to serious infection as she was battling two lung diseases, tested positive for coronavirus on 20 December despite rarely leaving home other than for essential reasons. Initially, Kelly-Anne felt slightly unwell and had headaches, but by Christmas Eve she had to be taken to intensive care because she was unable to breathe. Doctors said she was so weak that if she was put on a ventilator she would never come off it, and she died in the early hours of 4 January. For Syme, the fact that the Omicron wave is resulting in milder infections and fewer restrictions is cold comfort. “We’re absolutely heartbroken. We were meant to be planning Christmas together. We weren’t planning on saying bye to our mum. If people had taken the lockdown seriously, Mum would still be here. [Governments] lifted it too early, opening clubs, pubs and schools. We were just fighting the inevitable,” she said. As their father died six years earlier, Kelly-Anne’s youngest daughter, who is 12, will now be cared for by her older siblings. Syme said her mum leaves behind a “close-knit family” because she “raised us very well”. Syme is raising money for her mum’s funeral to “give her the send off she deserves”. In a tribute on the fundraising page, she wrote: “She had the biggest heart and most infectious smile. She was the best mum and the best wee granny.” David Garfinkel, 49, lost his father, Ivor, 76, to Covid after so-called freedom day on 19 July. In the summer, the public awaited a return to normality after more than a year of coronavirus restrictions. Nightclubs reopened, large events resumed and social distancing ended. For Garfinkel, however, what followed was “one of the worst experiences you can go through”. After catching the virus, Ivor, who had an autoimmune condition, gradually deteriorated. With the help of a family doctor, he was admitted to hospital and put on a drip. “We spoke to him briefly for the first time in weeks as he had been so tired before [that] he was in and out of consciousness and we could not get any sense out of him,” Garfinkel said. This was the last time he would speak to his dad. Within a few days, Ivor was taken to intensive care and put on a ventilator. After three days, doctors said they planned to switch the support off, but Garfinkel wasn’t allowed to say goodbye in person. “His body was ravaged by Covid,” he said. Ivor had started his working life with Marks &amp; Spencer before setting up his own business as an importer of accessories. “He was the kind of person who would always put other people first. If someone was in need, he would be there,” Garfinkel said. The experience has been traumatic for him. “There is a state of shock and denial around what has happened. You never get a chance to forget or move on. Covid is always in the news, and you are always asking, ‘What if’ every time there is talk of a new medicine to help or vaccination booster.” He says he has been surprised by the selfishness of people when it comes to mask-wearing and the “incompetence of the government”. “Behind every single coronavirus death, there are family and friends. It is not just one person lost; there are lots of people left behind picking up the pieces.”A well-meaning but hammy and perfunctorily sentimental heartwarmer in the familiar Britfilm style, inspired by the true story of Liz Evans, the dynamic founder of a youth theatre in Carmarthen whose productions were performed in an art deco theatre called the Lyric. She single-handedly saved it from demolition in the 90s, with her unflagging commitment to preserving it as a performance space, a movie theatre and a community resource. Samantha Morton plays Liz; Jonathan Pryce plays a benevolent old teacher (favourite film: Goodbye Mr Chips) and Tom Felton is a kind-hearted postman. But the movie creates a gurning comedy evil mayor who is in cahoots with wicked developers, and this thankless and somewhat broad role is taken by Adeel Akhtar, who can do little or nothing with it. I can’t help contrasting Save the Cinema with the recent film Dream Horse: also based on the inspiring true story of a Welsh community led by a gutsy local woman getting everyone together to fight back against adversity, in that case by buying a racehorse, and in fact Owen Teale has a part in both films. But that had a kind of passion and seriousness that Save the Cinema doesn’t and there is, for me, always something a little bit misjudged about appealing to sugary nostalgia in the cause of saving a cinema. Well, there is a nice tribute to John Ford’s How Green Was My Valley: a screening at the Lyric inspires everyone present to stand up and belt out Bread of Heaven. The sentiment is sound enough. • Save the Cinema is released on 14 January in cinemas and on Sky Cinema.Alistair McDowall’s new play The Glow transports its audience back to the 1860s where Mrs Lyall, a spiritualist medium, is visiting an asylum, searching for someone to act as an assistant. There she finds a strange, nameless, voiceless woman and takes her home, only to discover that the woman herself has powers. The premise is not wholly unfamiliar but McDowall is concerned as much with English myth and Arthurian legend as he is with the supernatural: how the past remains with us in the present and how we fictionalise history to make sense of ourselves. McDowall set out to write a fairytale “that had actual consequences”, taking something that appears to reside in the realm of the fantastic and grounding it in the real world “for there to be cost and emotional heft”. The Glow is intended to catch people off-guard, he explains over Zoom from Manchester, where he sits surrounded by boxes, having moved house the day before. Presenting audiences with something that looks familiar and then unravelling it is something McDowall is good at: his plays have a way of playing with your expectations. This can make them difficult to write about without revealing too much. X, from 2016, is a good example: it is set on a research base on Pluto that has lost contact with Earth. The clocks start going backwards. There is a glitch in time. But it is, at heart, a play about loss. Time has played a key role in a lot of McDowall’s work. “To not consider time as a proper element within the writing of the play,” he says, “would be like not considering character or scene structure.” Nonetheless, like JB Priestley, he has several works that could be described as “time plays” and 2011’s Brilliant Adventures even contains an actual time machine. More recently, All of It, a 45-minute rattle through one woman’s life, was performed by Kate O’Flynn at London’s Royal Court last year. It was directed – like X and The Glow – by Vicky Featherstone. “I tend to write work that’s quite high-concept,” he says. “There’s always a danger of someone getting fixated on the concept and making something flashy.” But Featherstone, he says, is very rooted. Despite X’s off-world location, she understood that the “story was actually quite simple.” Growing up in Great Broughton, North Yorkshire, McDowall’s interest in theatre was sparked, in part, by a drama teacher. At school, he read a vast amount and started stealing books “which I’ve since posted back out of guilt”. He finds the decline of drama in schools upsetting, not just because it means that potential writers or actors won’t have their eyes opened in the way his were, but also because drama can “temporally erode all the divisions that can build up at school”. Interested in film to begin with, he couldn’t afford a camera but found he could pressure his friends to be in his plays, many of which were “variations on The Breakfast Club”. By this he means a lot of people sitting in a room, talking. “That’s what I thought a play was.” But then he got into Beckett and Sarah Kane, Laurie Anderson and Sam Shepard, and began to discover the potential of theatre. “I am a theatre nerd,” he laughs. Originally commissioned by Royal Welsh College of Music and Drama, before playing London’s Orange Tree theatre, his 2014 play Pomona – a mix of dystopian thriller and Lovecraftian horror – feels like the antithesis of a Breakfast Club play. After a wobbly first preview, he remembers thinking: “Oh God, I’ve written a real stinker.” It’s a bleak play, nightmarish in places, but it became a cult hit, transferring to the National Theatre’s temporary Shed space. It’s his most performed play to date and has been staged all over the world, something that still seems to surprise him. Reading an early draft of The Glow brings to mind everything from Caryl Churchill’s The Skriker to Stanley Kubrick’s The Shining. Critics often comment on the deft way McDowall uses genre tropes, but he is surprised theatre doesn’t do this more often. After all, he says, “a research base on Pluto is just as fake as a drawing room in Victorian London”. McDowall is energised by the idea of people being able to come together in an auditorium once again. This is why, he says, theatre will always be his home: there’s a magic there you can’t find elsewhere. “You can put people in a room with some actors and you can go wherever.” The Glow is at the Royal Court, London, 24 January-5 March.Appearance: Either very jolly or entirely hellish, depending on your sensibility. Legality: Woolly. It cannot possibly be illegal for me to have a lovely birthday party for my adorable kitten. Let me ask you this: have you tried throwing a birthday party for a pet in China? Of course not. Well, don’t. A recent party for a dog named Doudou, in the city of Changsha, ended with the police threatening to open fire if something similar happened again. On the dog? No, on any drones used without permission. Doudou’s owner spent 100,000 yuan (£11,500) renting 520 illuminated drones to fly in formation above the city, showing the dog in a hat popping out of a box. The city operates a strict no-fly zone for drone displays, and this apparently extends to wildly elaborate dog-based celebrations. OK, in that instance I can see how a pet birthday would be legally iffy. Also, one that happened in India last week ended in arrests, too. What? Abby the dog from Ahmedabad had a birthday party that was widely attended, and three guests were promptly arrested for breaching Covid-19 regulations. But if I avoid ostentatious drone displays and public health violations, should I still have a birthday party for my pet? No. Why not? Because they’re stupid, that’s why. But celebrities do it. Well, sure. Dua Lipa threw her dog a party, complete with cakes and hats, last year. And Priyanka Chopra and Nick Jonas recently made a cake to celebrate their dog Gino’s second birthday. Aw, I bet Gino loved that. He didn’t! They posted an Instagram story of Gino sitting in front of the cake looking massively nonplussed. This is because Gino is a dog and therefore places no value in the human concept of birthdays. It’s still cute, though. No, it’s gratuitously vain. Your dog is your dog. It can’t read the loving inscription you had iced on its cake and hats probably irritate it beyond all comprehension. So you’re saying that pet birthday parties don’t actually have anything to do with the animals? That’s right. They’re all about the owners, who are all hideous attention-seekers. You know what pet birthday parties are? They’re gender reveal parties for the non-pregnant. But I love my pet. That’s fine. You’re allowed to love your animals! Animals are nice. But anyone who throws their pet a birthday party should be forced to live in a kennel. Sorry, I don’t make the rules. Do say: “Pet birthday parties are annoying and pointless.” Don’t say: “That said, I do have a houseplant that turns three next week. Bring a bottle.”The UK’s main statistical body has reported more than 175,000 deaths involving Covid since the start of the pandemic. The ONS has reported 176,035 deaths where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate since March 2020. The figure differs significantly from the government’s official count – which exceeded 150,000 deaths over the weekend – which requires patients to have had a positive test within 28 days before their death. The ONS figures are considered to be more accurate but because of delays in death registration they are not as up-to-date as the government figures. The 175,000 total was passed on 20 December 2021, but owing to these time lags, the ONS figures have only now been confirmed. This latest release takes the 2021 death toll to 81,037, down from 94,998 in 2020. However, the figures for more recent dates may still be revised upwards, especially because the number of deaths registered in the last week of the year will have been affected by the Christmas and Boxing Day bank holidays, which means they will not yet have been recorded. A total of 3,891 people have died of Covid since the first case of the Omicron variant was discovered in the UK on 27 November. The average lag between infection and death is 16-18 days and can be up to eight weeks, according to the ONS, so the Omicron death toll may increase further in coming weeks. The number of deaths this winter has not yet come near the peak of previous waves despite a huge surge in Omicron cases. On 29 December, 246,000 new cases were confirmed, smashing previous records and taking the seven-day average figure to 192,000. There were more than 7,000 deaths in November and December last year, compared with about 30,000 in November and December 2020. Kit Yates, co-director of the Centre for Mathematical Biology at the University of Bath, said: “We can expect both of these [death] figures [from the ONS and the government’s official count] to continue to rise for some time, reflecting the huge rises in infections that we’ve seen and the fact that cases have moved up the age ranges impacting more vulnerable older people. “Even so, we wouldn’t expect to see deaths get close to the disastrous figures we saw at this time last year and during the first wave, when we saw over 9,000 deaths a week. In large part this is due to the vaccination/booster programme, which has delivered good protection against severe disease and death. Of the deaths registered in the last week of December in England and Wales, 582 mentioned Covid, or 6.9% of all deaths, a decrease on the previous week when there were 852 deaths, or 6.5% of deaths in the week to Christmas Eve. Between the beginning of the pandemic and the end of 2021 there has been a crude Covid death rate of 262 deaths per 100,000 people in the UK, rising to 291 per 100,000 population in Wales, home to the highest proportion of people aged 65-plus of the UK’s constituency countries. The figures come as the government is considering cutting the mandatory isolation period for people infected with Covid-19 from seven to five days after a number of sectors have been affected by staff shortages. Boris Johnson said: “The thing to do is to look at the science. We are looking at that and we will act according to the science.”Rolling Stone magazine has called it “incredible balm”, and the New York Times extolled its “cheerful optimistic tone”. American viewers are enthralled by its bucolic setting, the small, everyday dramas and its old-fashioned sense of community. And, of course, the animals. All Creatures Great and Small, the small-screen adaptation of a series of novels by James Herriot, the pen name of Yorkshire vet Alf Wight, has become a surprising hit in the home of fast-paced thrillers and warring dynasties. Season 2, which started in the US at the weekend, has joined other British exports of gentle television that have won a place in American hearts. Bake-Off, The Repair Shop and – the grande dame of them all – Downton Abbey have shown US audiences that sex, violence, celebrities and swearing are not essential to success. Samuel West, who plays down-to-earth vet Siegfried Farnon in the Channel 5 drama, said last month that its warm reception was because “people need gentle, decent television about people trying to care for each other and reduce suffering rather than excellent hard-hitting, what you might call gritty, television about terrible things happening to innocent people”. He told the Talkshire podcast: “It’s strangely revolutionary to be making a series about people trying to be kind to each other.” Alan Sepinwall, writing in Rolling Stone, said the “empathy and simplicity of All Creatures feel genuinely radical”. Season 1 began airing in the US four days after Donald Trump supporters stormed the Capitol last January. “Suddenly there was nothing I wanted to watch more than this gentle show, with its low-stakes plotting, lush scenery, adorable animals, and ensemble of fundamentally nice people … “It is an incredible balm, and a welcome contrast … to the dumpster fire of our own reality.” Colin Callender, the show’s executive producer, said season 1 of All Creatures had been seen by more than 10 million viewers in the US, and “it looks like we’re en route to a similar number this time round”. He added: “A combination of the pandemic and the very uncivil society that we live in the US has meant the simple values of community, friendship and kindness have got lost in a very ugly political debate. The show serves as a relief from the stresses and strains that people are feeling right now.” US audiences loved it precisely because it was a very British drama, he added. “It’s what we do brilliantly,” and its success also showed that “we don’t need to spend enormous sums of money to compete in the international marketplace”. All Creatures was “not an expensive TV series by contemporary standards”. The Great British Bake Off, rights to which were secured by Netflix in 2018, is another success with US audiences, albeit under the title of the Great British Baking Show as the term “bake-off” is trademarked by a food brand. The Repair Shop, aired initially by Netflix, now by Discovery+, has found a loyal audience through the four seasons available in the US (the UK show is on season 8). Downton Abbey, now more than a decade old, triumphed in the US, winning more Emmys than Baftas. But some scenes and backstories were cut, with an executive producer for PBS explaining that US audiences demanded a “different speed when it comes to television drama”. Mark Lawson, who writes about television for the Guardian, said the enamour felt by some US and UK audiences for the other country’s small-screen offerings was not new. But in each case, it was a minority of viewers, perhaps 15-20%. “It goes back at least to the 1960s. British viewers who find British television too cosy have craved the edge of American television, and American viewers who find American television too edgy have craved the cosiness of British TV.” The US had supplied “glossy TV” such as Dallas and Dynasty long before anything similar was produced in the UK, while British broadcasters excelled at “heritage TV”, said Lawson, who is writing a history of television. Today, he added, “the US hits here tend to be the best of [their output], but I’m not sure that’s true reciprocally”.Novak Djokovic has claimed victory in one court, and is back on one more familiar. But as he prepares for the Australian Open at Melbourne Park, he does so with a Damoclean sword hanging above his head. Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, a close ally of the prime minister, is uniquely vested with extraordinary powers: at any time, with the stroke of the ministerial pen, he can end Djokovic’s right to stay in the country, and ban him for three years. Within government, these are known as the “God powers”, and their use – and misuse – has been controversial for decades. “I have formed the view that I have too much power,” a former holder of the immigration portfolio, Senator Chris Evans, said more than a decade ago. “I am uncomfortable with that, not just because of concern about playing God, but also because of the lack of transparency and accountability for those decisions and the lack in some cases of any appeal rights against those decisions.” Since Evans aired those concerns to the parliament, successive governments have falsely conflated migration with terrorism, or criminality, to justify more and more extreme powers. Australia’s federal court docket is quietly filled with dozens of challenges to visa cancellations. Rarely are they as fortunate as Djokovic: backed by money, institutional support, media attention, and a legal team in the multitudes. The worst-case scenario he faced was the abandonment of a tennis tournament (albeit a significant one). But for a refugee arriving in Australia seeking protection, without money or resources, without English or knowledge of Australia’s arcane migration law, what prospects for a successful conclusion? The glimpse of the government’s actions in the Djokovic case illuminate the capricious and arbitrary attitude taken by the Australian government towards people seeking entry. Australia is unique among liberal democracies for indefinitely detaining asylum seekers (though only those who arrive by boat). There are, right now, as Djokovic practises on Melbourne Park’s courts, refugees who arrived in Australia as children – whose claim for protection has been formally recognised – who have been stranded in detention for nine years. A childhood wasted, an adulthood formed in unjustified incarceration. There are stateless people – who have no country to which they can return – who have been detained more than a decade. For them, there is no swift resolution, no flag-waving supporters in the street, no presidential intervention, rapid court hearing, or forensic media glare. For them, it is only the slow, grinding demoralisation of a potentially limitless incarceration. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Australia’s detention regime is damaging, psychiatrists, the United Nations, and those running the regime itself, have repeatedly warned. The uncertainty of indefinite detention, the Australian government has been forced to recognise, is even more harmful. Visa cancellations, either at the border or in the community (as two others involved in the Australian Open have discovered), are commonplace. The government routinely cancels visas on so-called “character grounds”, powers are used against those convicted of serious crimes, or those believed to pose a threat to Australia. But these extraordinary powers, in certain cases unchallengeable, are also often misused. Some in Australia have had their visas cancelled for committing no crime at all. A stateless man acquitted of a murder wrongly alleged against him had his protection visa cancelled regardless last year: he faced detention for the rest of his life. Another man, 35, who had lived in Australia since the age of one, had his visa cancelled, and faced deportation to New Zealand, for belonging to an outlaw motorcycle gang that was not outlawed in the state where he lived. His behaviour was “entirely lawful” the minister was forced to concede. In both cases, the federal court (the same court in which Djokovic fought his case) intervened, after months of detention and uncertainty, to find, in the latter case, that the minister’s decision was “baffling”, “irrational and illogical” and “legally unreasonable”. The Djokovic case, too, has exposed a global apartheid around movement. Before the global pandemic, for those with the right passport, or enough money, free movement had become an expectation, a right that could be relied upon. For those without – many fleeing war, famine, persecution, or natural disaster – the world was a tightly constrained place, borders were hardened against them, with promises (and realities) or walls or armed guards, with forced deportations or boats being forced back to sea. “Djokovic’s detention and subsequent speedy appeal process contrasts starkly with the ongoing and prolonged inhumane treatment of refugees in Australia’s migration system,” Refugee Council of Australia chief executive Paul Power said. “Refugees seeking asylum in Australian airports don’t even get access to lawyers before they are put on the next flight out of Australia, let alone a chance to argue their case.” That Djokovic was momentarily held in the same hotel as refugees now in their ninth year of indefinite detention made that contrast all the more stark. Much has been made of the “Fortress Australia” mentality that has emerged into public prominence with the coronavirus pandemic. But the isolationist streak runs far deeper. In its incompetent handling of Djokovic’s case, the Australian government has exposed not just one bizarre case, but systemic, structural flaws in the way Australia treats those who arrive on its shores. Nation-states have the legal right to determine who crosses their borders. But there is an obligation that they treat people fairly, act reasonably, and without duplicity. In comparison to his colleagues, Djokovic is not popular in Australia. His anti-vaccination stance seems, to many in a population that is highly vaccinated and has been repeatedly locked down, irresponsible, entitled and arrogant. The Australian government might have sought to make an example of the world’s best male tennis player, as a demonstration that, as the prime minister said, “rules are rules”. It might have decided to single him out as a political distraction from its foundering, chaotic pandemic response. But it has done the opposite. Rules, it seems, were not rules. The government’s agents saw fit to act as they pleased, only this time, the world got to see just how it happens. Djokovic’s case reveals a far larger problem.Large swathes of the disability service sector have been forced into Covid isolation, leaving some clients without access to vital services, while a major provider has only been able to source seven rapid antigen tests for its entire workforce in one state. The peak body for national disability insurance scheme providers, National Disability Services, told Guardian Australia up to 20% of staff at some organisations were in isolation, mirroring the Omicron-fuelled workforce shortages in other sectors. Anger is also brewing among providers who say they’ve been left to compete for rapid antigen tests with other businesses and the general public, in part because they do not have priority access to the national stockpile like their aged care counterparts. Guardian Australia reported on Tuesday that despite this access, aged care providers were also struggling to obtain the tests from the federal government. “Disability services are under increasing pressure at the moment,” said the chief executive of National Disability Services, Laurie Leigh. “A number of staff are being furloughed or required to isolate following either [becoming] a positive case or being in contact [with one]. It’s causing additional strain and stress on what is already a system under strain.” The NDIS provider Able Australia, which operates group homes and day services, has obtained a total of seven rapid antigen tests for Tasmanian staff. “We’re in the rest of the queue with the general public, which is really disappointing as a disability service provider,” said the national director of engagement at Able Australia, Chandi Piefke. “We’ve actually had to ask our teams to hit up every pharmacy they can to get [rapid tests]. After putting that big call out we managed to get seven. We’re not talking seven packets, we’re talking seven individual tests. For a state that has over 100 staff and [100] clients, that’s simply not good enough.” Piefke said it was “quite ludicrous we’re into year three of the pandemic and we’re finding ourselves in this position”. “The standard channels which apply to health and aged care don’t seem to be available to the disability sector, which is really disappointing,” she said. National Disability Services is calling on the federal government to give support workers priority access to rapid antigen tests or PCR testing. Leigh said “having access to free [RATs] would make a huge difference”. Samantha Connor, the People With Disability Australia president, said last week that half of all people with disability in Australia lived in poverty and that many were keen to be tested regularly – and also have their support workers tested. She said it was not feasible for many to pay $15 a test when they had large teams of support workers. Her comments came as Guardian Australia reported how some people with disability were turning to a mutual aid fund to afford tests. While the government last week announced it would grant some free rapid tests to concession card-holders, including people on a disability pension and some on other payments, this will still exclude some NDIS participants. At the same time, some people with disabilities are missing out on vital services because workers are being forced into isolation, sometimes at short notice. Leigh said she had “anecdotal data saying anywhere between 10 and 15%, up to about 20% of their workforce may be affected at any one time”. Heather Renton, the chief executive of Syndromes Without a Name, which supports families of children with an undiagnosed or rare genetic condition, said some had reduced services or stopped them altogether. This was either due to staff being in isolation or because the families felt it was too risky to have support workers attend the house. “They’ve got the question, ‘Do I let support workers into my house and risk getting Covid into the house, or do I just struggle by and have these sleepless nights and be totally exhausted because I’m not getting a break?” Renton said. “Sometimes they need two people to shower the child, depending on the child’s age. It’s had a huge impact. A lot of support workers work in multiple places, a lot are off sick.” Renton, whose daughter has a rare genetic condition, has limited the number of support workers who could come to the house, meaning care had been reduced. “We have a carer who works in a number of places and we’re not having her care for our daughter at the moment,” Renton said. “It will impact her mental health.” Laura Green, the executive director at NDIS provider OnCall, which has about 2,000 disability support workers in Victoria and Queensland, said 2% of her staff had Covid and 7% were in isolation. “Every day is an absolute battle to look at what people need from you that day,” she said. Green said OnCall, which also provides workers to other providers, said there was “two to three times the demand for short-notice shifts, which tells us it’s happening across the sector”. Asked if the situation was the worst it had been through the pandemic, Green said “undoubtedly”. Piefke said the situation for Able Australia, which operates in Tasmania, Victoria, the Australian Capital Territory and Queensland, was broadly in line with the anecdotal evidence of other providers, meaning 10% to 15% of its workforce was in isolation at any time. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The National Disability Insurance Agency has previously said people in NDIS-funded supported independent living accommodation and their providers could claim $12.50 for each rapid test. There are about 25,000 SIL participants, but nearly 500,000 people in the NDIS. In a position paper released on Monday, the Centre of Research Excellence in Disability and Health warned there was “limited supply of rapid antigen tests, which are essential for ‘screening’ workers before they provide support”. It called for priority and free access for workers.Authorities in several Australian states have reintroduced mask mandates as a result of the recent surge in Covid cases. Earlier in the pandemic, amid PPE shortages for healthcare workers, the public was encouraged to wear reusable cloth masks or surgical masks, while P2/N95 respirators were not recommended for community use. But the Omicron variant’s increased transmissibility has prompted the question: should you consider switching your reusable mask for a respirator instead? Differing protection The latest guidance from the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee, published in November, suggests “individuals choosing to wear masks in the community may use any type of well-fitted mask”. In the US, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is considering changing its guidance to suggest that people who can consistently wear N95s instead of cloth masks should do so, the Washington Post reported on Tuesday. “It’s very important that with Omicron – it’s just so transmissible – that people wear the best quality mask they can,” said Dr Karina Powers, an occupational health physician in Western Australia. “Cloth masks are not enough: there are either not enough layers to filter out the viral particles or the weave is too loose,” she said. Surgical masks, like P2/N95 respirators, are made from three layers of meltblown polypropylene, and contain an electrostatic charge that traps particles being breathed in or out. However, surgical masks were initially designed for “source control” – worn by doctors and nurses to minimise the risk of contaminating a surgical area or infecting their patients. “They’re not designed to protect [the wearer] from airborne disease,” Powers said. Hassan Vally, an associate professor in epidemiology at Deakin University, said that studies on previous Covid variants show that an N95 mask is better than a surgical mask, which is better than a cloth mask. “If you’re in a higher risk situation, you want to be wearing the best mask you possibly can,” he said. P2, N95, KN95, KF94 respirators – what is the difference? Respirators sold in Australia must meet minimum protective standards. The P2 class of respirators is certified in Australia as filtering 95% of small airborne particles, and is essentially equivalent to the N95 standard set by NIOSH, the US’s occupational safety body. “It’s not the exactly same, but for all intents and purposes, it’s very similar,” said Prof Malcom Sim, president of the Australasian Faculty of Occupational and Environmental Medicine. KN95s are manufactured in China, with an equivalent standard set by the Chinese government. The CDC estimates, however, that about 60% of KN95s available in the US are counterfeit products that don’t meet NIOSH standards. “Very few of those are accepted for use here in the industrial environment, because they don’t quite meet the Australian standard that we have for P2 respirators,” Sim said. KF94s are manufactured in South Korea to meet a regulated standard. The respirator stands for “Korean filter” with a 94% filtration rate. Should everyone use respirators? Powers says ideally the government should provide everyone with free P2 masks. “So many [people] either don’t have access or don’t know how to find these or they’re not available in the chemist.” “This has been an airborne disease all the way along, and really we should have had supply from the beginning,” she said. “We will be far quicker at cutting outbreaks of disease and preventing large outbreaks starting if we are readily able to have access to these masks when needed.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But Sim believes P2 class respirators are less useful for the general public than in specific workplace settings such as hospitals. “They’re not designed for general use out in the community,” he said. “You need to be trained in how to use them, they need to be fit tested for them to perform at their proper level of protection, and they’re not really designed for taking on … [and] off.” “I think we should be putting the emphasis on other prevention measures: sitting outside, density limits, being very careful in your own household with inviting people around,” Sim said. Vally agrees that the protection of P2 respirators is only useful if properly worn. “There’s no point in having that increased cost … if they’re not worn properly and they don’t actually work in the way they’re supposed to.” Sim is also concerned about potential supply issues if there is a rush on respirators by the general public. “I think that could cause a squeeze in the health and aged care sector.” “We continue to offer a range of P2 respirators for our retail and commercial customers,” said Ben Shanley, a category manager at Bunnings, in a statement. “Overall we’re not experiencing any widespread product availability issues at this time.” Prof Trent Twomey, the national president the Pharmacy Guild of Australia, said the Omicron variant had “sparked renewed demand” for P2 respirators. “Clearly P2/N95 masks are preferable to cloth but any mask is better than none,” he said. Can respirators be reused? When used by healthcare workers, surgical and P2 masks are supposed to be thrown away after a single use. Powers says people in the general community can re-use P2 respirators. “You can drop your risk of transmission of Omicron by simply wearing the respirator and putting it in the sun, drying it out. You can keep using it … until the elastic breaks.” Peter Tsai, the inventor of the N95, has previously recommended buying seven of the respirators and rotating them daily, so that virus particles have time to become inactivated in the week between a mask being used twice. It’s important to note that washing single-use masks with soap and water, or sanitising them with alcohol, significantly decreases how effectively they can filter particles. Overseas, researchers have found that N95s can be reused at least 25 times after being decontaminated with vaporised hydrogen peroxide, without compromising their filtration system. However, while this could be useful in the healthcare setting, it’s not an accessible method for personal use.Santos has been accused of failing Indigenous groups and treating one of the country’s biggest landholders with a “cavalier attitude” as it faces court action over a proposed expansion of its fracking operations in the Beetaloo Basin. Fracking in the Beetaloo Basin is being accelerated as part of the Morrison government’s gas-led recovery plan, and several companies, including gas giant Santos, are currently seeking to exploit the area’s natural resources. But Santos has met well-resourced opposition in the Northern Territory supreme court from Rallen Australia, a company linked to the wealthy Ravazzotti and Langenhoven families, which owns huge swathes of land in the area through pastoral leases. The company has accused Santos of failing to meet strict obligations to disclose the proposed drilling of two additional horizontal wells on its land at Tanumbirini Station, near Daly Waters, in 2020, an expansion not allowed for under its existing environmental management plan. “At the very fundamental level, what this case is about is a cavalier attitude by a listed Australian public company to important disclosure regulations imposed on it by regulations designed to balance the interests of the miners and landholders,” Rallen’s barrister, Marcus Pesman SC, told the court this week. The court heard the company initially tried to convince the NT’s environment department it did not need to revise its environmental management plan to account for the two new wells. But the department disagreed, saying the new wells posed a “significant” and new environmental risk. It told the gas giant to lodge an amended environmental plan, which it did. Despite having been told of the added risk, Santos allegedly did not tell Rallen, despite what Rallen says was a legal obligation to do so. “And what we would be saying to your honour, ultimately, is that any responsible corporate actor, having received this correspondence from the department saying the new activity you intend to undertake contains significant environmental risks, would have communicated those risks to Rallen,” Pesman said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Santos responded by saying Rallen, a well-resourced and sophisticated company, could reasonably have been assumed to have known about the revised plan. That drew a sharp response from Justice Judith Kelly, who said: “But how on Earth is anybody supposed to comply with a requirement to give a stakeholder information about the regulated activity that the interest holder proposes to carry out, the locations where it’s – this is very specific – where it’s proposed to carry out the activity; and, importantly, the anticipated environmental impacts and environmental risks of the activity, and the proposed environmental outcomes in relation to the activity, and the possible consequences of that activity, if you don’t tell them?” The hearing is continuing this week. Outside court, the Nurrdalinji Native Title Aboriginal Corporation also accused Santos of not properly informing traditional owners about the expansion. Johnny Wilson, the group’s chair, said Santos was stopping traditional owners from “knowing the true story what is happening on country”. “It’s not just the pastoralists that Santos is failing to properly consult with, it’s also our people,” Wilson said. “Fracking wells risk the water systems that connect our country and people together. Our songlines go through these waters. We have a heavy heart thinking about what will happen if things go wrong when Santos does its mining.” Nurrdalinji is a recently formed group and says it includes traditional owners from Tanumbirini. The Northern Land Council is the relevant statutory authority under the Native Title Act empowered to speak on behalf of traditional owners. Santos said it could not comment while court proceedings were ongoing.Farmers have committed to working with traditional owners after land in New South Wales’ Liverpool Plains previously acquired for a Chinese state-owned coalmine was bought back by local farming families. Dolly Talbott, a representative of the Gomeroi traditional custodians, said traditional owners were still seeking assurances that their sacred places were safe and accessible to Indigenous people. “These are sacred places to the Gomeroi, we’ve been fighting for years for them …These properties have now changed from one hand to another. While it’s good farmers have had a win, what about Gomeroi people traditional owners?” Talbott said there was never any consultation with traditional owners to ensure Gomeroi people’s access to sacred sites, which include ceremonial areas, large grinding groove sites, scarred trees, burial sites and artefacts. “We’ve still got to resort back to jumping fences if we want to visit these sites or rely on the good faith farmers will allow us to do that. And even if the farmers of today allow us to do that, what about the next generation?” Her comments come after the portfolio of land in north-west NSW once earmarked for a coalmine has been sold in separate properties carved up between 12 local farming families plus one corporate institution in a deal valued at $120m. “I hope there are farmers who are going to stand up and say something about this land being protected. I call on Fiona Simson [the president of the National Farmers Federation] to call for these places to be protected,” Talbott said. Simson, a farmer in the Liverpool Plains area, said the community had always supported the Gomeroi in their quest to retain access to country and would continue to do so. Simson said she would encourage landholders to work with the Gomeroi towards resolving access because both farmers and traditional owners had huge respect for the land and their heritage in this area. Simson credited the community’s ability to work together alongside the traditional owners as one of the main reasons they had been able to sustain “a long hard-fought battle” over a decade which resulted in the NSW government paying Shenhua $100m to cancel the coalmine project in April 2021. Simson said the 10 years of sustained effort had involved everything from cake stalls to blockades, political letter writing campaigns, engaging in scientific panels and government reference groups. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter David Goodfellow, the managing director of CBRE Agribusiness, who negotiated the sale of the land, credited the community’s battle as one of the reasons they put in extra effort to see the land returned to local farming families rather than any of the domestic and foreign-owned investors who wanted the benefit of such a large aggregation of land. Goodfellow said they had made a very genuine commitment at the start of the sale process to give local producers a proper opportunity to be successful in purchasing land by selling it in individual properties rather than one single aggregation. Goodfellow said Shenhua didn’t specifically ask CBRE to focus on the local landholders but were “quite amenable” to allowing locals to buy the land. Even though there was “a lot more work and a bit more risk” in splitting up the property, Goodfellow said Shenhua was willing to do so providing CBRE committed to carry out the extra workload required. “Perhaps some other agents might take the easiest path, which is to do one transaction. We were happy to put the effort in because we knew how hard the locals had fought to have that land retained for agricultural use rather than for it to be used as a coalmine.” Of the five corporates wanting to buy the entirety of the largest property known as Breeza, one corporate agreed to buy a portion so that the balance of the land could be made available to local families. Goodfellow said the corporate entity – yet to be named – had bought approximately a quarter of the land, with the majority going to local farming families. Given the high market values farming real estate is commanding, Goodfellow said the major job for CBRE was not negotiating the price but realigning farm boundaries of the land to suit exactly what various families wanted. Goodfellow said the successful corporate entity is an Australian firm which already owns farms in Australia, but funded with foreign capital which needs to be reviewed by the Foreign Investment Review Board. “For the local farmers who’ve been able to buy this land, this is ensuring the future longevity of their family farming businesses and their ability to plan for the future and their ability to engage future generations in their farming businesses,” Simson said. “To be able to remove the threat of coalmining and acquire land that is neighbouring their own and enlarge and diversify their current farming businesses means a really strong future for them and for the Liverpool Plains as a future agricultural region of Australia. Simson believes government could learn lessons around strategic planning informed by “good science, good governance and good process”. “The Liverpool Plains is an exemplar of all of those things not occurring and government will ignore those things at their own peril.” Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityA Labor government will revamp the $4.7bn emergency response fund to commit up to $200m a year to disaster prevention and resilience, as leader Anthony Albanese sharpens his attack on the Morrison government for failing to plan. Making the announcement ahead of a visit to Mackay in Queensland on Wednesday, Albanese said Labor would use interest from the fund, which is managed by the Future Fund, to improve Australia’s disaster “readiness”. Proceeds from the fund would go towards prevention measures such as flood levees, sea walls, cyclone shelters, evacuation centres, fire breaks and telecommunications improvements. “Thousands of Australians who face bushfires, floods and cyclones every year deserve to be protected by a federal government who plans ahead and invests to keep them safe,” Albanese said in a statement. “These investments will literally save lives, not to mention the taxpayers’ funds that have to be spent on recovery and repairs when disasters hit. “Australians are renowned as the best disaster responders in the world. They deserve to be backed by a government that looks forward, plans and prevents the worst.” The redirection of the fund towards resilience and mitigation measures draws on recommendations made in a 2015 productivity commission report which looked into natural disaster funding arrangements in Australia. The report, which was ordered by the then treasurer Joe Hockey, found that governments “overinvest in post-disaster reconstruction and underinvest in mitigation that would limit the impact of natural disasters in the first place”. “Current government natural disaster funding arrangements are not efficient, equitable or sustainable. They are prone to cost shifting, ad hoc responses and short-term political opportunism,” the report found. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The government established the emergency response fund in 2019, with the funds to be spent on recovery and mitigation, but none of the fund has so far been spent with the government referring to it as a fund of last resort. In the 2021 budget, the government announced a similar fund called the Prepare Australia fund, which committed $600m over six years for disaster resilience measures. Labor accused the government of continuing to sit on the emergency respond fund which had “done nothing to help” prepare the country for natural disasters. “Three years after it was announced, the ERF has not spent a cent on disaster recovery and has not completed a single disaster prevention project. The only thing it has done is earn the government over $750m in investment returns,” Albanese said. “As with Covid-19, the Morrison government’s failure to plan and prepare for natural disasters has left Australians vulnerable. “It doesn’t have to be this way. We know weather events are on the horizon – we have the smarts and the resources to prepare and prevent. We just need a government with a plan.” The funding, which would be set at the current cap of $200m a year, would be matched by state, territory or local governments, in line with the productivity commission recommendations. Labor said it would continue to fully fund disaster recovery through existing arrangements and would improve the efficiency of disaster recovery processes, “to simplify and speed up payments to disaster victims and repairs to damaged infrastructure”. Albanese, who is midway through an eight-day “Better Future for Queensland” tour, will spend a second day in the seat of Dawson on Wednesday, visiting a canegrower and the local Country Women’s Association. Dawson is held by the LNP’s retiring MP George Christensen on a 14.6% margin. The opposition is using the Queensland trip as a test run for the election campaign, with Labor needing to build on the six of 30 seats it currently holds to try to win government. Grilled about the performance of the party in Queensland at the last election during his trip, Albanese said it was clear Labor did not get enough votes right around the state. “One of the things that I’ve been determined to do is to make sure that we do better right around Queensland,” he said. “We’ve learned the lessons. We did a whole review into it. And what we didn’t do was show that in terms of our policy offering, (that) wasn’t strong enough to secure the support of people in Queensland.”Australia’s promised supplies of 51m doses of the Novavax vaccine, which failed to arrive in 2021 as planned, may be approved within months after the company finally completed its approval applications with the health department. The protein-based vaccine, which was initially intended to be available as a primary vaccine for the entire Australian population last year, has earned the nickname “Never-vax” within the health department because of the ongoing setbacks. After providing initial data to the Therapeutic Goods Administration in January 2021, the company provided the government with its “complete submission of data and responses” last week. The Advisory Committee on Vaccines (ACV), which advises the TGA and the health minister, met to review the Novavax vaccine on Friday. The TGA is now preparing to review the committee’s final report. “Once the ACV’s final report is received and reviewed by relevant parties, the TGA will be in a position to make a decision,” a spokesperson for the Department of Health said. “The Novavax vaccine candidate will not be rolled out to the Australian public until the TGA has completed a full and thorough assessment. No part of this process has been rushed, and the TGA will not approve a vaccine unless it is found to be safe and effective.” The department noted that the supply of Novavax vaccine after approval would still be dependent on products arriving in Australia and meeting laboratory batch release requirements, noting problems faced by the company last year. “Throughout 2021, Novavax publicly indicated that there were delays in their regulatory submissions due to a series of vaccine manufacturing and supply issues,” the spokesperson said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Speaking after Novavax sent its first shipment of its vaccine into the European market this week, the company’s chief executive, Stanley Erck, said the company had marked a significant milestone and was expecting Australian government approval within the next three months. “There’s a lot of pent-up demand for our vaccine,” Erck told Bloomberg TV on Monday. “We’re waiting for … approvals within the next 30, 60, 90 days from places like Australia, Canada, UK, and hopefully the US in that time period. So it’s a big transition for the company.” In response to questions from Guardian Australia, Novavax said the TGA was now “actively evaluating” the data it had submitted in January, and said the company had made “remarkable progress” developing and securing approvals for its vaccine. “Novavax are working closely with the TGA on the submission and are hopeful the regulatory evaluation will be completed shortly,” the spokesperson said. “Once completed we will work with the TGA and federal government on the quantities and delivery schedule for the vaccine.” When asked about the reasons for the delayed supply, the company said it believed “the important thing is to look forward and focus on how quickly we have got here”. “We have spent the last year and a half conducting multiple late-stage trials with over 45,000 participants, creating our supply network, conducting tech transfer, and refining and validating our analytical methods and dealing, as all manufacturers have, with global raw materials shortages.” The health minister, Greg Hunt, insisted repeatedly last year that the company was still on track to deliver on the contracted supplies for Australia in 2021, dismissing reports of ongoing delays as “incorrect”. Unlike the Pfizer and Moderna vaccinations which use mRNA technology, the Novavax vaccine is a subunit protein vaccine, which uses a harmless part of the virus to trigger an immune response. The head of the country’s vaccine taskforce, Lt Gen John Frewen, said that he believed there were a number of people who had been holding out for the Novavax vaccine. “There is a group of people who are holding out for Novavax, so I think when Novavax eventually comes we will pick up maybe a couple of extra percentages there as well,” he said. In November, Hunt agreed that some people were waiting for Novavax, promising Australia would be one of the first countries to start administering the drug. “It may not be a full 2% exactly, but we do know that there are some people … who are waiting. Whilst we would advocate they don’t wait, I know that some will nevertheless make that decision, and I respect that,” Hunt said. Latest government data from Operation Covid Shield shows Australia’s vaccination rate, for those over the age of 16, is sitting at 94.7% for first dose and 92.1% who are fully vaccinated. Novavax was one of the three vaccines that the government prioritised in its initial vaccine procurement strategy, with the prime minister announcing in February last year that supplies would be “sufficient to vaccinate every Australian who chooses to be vaccinated in 2021”. The government continued to suggest the Novavax supplies would arrive in the third quarter of last year until the vaccine was dropped from the “horizon allocation” vaccine rollout strategy when it was released in June.A Queensland coroner has recommended the state’s police force review the use of a controversial neck hold after an inquest into the death of an Aboriginal man in custody. The 39-year-old, known as Noombah or Noomba for cultural reasons, died in February 2018 after his long-term partner called police concerned he was going to kill himself. He suffered a heart attack shortly after a struggle with two police who came across Noombah while driving to another incident near his house in Townsville. State coroner Terry Ryan found Noombah died of cardiac arrest in the context of being restrained, pre-existing heart disease and inhaling petrol in the hours before his death. The coroner found the actions of police officers Zachary Schembri and Shane Warren were lawful, authorised and justified in the circumstances and were not in breach of any police policy or procedures. Guardian Australia revealed in March last year that one of the officers said in a police interview shortly after the death that he had used a lateral vascular neck restraint (LVNR) hold while trying to restrain Noombah. The controversial hold is banned in other Australian and international jurisdictions and following the Guardian report Ryan requested Queensland police provide additional information to his office on LVNR training, how its use was governed, and its use in other jurisdictions. During the inquest, Schembri said he no longer believed he had used the hold during the struggle with Noombah. Ryan accepted that evidence in his inquest findings, published on Tuesday, but said the Queensland police service should review whether it continued to use the hold – and the training provided regarding its use. “I accept that a LVNR was not actually achieved in this situation, although that was how Const Schembri [initially] described the restraint he used,” Ryan found. “Irrespective of whether a lateral vascular neck restraint was activated in the detention of Noombah, there were conflicting views before the inquest about whether this type of restraint has a place in modern policing.” Ryan found the actions of Queensland ambulance service members who attended, however, “did not optimise Noombah’s chances of survival” after he suffered the cardiac arrest. The paramedics did not conduct a basic assessment of his vital signs or accurately record them, and after Noombah was found to be in cardiac arrest “the level of treatment was also suboptimal”, Ryan said. In his evidence, the Queensland ambulance service’s medical director, Dr Stephen Rashford, could not say if Noombah would have survived if the care provided to him had have been adequate. He said that in the most optimal circumstances about 25% of patients who arrest in the presence of paramedics do not survive. Ryan noted that neither of the paramedics who treated Noombah continued to practise. The Queensland ambulance service has apologised to Noombah’s family. In his other recommendations, Ryan said Queensland police should develop a mandatory requirement for police officers to request a priority response from the Queensland ambulance service when the demeanour of a person in custody “rapidly declines from a state of heightened emotion and agitation to one of apparent compliance”. This had occurred with Noombah, who Schembri had described as going from “100 to zero” very quickly. Under the recommendation, the process would be included in the police manual, and the mandatory request would require paramedics to conduct a medical assessment and monitor vital signs. Ryan also recommended the Queensland government work with Indigenous people in Townsville and other institutions to develop culturally appropriate referrals for “First Nations people in mental health crisis as an alternative to assessment in hospital emergency departments”.Australia’s focus on hand hygiene has been about as effective as telling people mosquitoes will give them HIV, leading epidemiologist Raina MacIntyre says. Professor MacIntyre of the University of New South Wales said there needs to be a national air safety campaign and national standards set for safe indoor air. At the start of the Covid pandemic, the federal government spent millions of dollars on awareness campaigns convincing Australians to wash their hands properly and to socially distance. But as understanding of the virus improved and evidence showed it was mostly spread through the air, there was no similar campaign for improved ventilation. “There is lots of denial. It’s hard as human beings to accept this [virus] occurred … I don’t think we’re going back to 2019 anytime soon,” MacIntyre said. “It hasn’t mutated into the common cold. This is not the flu. We need to get our heads out of the sand.” That means, despite vaccine availability, people should still wear masks and realise that “washing your hands won’t protect you”. “It’s like telling everyone HIV is spread by mosquitoes – ‘use your Aeroguard and you’ll be right’,” she said. When HIV emerged in the 1980s, people believed many myths about how it spread – such as through the air, touching, sweating, or mosquitoes. However, it is only transmissible through body fluids. While Covid can be spread through infected surfaces, the risk is very low and some researchers sneeringly call extensive washing and cleaning ”hygiene theatre”. It took a while for researchers and health authorities to catch up with the fact that Covid is primarily an airborne virus. Independent expert group OzSage on Monday recommended school openings should be delayed until students were vaccinated and indoor air standards were met. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In April 2021, the World Health Organisation updated its advice to recognise that “the virus can spread from an infected person’s mouth or nose in small liquid particles when they cough, sneeze, speak, sing or breathe. These particles range from larger respiratory droplets to smaller aerosols.” Doctors then put pressure on Australia’s infection control expert group to focus more on air transmission. Prof Nancy Baxter, head of the University of Melbourne’s school of population and global health, said Australians took on board the messages about washing their hands back before vaccines were available. Then the new evidence about air transmission got bogged down in a debate about the definition of aerosol spread versus droplet spread. “The infection control people were among the last to come around,” Baxter said. “The people who had the most control over the narrative did [have a bias].” She said as vaccines started being distributed, no one saw the need to step up to “re-educate” people about the cause of most infections. School students could be better protected by moving classes outdoors, opening doors and windows, and understanding how well-ventilated classrooms are by using Co2 monitors. “And in spaces where you can’t improve the ventilation either through air conditioners or heating, or opening windows or doors, then Hepa filters work,” Baxter explained. There needs to be a standard for air quality, she said, because it’s a “workplace safety issue” for schools as well as workplaces. “People talk about living with Covid. It seems like from a government perspective, ignoring Covid is what we’re aiming for.” David Anderson, deputy director of the Burnet Institute, told ABC radio on Tuesday that there had been “practically no investment” in air quality. He said he was worried about school children going back into that environment. “Things like indoor air quality and ventilation, people have talked about it, we’ve known for at least 18 months that Covid is airborne, and there’s been practically no investment in improving air quality in indoor settings.” Guardian Australia contacted the federal health department and health minister Greg Hunt’s office for comment. A health department spokesperson said state and territory governments were responsible for workplace and environmental safety in schools and other workplaces, and that “some jurisdictional governments have been undertaking work to improve the ventilation in schools”. The department referred the inquiry about a national campaign and standard to Safe Work Australia. A SWA spokesperson said the states and territories were responsible for schools.Rhys Nicholson has a vision for his upcoming Melbourne International Comedy festival show: zero mention of the pandemic. “I mean, who wants to talk about it?” he says. “There’ll be so many comedy shows, I reckon, that will be [titled] like ‘Blah Blah Gone Viral’, or some shit like that. And it’s just like, can we not talk about it? For just a little while? We’re living it. I would love just one aspect of my life to not involve talking about fucking Covid.” But the pandemic did bring one useful object into Nicholson’s life: a meat thermometer. Like many of us, the comedian got very enthusiastic about cooking during lockdown. It even became a point of social connection. “Some friends and I started a Facebook group called Dinner Club and literally all we did is send each other photos of what we had for dinner that night,” he recalls. “It was so grim.” Here, Nicholson tells us about the life changing powers of this thermometer, as well as the story of two other important personal objects. What I’d save from my house in a fire Two rings that I wear – one is my engagement ring, and the other is an heirloom my father gave me that was his father’s, and his father’s father before him. I have a joke in my standup about how it’s been passed down to all the men in my family and I’m the closest thing we have to a man right now. It’s the first thing that came to mind because I’m always just terrified of losing it. Like, a ring is such an easy thing to lose and I can’t be the one, in a hundred years, who loses it. The engagement ring I got because I proposed to my partner, but I did it when I was really drunk in the middle of the night and didn’t remember it the next day, so I didn’t have a ring or anything like that. But my partner is a much better person than me. So one day a few months later, I had taken off the heirloom ring. My partner grabbed it, took it to one of our best friends, Lisa, who is a jewellery maker, and got her to measure it. Then he got the engagement ring made without my knowing and proposed to me on the top of a mountain. So he’s a real nightmare of a person! What a dick. My most useful object This is a potentially boring answer, but I have a meat thermometer that you Bluetooth into your phone. I know that sounds so stupid. But you put the thermometer into the meat and leave it there, then there’s an app on your phone which tells you what the temperature is on the inside. You can set an alarm to go off when it gets to 58 degrees or whatever, without you having to constantly go and check it all the time. It’s weird when you get to an age where things like that become life changing. If you told me when I was 22 that I would be interested in meat thermometers, I’d be like “that sounds very depressing. I need to change the course of my life so that doesn’t happen”. But here I am, and it’s made my life a lot better. In the last couple of years, I’ve really tried to get better at cooking. It seemed to really kick off in the pandemic. Throughout the first lockdowns, I put on a tight eight kilos in six months, all from being deeply carnivorous. And that seems to be the magic number – everyone seems to have added between eight and 10. No one was like, oh, I put on three. The item I most regret losing A few years ago, I was heading to the airport in Auckland at 6am and realised I didn’t have my passport with me. I was coming back to Australia and was going to land and go straight to shows. It was too late to cancel them and my agent was calling people in a panic. It was the most useless I’ve ever felt in my life. But I got to the airport in Auckland and explained to a very nice Kiwi that I didn’t have my passport. I’m not exaggerating this in any way, he said, “no worries bro, let’s call Canberra”. Then a man in the airport called Canberra, I showed them my licence, and they let me on the plane! So it turns out if you’re ever in New Zealand and still have your licence, you can still get home. It’s up to the airline, which is wild to me. Air New Zealand were just like yeah, you seem like you. And they didn’t even find any of the heroin that I had!There’s a simple reason Scott Morrison has refused to make rapid antigen tests free – and it has nothing to do with the budget or the economy. He just didn’t plan ahead. If he announced now that we could all have free test kits by February or March he’d be laughed out of office so instead he is positioning himself as a fiscal conservative standing up to populists demanding he spend more money. As if. To criticise the prime minister for putting the health of the budget ahead of the health of Australians is to flatter him unfairly. Since the Covid crisis began, his government, having appointed a former gas executive to steer its Covid-19 recovery taskforce, has spent far more public money subsidising the gas industry than it will ever spend on rapid antigen tests. The idea that there is some trade-off between the health of Australians and the health of our economy is one of the foundations of Australian public debate but it has no foundation in economics. As my colleague Jim Stanford surmised, you can’t have a healthy economy without a healthy workforce. That simple truth is now crystal clear to the restaurateurs and retailers who were demanding Covid restrictions be lifted. Morrison should have told them the truth before Christmas. Instead, he offered false hope. As the election draws closer, Morrison is stuck in a dilemma of his own making. If he compensates businesses or workers for the costs of the freedoms he just granted, he’d have to admit he caused their pain. But if he doesn’t provide some support soon the economy will spiral downwards, only this time in the lead-up to a federal election. Ouch. Despite the months of blather from Morrison about the need to unshackle Australians from the yoke of (his) government’s oppressive regulations, the fact is it was government regulation and spending that got the country through the first two years of this crisis. Border controls, movement restrictions, mask mandates, QR codes and free vaccination delivered Australia one of the lowest death rates and unemployment rates in the world. Well-designed government intervention works. Josh Frydenberg knows that. As he released an economic update in December, the treasurer declared: “Having performed more strongly than any major advanced economy throughout the pandemic, the Australian economy is poised for a strong expansion.” I agree entirely, but that’s not the story Morrison wants to tell. No matter how many taxes or regulations he cuts, the reality is economies don’t work without workers, customers or supply chains. No matter how upbeat the prime minister appears, the Delta and Omicron variants of Covid are circulating freely in our shopping malls, restaurants, warehouses and hospitals. It is making hundreds of thousands of Australians sick and it’s making millions think twice about going out to spend. Conservatives have spent decades claiming that enormously expensive tax cuts would “boost labour force participation” and in turn help grow the economy. But those same politicians don’t seem to care that Covid is knocking hundreds of thousands of people out of the workforce each week. And that’s before we send millions of unvaccinated children back to school who, even if they “only get a mild case”, will need parents to stay home and look after them. Thanks to last year’s strollout and this year’s poor planning, millions of Australians still aren’t eligible for their booster shot and, for reasons that are yet to be explained, millions of kids won’t be vaccinated before school returns. It’s true that Omicron presents new challenges and that Australians are tired of this pandemic. But, just as Winston Churchill didn’t lose patience as the second world war dragged on, it’s Morrison’s job to stay focused and plan for what’s likely to happen, not what he’d prefer to happen – and to communicate clearly with the public about the real challenges, and real choices, we face. I’m sure he would prefer to spend the next few months announcing expensive tax cuts instead of providing free RATs to all Australians. And I’m sure he would prefer to attack Labor over climate policy rather than work with the premiers to restore Australia’s testing and tracing capacity. But the job of the prime minister is to deal with the real crises that land in your lap, not respond to fabricated crises of your own making. There is strong evidence that controlling Covid was good for our economy these past few years; there’s no evidence that letting it rip will be good for it. Scott Morrison has asked Australians to take responsibility for their own actions from here on in. It’s likely that many of them wish he would do the same. Richard Denniss is the chief economist at independent thinktank the Australia Institute. @RDNS_TAIThe first time the audience lays eyes on Seth Cohen (Adam Brody), soon to become one of the biggest breakout characters in teen TV history, he is sitting cross-legged in pyjamas, furiously playing a video game with his hair bed-coiffed like a parentless Kevin McCallister. It’s not the greatest sartorial start but it is the perfect introduction to the smart, sullen, self-centred 17-year-old at the centre of this fish-out-of-water comedy/drama. By comparison, the first shot of the troubled Marissa Cooper (Mischa Barton) is positively dreamlike: bathed in soft, shimmering, streaming sunshine, half-smiling, every inch the teenage dream she would become to millions as The OC quickly caught fire. She lives next door to Seth but they exist in different universes. Soon we would meet Summer Roberts (Rachel Bilson), Seth’s unattainable crush and Marissa’s unlikely best friend; the type of girl who is comfortable going to house parties in a bikini, who spouts California-isms as if every day was a pep rally, as seemingly shallow as the pools they party around. Our entry point to this rarefied world is Ryan Atwood (Ben McKenzie), fresh out of lock-up, dressed in a singlet, abandoned by his mother, carrying all his worldly possessions in a sack. Kindly lawyer Sandy Cohen (played by a brilliant Peter Gallagher) was charged with defending the wayward kid and recognised a spark in him. By the time the first episode ends, Ryan is living with Sandy in a Newport mansion, as much a misplaced puzzle piece as his new roommate, Seth. California, here we come! The OC was one of those lightning-in-a-bottle shows, intended by its creators to be a cross between The Karate Kid and 90210, and containing all the essential elements of both: a James Dean type from the wrong side of the track; a smart kid who can’t wait to leave the fishbowl he was born into; buckets of tragic teenage love set amid wealth, glamour and California coastlines; and hard-partying teens shepherded by troubled adults. There were overdoses, house fires, fist fights galore and more drama in an hour-long episode than in the entire lifespan of most TV shows. The showrunner and creator, Josh Schwartz, himself still in his late 20s and working on his first show, sprinted through storylines at such a fast pace that, by the end of season two, major cracks were starting to appear. The OC burned brightly and briefly, only surviving four seasons – and about one and a half great ones. But its cultural impact far outstripped its time on TV – like Friends or 90210, its stars will always be known for the vehicle that introduced them to the world. This show introduced the world to the concept of Chrismukkah: the Jewish/Christian hybrid holiday. Seth’s devoted fandom turned Death Cab for Cutie from midwestern indie hopefuls into a million-selling mainstream rock band. The reality show staples The Hills and The Real Housewives of Orange County were spawned by the public’s insatiable interest in this pocket of California. It even made water polo realistically seem like a sport tough kids would play. Unlike most shows starring teens, the “adults” were given ample screentime and their own sophisticated storylines, with Sandy Cohen quickly and correctly becoming a sex symbol in his own right. (Forget Cara Delevingne; Sandy made big eyebrows a trend.) Best of all, The OC was ridiculous and knew it. The show was filled with self-knowing winks, wry references to its own craziness and never painted its faulted characters as entirely aspirational – despite how many pool houses and ponies they possessed. Like California itself, everyone’s lives were built on fissures. Every minor rumble would trigger an earthquake; every mega-mansion was built upon shifting sand. Season one is where The OC peaked but it’s the second season that is arguably the one people remember the best as we meet improbable indie rock club The Bait Shop and its revolving lineup of the best acts from the mid-2000s. The Killers, Modest Mouse, the Thrills, the Walkmen, Rachel Yamagata and, yes, Death Cab all played at the venue, which Seth once quipped was the only place you could comfortably talk over the music and which never had a drinks line. As a glossy time capsule of a specific era, there is no better show to revisit than The OC. As a high-octane, hilarious dive into a world that could never exist, it’s pretty much perfect. As Death Cab sang, this is the new year. The world is in turmoil. Slip into something comfortable. • The OC is streaming in Australia on StanI grew up in a household eating copious amounts of chilli at every mealtime: heapings of chopped bird’s eye on eggs, extremely liberal lashings of Tabasco in popcorn, huge dollops of hot sauce consumed straight from the spoon. It was the idyllic childhood, probably because I spent most of it in a hot and heady daze, tongue burning and mind pleasantly blissed out in picante pleasure. These days, I make my own chilli oil whenever I’m feeling particularly nostalgic. The right chilli oil feels transportive. For the less sentimental, it also just tastes great on almost any savoury dish, banishing weak-flavoured woes. Neil Perry recommends it on steamed silken tofu; Kylie Kwong drenches dumplings in the stuff; Meera Sodha tops vegan noodles with a light smattering for extra oomph. There are many variations out there, but I favour a very simple recipe of just four ingredients. You will need: a good handful of chilli flakes, salt, minced garlic, and vegetable oil. Eyeball everything. Throw it all into a pot at medium heat and let it simmer until the garlic just turns brown – the result is a brilliant red condiment with crispy garlic bits. The great thing about chilli oil is that it lends itself to experimentation: anything (and everything) goes. Add sesame, or cardamom, or grated ginger, or shallots, or Szechuan peppercorns on repeat attempts. Does too much of this chilli oil make my stomach ache with an intense burning sensation as I lay awake at 3am? Yes. Will I continue making it and then over-indulging anyway? Also yes. Reader beware: if you are unlike me in that you are sane, just a light patter of this chilli oil is sufficient to add requisite zing to your dish. My perfect lazy dinner is chilli oil on rice, but it’s also easily dressed down in toasties, soups and salads, or dressed up à la Ottolenghi. And for the extra lazy, Lao Gan Ma offers an iconic store-bought version that’s available in the international aisle (as well as all Asian groceries). John Cena approves.Foot pain is a common, disabling condition associated with older age and obesity and is more prevalent in women than in men. A 2008 study found that foot pain affects nearly one in five people aged 18 years and over in Australia. Dr Kade Paterson, a researcher at the Centre for Health, Exercise and Sports Medicine at the University of Melbourne and certified sports podiatrist, says in younger to middle-aged adults, plantar heel pain is the most common condition, affecting around 5-8% of the general population. But as people age, the most common cause of foot pain is osteoarthritis of the big toe and the ankle joints, says Prof Kim Bennell, an academic physiotherapist and the director of the centre. Some illnesses can also affect the feet, such as diabetes or poor blood flow, says Prof David Hunter, a rheumatologist at Royal North Shore Hospital and the University of Sydney. Because the feet are involved in most types of exercising, foot pain can deter people from physical activity. But exercise, Bennell says, strengthens the muscles, improves flexibility and balance, and helps with weight loss, reducing the load on the feet. It also provides psychological benefits. “Exercise makes people feel better,” says Hunter. “Pain might still be present but can be better tolerated.” Exercise can help reduce foot pain in many ways, but it is essential to consult a podiatrist, doctor or a physiotherapist before you begin. The class: tai chi and yoga There is evidence that tai chi and yoga classes can help reduce foot pain, Bennell says. Tai chi and yoga are excellent, holistic workouts that can strengthen and improve the whole body,” says Paterson. These barefoot practices can help strengthen the feet’s muscles and increase stability. Tai chi and yoga classes can also improve balance, essential to avoid falls and further injuries, especially as people get older. “The balance benefits that come with tai chi and yoga are an additional benefit that we don’t see with some of the other workout classes,” Paterson says. “Classes have the benefit of social participation as well,” adds Bennell. “People with persistent pain can often find it helpful to be in a group setting.” The move: calf raises “My number one go-to exercise is some form of calf raises,” says Josh Butcher, a podiatrist and APA musculoskeletal physiotherapist. Although it can be challenging for many people, he says, calf raises are great for improving calf strength, stabilising the foot and preventing injuries. “If you have great calf strength, it means you don’t have to compensate through other muscles or other joints within the foot,” he says. “You’re using your body’s natural spring mechanism to propel forward and move.” Calf raises are a simple exercise you can easily slip into your day-to-day life. Stand upright with your feet hip-width apart. Push through the balls of your feet to raise your heels, keeping the knees extended but not locked. Hold for one second, then lower slowly back to the ground. This exercise has many variations, and you can slowly increase the intensity over time. You can begin with seated calf raises if standing causes too much strain. You can progress with weighted calf raises by holding weights in your hands or a single-leg calf raise by lifting one foot off the floor and holding on to a chair for balance. “[Calf raises] strengthen the big muscles that are outside of the foot and run into the foot. They also work out the little muscles that live inside the foot,” says Paterson. “It’s a really good all-round exercise to support foot function and can have pain-relieving effects.” However, he says calf raises might exacerbate some forefoot conditions, such as neuroma or bursitis, so it is essential to modify the exercise if necessary. The activity: walking and running “Walking is always a good exercise for [foot] osteoarthritis,” says Bennell. But even a short stroll might feel excruciating to someone with severe foot pain, so starting with short easy walks is recommended. Running is also an excellent activity for foot pain, especially if you already are a runner, Bennell says. But pacing yourself is critical. “Running is really good for foot pain,” says Butcher. “It just has to be done really well as it can lead to further injuries if you do it incorrectly. Starting with a couch to 5km run programs is always preferable.” He also recommends getting footwear checked by a recognised running-shoe shop. “Provided that the pain is not getting too bad or lasting too long, then certainly running is fantastic,” agrees Paterson. “But if you find this weight-bearing exercise makes your pain worse, then you can look at non-weight-bearing options like swimming or cycling.” The hard pass: not too fast While exercise has several benefits, all experts agree that people with foot pain should avoid doing too much too quickly. “Ease into it,” says Butcher. After months of lockdown, people are eager to get out and move more, he says, but overloading your feet too suddenly might exacerbate foot pain. “Having some pain during exercise is OK and expected,” says Bennell. “But if you are getting much worse symptoms that don’t settle down by the next day, then obviously whatever you are doing is a bit much and you need to back off.”Outside the Australian Botanic Garden Mount Annan in south-western Sydney are four shipping containers with freezers inside. Over the next six months, more than a million plant specimens will be cycled through the containers, each spending about a week in the cold to rid them of any insects. It’s an important step in a large operation to relocate the National Herbarium of New South Wales from the Royal Botanic Garden in Sydney to a new facility at the Mount Annan site. Once inside, the collection will be moved into vaults that have been cleaned and fumigated and are temperature-controlled at 16C with 45% to 50% relative humidity to prevent insect infestations and mould. “Just about any plant you get growing in the bush is probably represented in our collection,” says Hannah McPherson, the herbarium’s collections manager. “We have really iconic Australian plants like wattle, eucalyptus and Sturt’s desert pea. “And then there are more difficult-to-manage things like cactus and stinging trees and palms that we have to house in a different way by hanging them in lockers.” The relocation will mark the end point for another project that will make the herbarium – which is not physically open to the public – much more accessible to researchers and the broader community. For nearly three years, staff and volunteers have been going through about 70,000 boxes in a mammoth undertaking to digitise the herbarium’s collection. It’s the largest mass digitisation of a natural history collection undertaken in the southern hemisphere and by the time it is completed there will be a digital record of 99% of the specimens the herbarium holds. The process has allowed staff to do something that had never occurred at the herbarium before. They’ve looked at every specimen the facility holds, auditing the entire collection, which covers Australian and global locations and dates back to samples taken in the 1700s. “Something that most people don’t know is that institutions like this one don’t know everything they have,” says the herbarium’s digitisation manager, Andre Badiou. “The Royal Botanic Garden is now the longest-running scientific institution in Australia. If you’ve got things that have been collected since that time, things get put away in boxes. “There are also other [facilities] that close down and send us their collections. It’s just not possible to keep up with that kind of input. So after a couple of years, you’ve lost track of everything you have.” *** To digitise the collection, every specimen was given a QR code and put on a conveyor belt that had cameras at the mid and end points. Sensors would read the label, images were taken and auto-cropped and the specimen was then packed into a trolley. Each specimen spent about two seconds in front of the camera. “You’re getting about 4,000 images a day going through,” Badiou says. “You can imagine just with a camera if you had a million plants to take photos of it would take forever.” The images were sent to the Netherlands-based digitisation company Picturae, which created different file types, some for internal use at the herbarium and others that are being uploaded to Amazon Web Services for scientists and the public to access. Alembo, a specialised transcription service based in Suriname, has also been working with herbarium staff to transcribe handwritten labels into digital records. Eventually, every specimen will end up on the Atlas of Living Australia and infrastructure is in development to make the whole collection more searchable. Through the course of the audit, items were discovered that herbarium staff had not realised were in their possession. These include two specimens that pre-date the herbarium’s existing special collection of 824 specimens Joseph Banks and Daniel Solander collected in Australia in 1770. One of them is a snowberry, or Gaultheria antipoda, collected in 1769 in New Zealand. The other is Parietaria debilis, a herb native to Australia and New Zealand that Joseph Banks and Daniel Solander collected the same year from Tolaga, Opuragi and Motuaro. They will be added to the special collections vault at the new state-of-the-art building at Mount Annan. The digitisation process also uncovered previously unknown illustrations in the specimen boxes, including work by the Australian botanical artist Margaret Flockton. It has resulted in a doubling of the herbarium’s illustration library, which is also being digitised and will remain at the Royal Botanic Gardens Sydney. *** Most of the specimens the herbarium holds were collected by botanists. Older samples are markers of colonialism and the white, male field it was for a long time, Badiou says. There are also samples collected by gardeners, bushwalkers and farmers trying to identify plants on their properties, or orchid collectors who travel the world just to see one particular plant. Badiou says one particularly important collection is from a woman who followed her husband to remote Western Australia. She collected, dried and wrote about plant life on a property in a part of the country that is not represented anywhere else in the more than 1 million specimens. About 8,000 new items are added to the herbarium each year. The specimens are used for ecology, evolutionary studies, botanical consulting, artworks and bush regeneration. McPherson recently gave a talk to a group of poets using the specimens for inspiration. There are narcotic plants, such as opium poppies, which are kept under lock and key, and the site runs an identification service that is often called upon to identify items in criminal or poisoning cases. McPherson says anything related to looking after the environment also ends up coming back to the specimens in some way. The completed digitisation project will open the herbarium up on a scale that hasn’t been possible previously, she says. “Often people think of a herbarium like a museum, they keep lots of old stuff in there,” she says. “But for us as scientists we think of it as an active research collection because those old specimens are still just as relevant as the ones collected today. “It’s not just a dusty old warehouse.” The herbarium is part of a global lending and borrowing network that involves sending physical specimens to facilities all over the world for scientific research. The new images are of such high quality that researchers may no longer need to work with the actual physical specimen. “The point of the herbarium specimen is not just to be a plant in a collection, it’s a plant that represents a time and a place,” McPherson says. “We don’t just learn about that plant but a whole landscape and that landscape through time.” That includes looking at how a landscape has changed, how human activities have changed and reduced plant populations, and how the climate crisis is affecting plants – all the way down to leaf shape. “We could do that to an extent before but now there is just so much more we can do that will help us with our science,” she says.I am starting to think that common sense really is not that common after all – we live in exceedingly stupid times. Exhibit 874: US anti-vaxxers are now urging people to drink their own urine to fight coronavirus. Over the weekend, Christopher Key, the leader of an anti-Covid-19 vaccine group called the “Vaccine Police”, posted videos online extolling the health benefits of what he described as “urine therapy”. According to the wizard of wee, there is “tons and tons of research … [and] peer-reviewed published papers on urine”; so if you do your own pee-search you will discover it is God’s own antidote to Covid-19. “This vaccine is the worst bioweapon I have ever seen,” Key said. “I drink my own urine!” That is not the only questionable thing he does. Key was recently arrested for refusing to wear a mask and filming proceedings during a court hearing. The reason he was in court? He was arrested in April for refusing to wear a mask at a Whole Foods store. In August he made headlines for suggesting that pharmacists should be executed for administering coronavirus vaccines; in December he also set off on a road trip across the US with a fake badge and firearms, in a mission to arrest a Democratic governor over vaccine mandates. Very busy man, our Mr Key! I cannot help thinking that if his name was Mohammed his shenanigans would have had him locked up in Guantánamo Bay by now. Key’s “urine therapy” is far from the only experimental – and highly dubious – Covid “cure” to be promoted during the pandemic. We all remember the former US president’s comments on the benefits of injecting bleach. Last year saw a prolonged bout of Ivermectin-mania. Now, along with urine, the right seems to be fixated on Viagra and colloidal silver. Fox News’s Tucker Carlson, who has repeatedly questioned the efficacy and safety of Covid vaccines, recently dedicated a portion of his show to hyping the potential of Viagra as a potential cure. Carlson seized on the story of a British nurse reportedly recovering from a Covid-19 coma, after being given a dose of Viagra, to sing the little blue pill’s praises. “Is there anything [Viagra] doesn’t cure?” Carlson joked. Yes, I am afraid it does not appear to cure stupidity. Speaking of which, the conservative media personality Candace Owens recently told her social media followers that she takes a “teaspoon a day” of colloidal silver, a product that has also been touted as a Covid cure by the likes of Infowars founder Alex Jones. I am sure I do not need to tell you this but there is zero evidence that colloidal silver can help with Covid. On the contrary, taking too much can turn your skin blue permanently and, in rare cases, can even kill you. (I can never resist an opportunity to big-up my hero Wilkie Collins, so I urge you to read his underrated novel Poor Miss Finch, about a blind woman who falls in love with identical twins, one of whom turns blue after trying to cure his epilepsy with silver. The novel won’t cure Covid but it may provide temporary reprieve from existential ennui.) The amount of misinformation about Covid cures is highly depressing, and it is important that we hold to account the people spreading dangerous falsehoods, and undermining trust in the vaccine. Still, let us be clear: the biggest obstacle towards ending this pandemic is not kooks such as Key and Owens. The obstacle is the rich countries that have been hoarding vaccines, and the likes of Pfizer and Moderna, who have been slow to license their vaccine technology (developed with taxpayer money) to poor countries. The fact that big pharma is making billions from a public health crisis is unconscionable. I am very pro-vaccine but I am running out of enthusiasm for boosters. The idea of potentially having to get a fourth shot soon, while so much of the world still cannot access a first dose, makes me sick. If only we had a vaccine for greed. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistWordle, a deceptively simple online word puzzle, has had a meteoric rise since its launch last autumn, from 90 daily players in November to 300,000 at the beginning of January, to 2 million last weekend. But, for its creator, the game’s rapid success has resulted in as much anxiety as excitement. The game has become an unexpected grassroots hit for Josh Wardle, who developed it for his puzzle-loving partner. The pair played it for fun on their sofa, and other users slowly began to join them. Every day, there is a new word to guess, and players get just six chances to identify it. Wordle’s popularity is thought to be partly because, in an era of apps aggressively competing for your attention and time, the game was deliberately built to be played once a day, and without features designed to promote its growth such as push notifications and email sign ups. As its popularity has snowballed on social media, Wardle, a software engineer based in Brooklyn who is originally from Wales, has begun to feel overwhelmed by the response. “It going viral doesn’t feel great to be honest. I feel a sense of responsibility for the players. I feel I really owe it to them to keep things running and make sure everything’s working correctly.” But he takes comfort in the knowledge that his game has brought joy to people at a difficult time. “I get emails from people who say things like ‘hey, we can’t see our parents due to Covid at the moment but we share our Wordle results each day’. During this weird situation it’s a way for people to connect in a low effort, low friction way.” The game really took off when one user in New Zealand (where the game is especially popular) displayed her results in a sequence of emojis on Twitter, prompting Wardle to build a function that would allow users to share theirs more easily, in a visually appealing Rubik’s Cube-style grid configuration. Wardle also thinks the game is so popular because it’s simple and accessible, yet also challenging. “Even though I play it every day, I still feel a sense of accomplishment when I do it: it makes me feel smart, and people like that.” Part of the appeal of Wardle’s game is that it harks back to a more innocent age of the internet, gaming experts say. Users have grown cynical about many apps’ ethically dubious use of their data and attempts to monetise game play or foster addictive behaviour. “The internet is in a really bad place at the moment, but this is great because it’s not doing all those nasty things. It’s what the web was like when we first had it, it was much more playful,” said Adam Procter, who leads the game design course at Southampton University. Prof Chris Headleand, the head of game design technology at Staffordshire University, added that Wordle may also have benefited from its timing. A short daily game is a welcome reminder to take a break for those who are working from home. Equally, people have missed out on opportunities to connect with family and friends over in-person games during the pandemic. The rules were also intuitive for people who grew up playing word games such as Scrabble, or a code-breaking game such as Mastermind, said Steve Bromley, the author of How To Be A Games User Researcher. Wordle combined this familiarity with an opportunity to show mastery and to improve performance over time, a blend which enabled players to enter into a “flow state”. The game has also proven popular among mathematicians, who enjoy applying information theory to work out the best strategies for success. One tweet shared an algorithm that it said would result in the answer 50% of the time, or a choice of three 90% of the time. Others have worked out which words are best to start with to maximise your chances of success. One suggestion is to start with adieu, which has a lot of vowels. Tim Gowers, a mathematics professor at Cambridge, suggested choosing two words with a lot of commonly used letters where none are reproduced, for example “tripe” followed by “coals”. Gowers explained that the game touched on the theory of entropy, which is a measure of how much information is needed to specify a particular object (the Wordle’s word of the day) out of a collection of objects (all the five-letter words in Wordle’s dictionary). The question Wardle is currently grappling with is whether to evolve the game further. “I need to be really thoughtful. It’s not my full-time job and I don’t want it to become a source of stress and anxiety in my life. If I do make any changes, I would like to think they are changes I would have made even if it was just [my partner and I] playing.” • This article’s main image was changed on 11 January 2022. A previous image showed a grid from a Wordle imitation, not the original game.The Republican who memorably resisted Donald Trump’s attempt to overturn his election defeat in Georgia has said he will run for re-election on a platform of “integrity and truth”, against an opponent who as a churchman “should know better” than to advance the former president’s lies. Brad Raffensperger, the Georgia secretary of state, became a household name after he turned down Trump’s demand that he “find 11,780 votes” in order to overturn Joe Biden’s win in the southern state. It was the first victory by a Democrat in a presidential race in Georgia since 1992. The call is among subjects of an investigation by the district attorney of Fulton county into whether Trump and others committed crimes in their push to overturn election results in the state. On Monday, Fani Willis told the Associated Press she expected to make a decision in the case in the first half of this year. “We’re going to just get the facts, get the law, be very methodical, very patient and, in some extent, unemotional about this quest for justice,” she said. In this year’s elections, Raffensperger will face off against Jody Hice, a pastor, US congressman and Trump acolyte. “Congressman Hice, he’s been in Congress for several years,” Raffensperger said on Sunday, on CBS’s Face the Nation. “He’s never done a single piece of election reform legislation. “Then he certified his own race with those same machines, the same ballots [that were used for the presidential election]. And yet for President Trump, he said you couldn’t trust that. “That’s a double-minded person. And as a pastor, he should know better. So, I’m going to run on integrity and I’m going to run on the truth. I don’t know what he’s going to run on.” Hice played a key role in legal and political attempts to overturn the 2020 election result. Writing for the Guardian to mark the anniversary of the 6 January Capitol attack, in which Trump supporters failed to stop Congress certifying the election result, the former Clinton aide Sidney Blumenthal said that as the riot unfolded, Hice “raced by a Democratic colleague, who told me Hice was screaming into his phone: ‘You screwed it up, y’all screwed it all up!’” Hice, Blumenthal wrote, “was tasked to present a challenge to Georgia’s electors … as part of the far-rightwing Republican faction, the Freedom Caucus, directed by Congressman Jim Jordan, of Ohio, who was in constant touch that day with Mark Meadows, the White House chief of staff and former Freedom Caucus member, and a watchful Trump himself. “Just as the violent insurrection launched, and paramilitary groups spearheaded medieval style hand-to-hand combat against the police and burst into the Capitol, Hice posted on Instagram a photo of himself headed into the House chamber with the caption, ‘This is our 1776 moment.’” Hice deleted that post and said he condemned the violence at the Capitol. In an email to the Guardian, a spokeswoman for Hice said the congressman denied “any phone calls on 6 January remotely similar to what Mr Blumenthal describes”. The spokeswoman also said Hice was not in the Capitol when it went into lockdown. But Hice formally objected to results in Arizona and Pennsylvania and voted against investigation of the attack. The select committee is reportedly interested in his own phone records as Hice remains a vocal proponent of the lie that Trump lost due to electoral fraud, a lie believed by clear majorities of Republicans. Hice announced his run to be secretary of state in Georgia, last March, later gaining Trump’s endorsement. Should he win, he will be in charge of state election counts. Many outside the Republican party fear the prospect of Trump allies filling such posts in battleground states, preparatory to another attempt to overturn a presidential election. “It’s certainly not by accident that we’re seeing individuals who don’t believe in democracy aspire to be our states’ chief election officers, particularly in the states that were under the greatest spotlight in 2020,” Jocelyn Benson, Michigan secretary of state, told the Guardian earlier this month. Raffensperger and Governor Brian Kemp, however, have placed Georgia among Republican-run states which have implemented election laws which critics say aim to restrict Democratic turnout. Asked about visits to Georgia this week by Biden and Vice-President Kamala Harris, to promote federal voting rights protections, Raffensperger told CBS: “6 January was terrible, but the response doesn’t need to be eliminating photo ID and then having same-day registration. “If you don’t have the appropriate guardrails in place, then you’re not going to have voter confidence in the results.” Pressed on claims by figures including the Georgia gubernatorial candidate and voting rights campaigner Stacey Abrams that state election law is skewed against people of colour, Raffensperger heralded provisions for early voting and said: “I think that we have shown that Georgia has fair and honest elections. We have record registrations. We have record turnout.” He also said he was confident Hice would not take over the elections process. “The results will be the results,” Raffensperger said, “and those will be the results that will be certified. You cannot overturn the will of the people and so that won’t matter. “But at the end of the day, I will be re-elected, and he will not be.”Seth Meyers Back in his fifth makeshift studio after testing positive for Covid, Seth Meyers (boosted and asymptomatic, he noted) returned to Late Night to mock Ted Cruz’s groveling appearance on Tucker Carlson’s Fox News show over the weekend. The Texas senator’s appearance on Carlson’s show, in which he apologized for condemning the 6 January assault on the Capitol as a terrorist attack, was “so pathetic, I honestly thought I was delirious from the Covid”, Meyers said on Monday evening. “Look, we all know Ted Cruz has a thing for self-humiliation,” Meyers noted. “He slinked back from Cancún after escaping the blackout in his state, he endorsed Donald Trump after Trump insulted his wife and his father,” and “he keeps showing up in public with that facial hair, looking like a Chewbacca who shaved everything but the beard.” So Cruz’s about-face wasn’t entirely surprising. Just a day before the first anniversary of the insurrection, Cruz told Congress, “we are approaching a solemn anniversary this week, and it is an anniversary of a violent terrorist attack on the Capitol.” “I mean, it’s the right thing to say, even though it’s definitely a little weird to condemn an attack you helped whip up by spreading the very lies that fueled that mob,” Meyers explained. “It’s like when OJ promised to find the real killer, except in Cruz’s case it’s arguably worse because he’s doing it at the scene of the crime.” But “even that bare minimum condemnation of the January 6th attack was apparently too much for the new enforcers of Republican orthodoxy like Tucker Carlson.” Carlson, who is rumored to harbor ambitions for a Republican presidential run against Cruz, tore into the senator on-air. “You called this a ‘terror attack’ when by no definition was it a terror attack,” Carlson said. “That’s a lie. You told that lie on purpose, and I’m wondering why you did.” Cruz corrected: “I agree with you, it was a mistake to say that yesterday.” “Wow, I knew Ted had a thing for self-humiliation, but that is next-level,” said Meyers. Stephen Colbert On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert tepidly addressed the discovery of 25 cases of a coronavirus strain in Cyprus which combines elements of the Delta and Omicron variants, nicknamed “Deltacron”. “Deltacron: also the name of the disappointing Transformer who turns into a delayed flight for Atlanta,” Colbert joked. The new variant follows on the heels of the Omicron surge, which may or may not decline sharply by the end of the months, according to experts. Said Dr Anthony Fauci over the weekend of Omicron’s future: “I would hope – I can’t predict accurately because no one can – but I would hope by the time we get to the fourth week in January – end of the third week, beginning of the fourth week – that we will start to see this coming down.” “Can you be more specific?” Colbert responded. “That’s like your horoscope reading ‘Capricorn, you will make a connection with a handsome stranger. Or not. Maybe he’ll give you a disease. No one can predict accurately.” Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel noted the rapid spread of Omicron among his staff, which shut down production last week, and encourage alternative motivations for getting the unvaccinated to participate. Quebec, for instance, has announced a vaccine requirement for the purchase of alcohol and cannabis; first-dose appointments have increased from 1,500 a day to 6,000. “I think maybe Pfizer needs to come out with some gummies and a hard lemonade,” said Kimmel. “Of course, there are all sorts of new crazy miracle cures and remedies,” he said, pointing to a particularly egregious anti-vax evangelist named Christopher Key who touts “urine therapy” – drinking one’s own urine – as a Covid treatment. “If this guy’s kids ever set up a lemonade stand in your neighborhood, run,” said Kimmel. “Urine therapy – that’s actually one conspiracy theory I’m OK with,” he added. “You think vaccines were created by the devil or George Soros or Bill Gates? Go ahead, pee in a mason jar and chug along with Dr Dumbass.”Andy Murray has welcomed Novak Djokovic’s release from immigration detention but he anticipates the men’s world No 1 will have a number of questions to answer in the coming days if he remains in Australia. Djokovic spent his first full day of freedom focusing on tennis matters as he took to Melbourne’s Rod Laver Arena behind closed doors for much-needed practice after the best part of five days spent in a hotel room fighting the cancellation of his visa. Off court however, his status remained in limbo as Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, continued to deliberate over whether to exercise his reserved powers and attempt, for a second time, to deport the Serb, while fresh questions arose over the accuracy of Djokovic’s travel documents. There was no response from the Djokovic camp, either, following increasing attention on the positive PCR test from 16 December on which he relied to obtain a medical exemption to travel and his apparent maskless appearances in public in social media posts shortly after that date. As players began to speak about the 34-year-old’s detainment, Murray said it was good to see Djokovic win his hearing but he believes there are still issues to be resolved. “It’s positive that he’s not in detention any more,” Murray said. “Obviously he won in court, so that’s a positive thing for him. Hopefully [he] will be able to concentrate on the tennis now. You know, I think there are still a few questions that need to be answered around the isolation and stuff, which I’m sure we’ll hear from him in the next few days.” Meanwhile, Marton Fucsovics became one of the first players to publicly disagree with Djokovic’s presence in Australia. The 29-year-old Hungarian described Djokovic as the greatest player in the sport and underlined the respect he has for the No 1. “However, we must not go beyond what is happening in the world now,” Fucsovics said, speaking with M1, a Hungarian TV channel. “People’s health is paramount, and there are rules that were outlined months ago, namely that everyone should vaccinate themselves, and Djokovic didn’t. From this point of view, I don’t think he would have the right to be here.” On Monday, Djokovic and his team of lawyers won their court hearing and successfully restored his visa when Judge Anthony Kelly found the Australian Border Force had not given the player enough time to speak with his lawyers and Tennis Australia before cancelling his visa. Thus allowed out of detention and to move around freely, Djokovic went straight from his lawyers’ offices to train at Melbourne Park and he returned for a second session in the middle of Tuesday afternoon, where he practised with the Australian junior James McCabe on Rod Laver Arena. Amid curiosity about his physical condition after several days spent in a hotel room, Djokovic opted for his session to be held behind closed doors and the live feed from the court in the press rooms was temporarily taken down. Top players sometimes opt to practise without an audience when they would rather the public or their rivals cannot see them. However, the tournament went to extraordinary lengths to keep all eyes out with nearly every door in the arena locked shut. Aside from Tennis Australia’s in-house videographers, the only footage of Djokovic came through a drone directed by 9News, although Tennis Australia photographers were allowed to pool images. As Djokovic continues his preparation, he does so with clouds seeming to multiply above his head. The Australia Border Force is investigating suggestions that Djokovic disclosed incorrect information on his Australia Travel Declaration. In the form, released after his court hearing on Monday, Djokovic – who indicated across different court documents that his agent and Tennis Australia had completed the form at different times – declared he had not travelled to any other country in the 14 days before he began his journey to Australia from Spain on 4 January. However photos on social media appeared to indicate he had recently travelled from Serbia as he had posed alongside the Serbian handball player Petar Djordjic in Belgrade on Christmas Day. Djokovic has not commented and it is not clear when the image was taken. Should Djokovic remain in Australia and compete in the tournament, Tennis Australia – who on Tuesday formally confirmed he would be the No 1 men’s seed – will likely move to increase security after the rowdy scenes on Monday when police used pepper spray on members of the public as they stormed a car they thought to be carrying Djokovic away from his lawyers’ offices. In the wake of Djokovic’s successful hearing, the ATP addressed his detainment for the first time in a lengthy statement, acknowledging the saga has been detrimental to all concerned. The men’s tennis governing body noted its respect for the Australian public’s sentiments and the strict border laws while expressing support for Djokovic. “It’s clear Novak Djokovic believed he had been granted a necessary medical exemption in order to comply with entry regulations,” said the ATP. “The series of events leading to Monday’s court hearing have been damaging on all fronts, including for Novak’s wellbeing and preparation for the Australian Open.”Germany’s new economy and climate protection minister has called for the nation to pull together to realise the “gigantic task” of creating a climate neutral country, saying it posed a considerable social and financial challenge as well as a big opportunity. Introducing a broad outline of his ambitious plans to the public for the first time since entering government as part of a three-way coalition last month, the Green party’s Robert Habeck called for a threefold increase in the speed with which carbon dioxide emissions are reduced, arguing Germany faced a race against time and required a “massive national debate” to achieve the goals set out by his ministry. He said the government faced an uphill task to win many people over to the idea of a transition. “It is a large political task, but one that of course also offers an enormous chance,” he said, adding that it was “mightily ambitious” and would require the entire country to engage in “fresh thinking”. Asked if he believed he could succeed and whether he was in danger of destroying the reputation of the Greens if he failed, Habeck, who has a reputation for turning to literature for inspiration, quoted the German poet Friedrich Hölderlin, stating: “Where there is danger so the power to save grows accordingly.” Habeck warned Germany was currently “dramatically behind” in its aim to achieve a goal for 80% of energy to come from renewable sources by 2030, as well as for a 65% reduction in greenhouse gases compared with 1990 levels, and to become climate neutral by 2045. Currently about 42% of energy in Germany comes from renewables. Habeck said a radical overhaul of planning and building processes would be required as well as changes to industry and a slimming down of bureaucracy. Announcing a mandate for solar panels to be put on all new builds, he repeated his party’s pre-election manifesto that 2% of the entire surface of the country should make way for the mechanisms required for renewable energy, such as windfarms, solar panels and hydrogen technology. He urged people to embrace the technology and said this would help free Germany from dependence on unstable global markets. So far only two out of 16 states, Schleswig-Holstein and Hesse, are anywhere near the 2% target. A more relaxed and flexible approach towards rules governing the building of turbines was required, he said, expressing his frustration over a recent ruling in the southern state of Bavaria, according to which turbines cannot be erected closer to homes than a distance equivalent to 10 times their height. Habeck said he was planning to announce a first tranche of climate protection measures by Easter, and a second by the end of the summer, to come into force by 2023. The government’s plans have been fiercely criticised by Fridays for Future climate activists, who say they are too little, too late and are a betrayal of the Greens’ own principles. “We can no longer follow the policy of ‘we’ll do what we can’, rather we must have a policy according to the principle of ‘we’ll do what is necessary right now’. That is unfortunately not the case right now,” Hannah Pirot of Fridays for Future Berlin told the broadcaster InfoRadio. Habeck rejected the claims. He said: “I don’t recognise the charge of betrayal.” He added the goals of his government had to remain realistic and the effort had to be a collective one. Habeck said large-scale immigration would be necessary to realise the energy transition, which would require a considerable number of engineers, craftspeople and carers. “We have 300,000 job openings today and we expect that to rise to a million and more. If we don’t close that gap, we will face real productivity problems,” he said. He said while the pandemic had led to a reduction in CO2 emissions, these had risen again last year. “The trend is going in the wrong direction and that is of concern,” he said. Caution towards his plans came from within the government itself, with the pro-business FDP’s Reinhard Houben welcoming them, but urging Habeck to “not lose sight” of issues such as affordable energy and concerns over energy security. The government has said it will provide subsidies to enable lower income families to better shoulder increases in energy costs. The chair of the German Association of Towns and Municipalities, Gerd Landsberg, warned of the contradiction Habeck would face between people expressing their support for a rollout of renewable energy at the same time as resisting anything that might be built close to their own homes. “People are in favour of alternative energy as long as they don’t have to see or hear the facilities behind them,” he told German television.Tamara Rojo, the artistic director of English National Ballet and one of the biggest names in the industry, is stepping down after 10 years in the role, the company announced on Tuesday. The acclaimed dancer – who has introduced groundbreaking works into the ENB’s repertoire, including more than 40 works choreographed by women – will step down in late 2022 to take up the role of artistic director at San Francisco Ballet, where her husband, Isaac Hernández, was recently appointed a principal dancer. Rojo has been credited with giving ENB a new, international allure, through innovative and risk-taking commissions such as Akram Khan’s Giselle. She also led ENB into a new chapter in 2019 by moving it into the RIBA award-winning Mulryan Centre for Dance in east London, several months before the pandemic hit. Since then, she’s been a strong advocate of the arts, after ENB had to furlough 85% of its workforce and many of the staff, including Rojo, took pay cuts. Later this month, she will make her choreographic and directorial debut with Raymonda, her first full-length ballet, which ENB will perform at the London Coliseum. In a recent interview with the Guardian, she spoke about turning the 1898 ballet, set during the crusades, into a new production inspired by Florence Nightingale and the Crimean war. ENB said it will appoint an Artistic Advisory Panel to support the board in the search for Rojo’s replacement. Meanwhile, Rojo will become the first woman to lead the oldest professional ballet company in the US, founded in 1933. In a statement, she said it had been “an honour” to have led ENB since 2012. “I am incredibly proud of all that we have achieved together, from the tremendous talent working within and alongside the company, to creating and moving into the amazing new building we now call our home, to the off-stage communities we have established with our education and engagement work,” she said. “English National Ballet’s fundamental aim to bring world-class ballet to the widest possible audience has always resonated with me. It is the reason the company has been a part of my life for so many years, from performing here as a dancer early in my career, to returning as artistic director in 2012. My admiration and support do not end here. I will remain invested in English National Ballet’s continued success in the years to come.” English National Ballet’s chair, Sir Roger Carr, said Rojo had propelled the company to new heights. “After 10 years at the helm,” he said, “the legacy that Tamara leaves will be long lasting and it is hoped that in her new position in San Francisco she will have the opportunity to capitalise on past achievements and build a bridge between these two great ballet companies for joint endeavours to our mutual benefit.” He added: “I speak on behalf of us all at the English National Ballet when I offer my sincere thanks and wish Tamara every success in the future.”Senior professionals can expect pay increases of up to 25% in the first quarter of 2022, as the economy begins to open up following the lifting of Omicron-related restrictions and companies fight to hold on to their best staff. Experienced staff with salaries of £80,000 and above across a wide range of disciplines from marketing to finance and IT are already beginning to enjoy rises of £20,000 a year or more, according to recruitment firm Robert Walters. The hunt for talent also extends further down the pay scales as professional services companies budget for an increase in their wage bill of between 10% and 15% – the largest increase seen since 2008 and almost three times the inflation rate, the recruiter said in its 2022 UK Salary Guide. Chris Poole, the firm’s managing director, said that after a year of double-digit pay increases for new joiners, firms were under pressure to ramp up pay rates for existing staff to prevent them quitting for a rival. Business lobby groups have reported many of their members complaining of lengthening backlogs of work made worse by a shortage of staff. The situation has been made worse by many over-50s suffering from long Covid while experienced, skilled workers have quit their jobs in search of a new challenge, dubbed the great resignation. A switch to digital commerce during the pandemic has also created a dislocation in the jobs market, stranding many people in jobs that are no longer in demand. The report found that in the past year, wages for new starters grew on average by 6% to 8%, while those professionals who moved into industries at the forefront of fighting the pandemic or meeting pandemic-related demands, such as technology or healthcare, saw pay hikes as high as 15% to 20%. “Looking at the year ahead we will see more companies raise the pay of their existing employees to sit in line with new starter salaries,” he said. Over a third of businesses (39%) said they were increasing pay to keep up with rising inflation, he added. Many companies, unable to recruit from the wider jobs market, are looking to recruit and train existing staff, which often means promoting senior executives from regional offices who refuse to move to London. “There is a lot of compromise and flexibility in the search for talent,” a spokesperson said. “So boards are allowing people to work from quite far away and making commitments that executives only need attend a proportion of meetings in person.” She said the acceleration of digital services meant that tech savvy executives who could interpret large amounts of data were “head and shoulders above the rest”. However, many workers, including some of those with in-demand skills, are starting from a low base in their search for higher wages. More than half (54%) of workers said they were expecting a pay rise this year after a two-year salary freeze. The survey also unearthed a large degree of staff dissatisfaction from their treatment by employers during the pandemic, with two-thirds saying they will leave their job if they are not rewarded fairly. Three-quarters said they were “very confident” about job opportunities in their sector this year. The report said the majority of professionals gave top priority to “excellent compensation and benefits and a bonus scheme,” while 40% put job security as their most important requirement. “In fact, flexi-hours (29%), remote working (22%), and holiday entitlement (20%) all rank much lower in importance for professionals – perhaps because over half of white-collar workers stated that they ‘wouldn’t bother’ asking about flexi-working in a job interview in the coming year because they naturally assume ‘it is a given now’,” it said.Book sales continued to climb last year despite lockdowns, with more than 212m print books sold in 2021 – the highest figure of the last decade. Driven by booming appetites for crime novels, sci-fi, fantasy, romance and personal development titles, sales last year showed an increase of 5% on 2020. The sales were worth £1.82bn – a 3% increase on 2020, and the first year on record that sales have topped £1.8bn. The figures were released on Tuesday by Nielsen BookScan, which was forced to fill in lockdown data gaps with estimates based on its monthly consumer surveys, which collect data from around 3,000 book buyers each month. Bookshops across the UK were shut for over three months at the start of 2021. Fiction was up 20% compared with 2019, said Nielsen, propelled by 19% volume growth for the crime and thriller genre, 23% for science fiction and fantasy, and 49% for romance. Chart-topping sales for Richard Osman’s first two novels drove crime’s strong performance: The Thursday Murder Club was the year’s bestselling title, while The Man Who Died Twice was the fourth bestselling title of the year. In non-fiction, the mind, body, spirit category saw the biggest growth, up by 50% to hit a lifetime high of £18.7m. Charlie Mackesy’s “book of hope”, The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse, continued to be a source of inspiration for readers as the year’s second bestselling title, revealed Nielsen, followed by Matt Haig’s The Midnight Library, an uplifting novel in which heroine Nora struggles with depression. Other strong performers include the Women’s prize winner Hamnet, by Maggie O’Farrell, and the Booker prize winner Shuggie Bain, by Douglas Stuart, with adult fiction taking nine spots in the Top 20, its highest total since 2012. Adam Silvera’s young adult novel They Both Die at the End, a favourite on TikTok, just made it into the Top 20, the first YA title to do so since 2015. “Overall, the year’s bestsellers show book buyers seeking out comfort, laughter, escapism, familiarity and maybe a sense of community, given the continued impact of social media in bringing in new authors with existing platforms and creating conversations around new and old books,” said Nielsen’s Jackie Swope. “The start of 2022 is unfortunately looking a lot like 2021, with a new variant, a rush to vaccinate and widespread uncertainty. But one thing we can be certain about: books are most definitely not a pandemic fad and have proved their lasting power time and again.” Kiera O’Brien, charts editor at The Bookseller, welcomes the growth. “It really does seem to be a re-discovered/newfound love of reading driving sales across the board. Fiction rising 20% against 2019 (for the non-lockdown weeks of 2021) is really incredible, given how sluggish fiction sales have been previously,” she said. “Of course, Osman brought in nearly £12m in the non-lockdown weeks alone, but both Hamnet and Shuggie Bain hitting the year’s top 20 bestseller list shows literary fiction is rising (and perhaps the nation’s desire to support their local indie too). “ The Top 10 bestselling books of 2021 The Thursday Murder Club by Richard Osman (Penguin £8.99) The Boy, The Mole, The Fox and the Horse by Charlie Mackesy (Ebury £16.99) The Midnight Library by Matt Haig (Canongate £8.99) The Man Who Died Twice by Richard Osman (Penguin £18.99) Pinch of Nom: Quick and Easy by Kay Featherstone and Kate Allinson (Pan Macmillan £20) Guinness World Records 2022 (Guinness World Records £20) And Away … by Bob Mortimer (Simon &amp; Schuster £20) Megamonster by David Walliams (HarperCollins £14.99) Windswept and Interesting by Billy Connolly (John Murray Press £25) Where the Crawdads Sing by Delia Owens (Little, Brown £8.99) Figures provided by Nielsen BookScan.Restrictions on large outdoor events in Scotland will be lifted from next Monday, Nicola Sturgeon has confirmed, as she told Holyrood that the latest Covid infection data indicated “we may be starting to turn a corner”. But Sturgeon also warned MSPs that while the country was on a path to Covid becoming endemic, “that is not a shift that any government can just declare or wish into being”. She said the latest revelations about Downing Street’s “serial” rule-breaking were “deeply angering and upsetting” to people who had made significant personal sacrifices to follow government guidance. Before the statement Holyrood’s presiding officer, Alison Johnstone, issued a strong rebuke to the first minister after a draft of her weekly Covid update was reported by some media outlets, describing the leak as “extremely disappointing and disrespectful to this parliament and its elected members”. Sturgeon assured Johnstone there would be an inquiry into the origin of the leak. Ending the limit of 500 people at outdoor events that has been in place since Boxing Day will mean that football fans can return to stadiums when the Scottish Premiership’s winter break ends next week, and that Scotland’s Six Nations rugby matches can be played in front of crowds at Murrayfield next month. The relaxation came as the Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, resisted pressure for large crowds to be allowed back into football and rugby grounds, saying restrictions – which include a limit of 50 people meeting at outdoor events – remained necessary while the country was still “in the teeth of the Omicron storm”. At first minister’s questions on Tuesday, Drakeford said: “We have the latest modelling – it shows that the peak of the wave is yet to be reached in Wales, we may be 10 days away form the peak. Every week we take advice from the chief medical officer and others. When they tell us it is safe to lift restrictions, we are eager to do that. We are not in that situation yet”. Sturgeon told MSPs that in Scotland a combination of the “protective measures introduced before Christmas, responsible action on the part of the general public, and the rapid delivery of booster vaccines has had a positive impact”. She said she hoped to lift other restrictions in the coming weeks, including limits on attendances at live public events, the requirement for distancing between groups in public indoor places and the requirement for table service in hospitality venues serving alcohol. She said her cabinet would continue to consider the possibility of extending the requirement for Covid passports, which are currently needed for nightclub entry, to other venues. She stressed that government advice remained to wear face masks on public transport and in shops and hospitality settings, to work from home where possible, to avoid social contact with other households and to limit the number of households meeting indoors to three. Sturgeon also announced £5m in capital funding to improve ventilation in schools and nurseries, following updated guidance that included the use of air cleaning devices. She said her government would publish a revised strategic framework “within the next few weeks” on living with the virus longer term. “We know that we cannot continually rely on restrictive measures to manage the virus. But equally we cannot be indifferent to the continued risks the virus poses to health and wellbeing. So we need to consider what adaptations we can make to manage these risks in a way that is much less disruptive to our lives and much less of a daily presence in our minds,” the first minister said. Asked about the impact of the latest reports about UK government rule-breaking on Scotland’s public health messages, Sturgeon said that “people across the country are aghast at the revelations about Downing Street’s conduct”. “It appears not just one isolated breach but serial breaches of guidance that people were following through painful sacrifices through this pandemic and a prime minister who apparently is not being truthful about his knowledge of these matters. I don’t think it will surprise anybody to hear my view that the office of prime minister would be greatly enhanced by Boris Johnson’s departure from it. But more importantly, I think at this moment in time, the interests of the United Kingdom would be enhanced by that as well,” she said.The Biden administration is creating a new unit in the justice department to counter domestic terrorism following the deadly US Capitol attack by supporters of Donald Trump, a senior official said on Tuesday. “We face an elevated threat from domestic violent extremists,” Matthew Olsen, assistant attorney general of the national security division, told a hearing held by the Senate judiciary committee. Olsen was testifying days after the US observed the first anniversary of the violent attack on Congress, in which Trump supporters sought to stop certification of Joe Biden’s election victory. Olsen said the number of FBI investigations into suspected domestic violent extremists had more than doubled since the spring of 2020. In November, a top FBI official told Congress the bureau was conducting around 2,700 investigations related to domestic violent extremism. Olsen defined such extremists as “individuals in the United States who seek to commit violent criminal acts in furtherance of domestic social or political goals”. “Domestic violent extremists are often motivated by a mix of ideologies and personal grievances,” he said. “We have seen a growing threat from those who are motivated by racial animus, as well as those who ascribe to extremist anti-government and anti-authority ideologies.” The attorney general, Merrick Garland, told lawmakers last May domestic violent extremist groups, particularly white supremacists, posed a growing threat to the US. The DoJ national security division has a counter-terrorism section. Olsen told the committee he decided to create a specialised domestic terrorism unit “to augment our existing approach”. Olsen said the new unit will be housed within the national security division and will work to “ensure that these cases are properly handled and effectively coordinated” across the department and around the country. Five people died around the Capitol attack and more than 100 police officers were hurt. The DoJ has brought criminal charges against more than 725 participants. Some of the defendants are members or associated with far-right groups or militia including the Proud Boys, the Oath Keepers and the Three Percenters.The Wellcome Trust, Britain’s biggest charity, is ramping up spending on science research to £16bn over the next 10 years, with a focus on funding next-generation Covid vaccines, after it reaped the highest investment returns in a quarter of a century. Wellcome said it was making its biggest funding commitment to science and health in its 85-year history. It was created by the will of the pharmaceuticals entrepreneur Sir Henry Wellcome in 1936. The £16bn promise comes after it spent more than £9bn on research grants and other charitable activities over the past decade, including £1.2bn last year alone. The trust made a 34.5% return in the year to 30 September on its investment portfolio, which is now worth £38.2bn, about £10bn more than a year ago. This is its best performance since it was created in its present form as an independent charitable foundation in 1995, when Wellcome plc was sold off to the drugmaker Glaxo, which later became GlaxoSmithKline. One of Wellcome’s top investment picks was DoorDash, a US-based food delivery business, which doubled in price since its stock market flotation in December, generating a profit of more than £1bn for Wellcome, an early investor. Sir Jeremy Farrar, the director of Wellcome and a former member of the government’s Sage advisory committee, hailed a “phenomenal year,” and said the investment returns marked “a step-change in Wellcome’s ability to fund and support new discoveries in science and health, and help solve three of the great challenges of the 21st century: climate change and its impact on health, existential infectious diseases, Covid is the best example recently, and mental health, particularly of young people”. Farrar said some of the money would go towards funding second- and third-generation Covid vaccines as part of Wellcome’s infectious diseases programme, as the virus becomes endemic. “The vaccines have saved hundreds of thousands, if not millions of lives, but they’re not perfect,” he said. Second-generation vaccines that work against Omicron are around the corner, from Pfizer/BioNTech and others, but he stressed the importance of developing third-generation vaccines that might stop transmission over the next few years. “Covid is not going to go away. It’s with humanity for a very long time, probably for ever,” he said. “As long as transmission goes on at the level it is at the moment, the risk of new variants is higher. What we need to do is have a vaccine that can be stored at room temperature, gives you long-lasting, multi-year protection, prevents transmission and stops you getting sick… There’s no doubt that beyond Covid other coronaviruses remain a risk.” Farrar said while 2021 had been “awful” in terms of the fair distribution of vaccine supplies around the world, he was much more optimistic about this year, as global manufacturing capacity is being ramped up to 20bn doses. He said it should be possible, by June, to achieve the World Health Organization’s target of vaccinating 70% of the world’s population. At the moment, 50% is fully vaccinated. The trust’s annual report showed that pay packets surged at its investment team after the record returns. Nick Moakes, the chief investment officer, was awarded £7.9m last year while Peter Pereira Gray, the chief executive of the investment division, received a £7.8m package, making them the highest-paid charity workers in the UK. The packages include long-term bonuses that have not been paid yet. The previous year, they were awarded £4.6m and £4.5m, respectively. Farrar said the pay packages were considerably less than what it would pay outside investment managers, adding that they should be seen in the context of the big university endowment funds in the US. In comparison, Farrar was paid £515,216 last year, up from £483,788 in 2020. Wellcome said it would spend more on cross-sector collaborations such as the public-private Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness (CEPI), co-founded by Wellcome in 2017, which has brought together various parties to develop and fairly distribute Covid-19 vaccines. Wellcome also helped fund the Covid vaccine developed by Oxford University and AstraZeneca. As part of its £150m commitment to fight the pandemic, the charity has supported genomics researchers to keep up with the virus. The Wellcome Sanger Institute was at one point responsible for half of the world’s Covid-19 sequencing.I loved the photo essay (10 January) on Svalbard church in Longyearbyen. But it’s not the world’s most northerly parish. That honour goes to a church in the diocese of the Arctic: Grise Fiord, Nunavut, Canada at 82N. Longyearbyen is only at 78N. The church alas was destroyed by fire in 2018, but here it is pre-fire. Anne Willis Bradford-on-Avon, Wiltshire • In 1946, my father received a letter addressed to “Professor Marrow, Croxley Green, near London”. It had been dictated by a lady newly released from Belsen concentration camp, whose son we had been looking after. The message inside simply read: “I live and am well, Amelie” (Letters, 9 January). Bridget Marrow Pinner, London • My mother, now 83, still remembers the letter she got as a young woman addressed to “The beautiful Clare, Cavendish Square”. Louisa Killpack Newport, Isle of Wight • Philip Clarke (Letters, 7 January) reminds me of what we used to call the Midland General B6 bus from Ilkeston to Mansfield, because of the many times the driver had to stop and let me out to “be sick”. Penny Aldred London • Recent correspondence (Letters, 7 January) about the art of using science reminded me of a statement by Yogi Berra: “In theory there is no difference between theory and practice. In practice there is.” Hal Dunkelman Cote, Oxfordshire • Scrolling or eating Haribo (9 January)? I hadn’t realised that they were alternatives. Pete Bibby Sheffield • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The title of your article (England’s farmers to be paid to rewild land, 6 January) is misleading. George Eustice and the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs are planning to pay landowners (mostly not farmers) to rewild land. That is, pay huge sums of public money to extremely rich individuals to do almost nothing. Wealthy businessmen have bought agricultural land to avoid tax, to benefit from its exemption from inheritance tax. They will now be paid to evict tenant farmers and stop food production on that land. Can this be justified by the positive impact on the environment? No. When the UK produces less food, we don’t consume any less, we buy it from abroad. Our farming has the highest environmental standards in the world. So importing food, rather than producing it in the UK, means increasing environmental damage. We need to produce food through carbon neutral and sustainable means. That can be achieved by paying farmers to farm in the right way, not by paying landowners to terminate food production. Hugh Padfield Dairy farmer, Kelston, Somerset • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.There is a slave trade memorial in Lancaster (Letters, 2 January). It is Kevin Dalton-Johnson’s Captured Africans, unveiled in 2005. Rather than erect another slavery memorial in London or Liverpool, maybe we need lots of small local reminders like Germany’s Stolpersteine (stumbling stones), which commemorate victims of the Holocaust. The influence of the slave trade was so pervasive, yet largely unknown to many. Small reminders could be outside, for example, Harewood House in West Yorkshire (Lascelles family’s sugar plantations), Dent churchyard in Cumbria (graves of the notorious Sill slaver family), or the site of the Royal African Company’s headquarters in London. A single memorial, especially in London, conceals the extent and depth of the slave trade’s continuing influence. Aidan Turner-Bishop Preston • In the early 1970s, when I lived in Clifton, the Georgian district of Bristol, I was taken to the basement of a friend’s house where there were manacles on the wall which he said were used to hold in-transit slaves. Robert Tilleard Salisbury, Wiltshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.In his piece (Working from home has entrenched inequality – how can we use it to improve lives instead?, 9 January), John Harris rather glosses over one of the most vital aspects of having a collective workspace: the importance of social interaction and discourse, for our wellbeing as social animals. The creeping takeover of our lives by electronic technology already signifies an increasing alienation from our fellow human beings, not only in the workplace but in so many other areas of our lives. Only a few days ago, there was an article about new supermarkets where we have no interaction with people at all; we simply take goods off the shelves and walk out. For many, the workplace is vital for meeting people outside our family circles, a place where we can exchange ideas about work and life in general, banter and form close relationships. All that is threatened by home working. Capitalism will always have a tendency to exploit and, in essence, would prefer robots rather than flesh-and-blood human beings. We have to strongly resist that tendency. John Green London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.For a country without a written constitution, the UK was fortunate in having the authoritative and industrious Anthony Bradley among its leading constitutional experts. His work, spanning seven decades, shone a clear light on the sometimes ill-defined legal framework that underpins the modern state and expanded public scrutiny of government powers. Bradley, who has died aged 87 of pulmonary fibrosis, was principal author of the standard textbook on constitutional law, served on the influential House of Lords constitution committee and taught a generation of judges at the universities of Edinburgh and Cambridge. In his mid 70s, having embarked on a second career as a barrister, he presented arguments to the law lords on behalf of exiled Chagos Islanders who are still unable to return to their homes on the Indian Ocean archipelago. One of his most innovative cases involved a courtroom battle in the early 90s against the home secretary, Kenneth Baker, over the deportation of a teacher to what was then Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of Congo) who was still pursuing an asylum claim in the UK. The House of Lords eventually found that the home secretary and his officials were in contempt of court by unlawfully removing the teacher, establishing the principle that ministers are subject to court orders and enforcement proceedings can be brought against them. The lawyer and former appeal court judge Stephen Sedley, who worked on early stages of the case with Bradley, described him as “a living resource with his compendious – though never flaunted – knowledge of constitutional and public law”, adding that “the quiet genius behind it all was Tony”. One distinguished legal commentator, HWR Wade, described the judgment as the most important legal decision in 200 years. Bradley’s international renown was such that he was involved in drafting new constitutions for Montenegro, Palestine and even the amalgamated trade union Unison. Liberal Democrat and pro-EU in political sympathies, his writings were nonetheless quoted widely in parliament by a range of MPs, including the Eurosceptic Bill Cash. Anthony was born in Dover, Kent, where his parents, Olive (nee Bonsey) and David Bradley, ran a dyeing and dry-cleaning business. At Dover grammar school he was known as “Prof” due to his love of studying. He lived up to his nickname. After national service with the Royal Army Education Corps, Bradley won a scholarship to study law at Emmanuel College, Cambridge. He graduated with a starred first in 1958. Completing his training as a solicitor with the town clerk’s department in Reading, he secured another prize in his qualifying exams. Music was an abiding passion and it was at a Bach choir in Reading that he met Kathleen Bryce, a nurse who later became a health visitor. They married in 1959. Bradley returned to Cambridge University the following year as a law lecturer, taking time out to help establish a law faculty at the University of Dar es Salaam in Tanzania. At the age of 34 he was appointed, in 1968, professor of constitutional and administrative law at Edinburgh University. In 1965 he had begun editing Constitutional Law, a reference work first published in the 30s and already in its seventh edition. At Edinburgh in 1977, he relaunched it as Constitutional and Administrative Law; it became crucial reading for law students and is cited widely in UK court cases and foreign jurisdictions. Bradley continued working on updates until 2014. Highly organised, Bradley was also known for his kindness and charm, and the encouragement he gave to others. His daughter, Charlotte, recalled Christmases during which foreign students who had no homes in the UK would share family festivities. He hosted parties and liked to play the viola. His musical tastes were not limited to the classical; he was a fan of the band Manfred Mann. In 1989, he took early retirement from Edinburgh and joined Cloisters Chambers in London to train as a barrister; he was older than his pupil master. One of his first tasks was travelling around the country preparing compensation cases for women who had been sacked by the army when they became pregnant. His academic background and ability to see both sides of an argument may not have been ideal preparation for partisan argument, which occasionally left him bemused at the discourtesy of opponents. As well as fighting courtroom battles, Bradley gave expert evidence to parliamentary committees and commissions. One of his most important roles was as legal adviser between 2002 and 2005 to the House of Lords constitution committee, a body at the forefront of monitoring constitutional and legal developments. He was the UK ’s nominee on the Venice Commission, an advisory body to the Council of Europe, which supports development of democratic constitutions and the rule of law. Bradley was appointed an honorary QC in 2011. He continued giving lectures and writing articles for newspapers, including the Guardian. Among other roles, he was chair of Asylum Welcome, a charity that helps refugees in Oxfordshire. In 2019 he welcomed the “clinical precision” of the supreme court ruling, in the case brought by Gina Miller and his former student Joanna Cherry, which found that Boris Johnson acted unlawfully in proroguing parliament. Kathleen, their four children, Richard, Elizabeth, Lucy and Charlotte, and six grandchildren survive him • Anthony Wilfred Bradley, lawyer and academic, born 6 February 1934; died 20 December 2021Trevor Bayliss, the World Cup-winning former England head coach, has emerged as the in-house favourite to take charge of the Australian men’s team should Justin Langer’s contract not be renewed after the Ashes. The Guardian understands Bayliss is the preferred candidate to be the next head coach among the current support staff and senior players after a 12-month period that has delivered on-field success yet seen Langer’s methods questioned behind the scenes. Sourced reports of player dissatisfaction at the 51-year-old’s supposedly intense and volatile approach first surfaced after the 2-1 defeat by India last January and led to several rounds of clear-the-air talks. Cricket Australia even released a statement last August backing the head coach, who is under contract until June 2022. But while Langer’s recently stated hopes of a renewal appeared to be strengthened by Australia’s surprise victory at the T20 World Cup and the current 3-0 Ashes scoreline going into this week’s fifth Test in Hobart, Pat Cummins, the Test captain, notably declined to discuss the matter after the win in Melbourne. Cummins said: “We’ll all sit down together after this series or whenever his tenure is up. His contract is up for renewal in a few months and we’ll deal with that then.” Andrew McDonald, the popular assistant coach, is viewed by many inside Australian cricket to be a future head coach of the men’s team and has been a beneficiary of the previously hands-on Langer being forced to delegate more responsibilities to his support staff since discussions with the players. But over the course of the current Ashes series a belief has grown in the set-up that the more experienced Bayliss would serve as an ideal immediate successor to Langer given a track record of setting up relaxed, player-led environments. Bayliss, 59, remains hugely popular among the large New South Wales faction of the Australia dressing room from his two previous spells coaching the state side – most recently 2013 to 2015 – and also has strong links with its most prominent member, Cummins, through Penrith Cricket Club. Since stepping down as England head coach in 2019 – a four-year stint that returned an Ashes win in 2015 and the World Cup four years later – Bayliss has worked on the franchise T20 circuit and currently heads up Sydney Thunder in the Big Bash League. Asked about his ambitions last June, Bayliss told the Sydney Morning Herald: “The only full-time job I’d contemplate in the future if it came up would be the Australian job. But I’m very happy coaching two or three of the franchise teams around the world.” Ben Oliver, Australia’s performance director, has said a consultation process over the head coach role involving players and staff will begin after the conclusion of the Ashes, but played down suggestions of splitting the role by way of format.Labour has accused the government’s flagship national tutoring programme (NTP) of failing children and taxpayers after official figures revealed take-up rates way below target. Just 10% of this year’s target for children receiving one-to-one or small group tutoring from NTP tuition partners has been reached so far, with figures showing headteachers in England favouring their own school-led tuition programmes over the national scheme, which was controversially awarded to the Dutch multinational Randstad. The NTP progress report coincided with the latest official school attendance figures, which showed nearly 5% of state school teachers in England were absent because of Covid infections on the very first days of the spring term. The Department for Education (DfE) figures also revealed that more children stayed off school last week because of Covid than at the end of last term, with 315,000 students and pupils absent for Covid-related reasons – 3.9% of all pupils nationally and 14,000 more than on 16 December. On catchup, the DfE said pupils in England began just over 300,000 tutoring courses last term and insisted that the NTP was on track to deliver its target of 2m courses this academic year. Of those already under way, an estimated 230,000 were school-led tutoring packages, while just 52,000 were provided by the national scheme, far short of the 524,000 target for this academic year. Another strand of the national scheme, which involves tutoring through academic mentors, has so far started 20,000 courses, out of a target of 252,000. Randstad was awarded the NTP contract last June after it put in a bid substantially lower than its rivals. A separate school-led tutoring route was also set up, with schools receiving £579m directly to employ their own catchup tutors. The shadow schools minister, Stephen Morgan, said: “Covid learning loss threatens to limit the life chances of a generation of our children, yet the government’s flagship tutoring scheme has reached less than 10% of pupils targeted. A third of the way through the school year, this cut-price contract is failing children and the taxpayer.” Nick Brook, the deputy general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, added: “The government’s tutoring revolution risks stalling unless more is done to ensure that high quality easy-to-access tutoring support is available to every school, for all pupils that need it, in every single part of the country.” Robin Walker, the schools minister, said: “We know there is still work to do, but it’s hugely encouraging to see so many students from all backgrounds have been directly reached through the government’s tutoring programme and I encourage all schools to take advantage of it.” A Randstad spokesperson said: “We are really pleased to see how many pupils have already benefited from catchup tutoring through the programme this academic year. We are continuing to work closely with all of our stakeholders to ensure we deliver an ambitious and high-quality programme at pace, for schools to help their pupils whose education has been most impacted.” On attendance, the January total includes 159,000 pupils absent with confirmed cases of Covid and 102,000 with suspected cases – but it does not include those isolating after a positive PCR test result, who are defined as ill. More worryingly, the figures also show rising numbers of staff absences. Among teachers and school leaders, 4% were off on 6 January with a confirmed Covid infection, nearly double the 2.2% absent for the same reason on 16 December. Among teaching assistants and other school staff, 5% were off with a confirmed Covid infection, compared with just 1.5% on 16 December.Time to recap. Several US interest rate rises are looming this year, after Federal Reserve chief Jerome Powell pledged to take steps to prevent America’s high inflation becoming entrenched. During a Senate confirmation hearing, Powell told lawmakers that high inflation was a threat to the Federal Reserve’s employment goals. He told the Banking Committee that rates were likely to rise this year, and that the Fed could start to run down its balance sheet in 2022 as well. Powell also predicted that omicron would only have a short-term impact on the US economy and labor market. During the session, Elizabeth Warren challenged Powell over the causes of high inflation, explaining how large corporations with little competition were able to hike prices and fatten their profit margins. The cost of living across the rich countries which make up the OECD has risen at the fastest pace in 25 years, with US inflation a near 40-year high in November. The World Economic Forum has warned that the pandemic has undermined the fight against global heating, in its latest Global Risks Report. WEF also flagged that failure to act on climate change was the biggest global risk, followed by extreme weather and biodiversity loss. The Risks Report also warned that the Space race, between countries and companies, could lead to heightened global tensions. Here are all today’s main stories: European stock markets have managed to turn around after Monday’s losses. The pan-European Stoxx 600 has gained 0.85%, as stocks recovered yesterday’s selloff, The main indices all rallied, despite Jerome Powell making it clear that the Fed plans to tighten monetary policy this year. In London, the FTSE 100 index gained 46 points, or 0.6%, to 7491 points. Technology-focused investment trust Scottish Mortgage (+5%) was the top riser, followed by retailer Next (+4.5%), veterinary pharmaceuticals firm Dechra (+3.4%) and high street chain JD Sports (+2.8%). Danni Hewson, financial analyst at AJ Bell, says some investors have been picking up bargains: “Wall Street’s indices couldn’t quite make up their minds in early trading about how the day was going to play out but so far, the Fed Chair’s comments to Congress haven’t delivered any big shocks and Tuesday might just live up to its turnaround title after all. Inflation is clearly a mega issue for the new year and investors have been realigning their portfolios ready for rate rises. But yesterday’s sell off felt emotional and after a good night’s sleep some investors are already grabbing onto opportunities that have arisen, deciding that the long play might not look as different tomorrow as it did last week. Peloton, DocuSign and PayPal are among the Nasdaq’s big risers, the dip proving just too tempting for some. Jerome Powell’s comments today are consistent with a March interest rate hike, says Paul Ashworth of Capital Economics. He explains: In his Senate re-nomination hearing today, Fed Chair Jerome Powell echoed the increasingly hawkish rhetoric coming from other officials. He admitted that “supply side constraints have been very consistent and very durable” and that the Fed was “not seeing the progress... we thought we would be seeing.” Under those circumstances, he wants to try getting interest rates “to a place that is more neutral, and then perhaps tight.” Ashworth predicts that there will be four US interest rate rises this year, lifting Fed funds policy range will rise to 1.00%-1.25% by end-2022 and 2.00% to 2.25% by end-2023. Turning to the climate crisis, Powell says that climate stress tests will “very likely” be a “key tool going forward”, to ensure that top US banks are aware of the financial implications. The Fed chair says: “We are looking at climate stress tests, I think it’s very likely that climate stress scenarios, as we like to call them, will be a key tool going forward.” Those scenarios will test whether large financial institutions understand all of the risks that they’re taking, including the risks that may be inherent in their business model regarding climate change over time, Powell explained. Progressive groups have been disappointed that the Fed has not shown more leadership over climate issues, and hope that Powell can address that in his second term. The Bank of England announced climate stress tests last year. Senator Elizabeth Warren challenges Jerome Powell over the way that “concentrated corporate power” has allowed companies to lift prices, beyond simply passing on their higher costs. Warren tells the Federal Reserve chief that American families face higher prices at the grocery store and the gas pump in recent months. Turning to ‘Econ 101’, Warren argues that companies that dominate market, without much competition, can lift profits at customers’ expense - beyond just the cost of supply chain problems, unexpected demand and higher wages. Q: If you’re a corporation that has eaten up most of the competition and cornered the market, is it easier for you to raise prices on your customers and maximise profits, as you don’t need to worry about losing business. you’ve lost the discipling that the market imposes? In principle, if you’ve lost your competition and you’re a monopolist, you can raise your prices, Fed chair Powell agrees. Warren says that two out of three of the biggest publicly traded companies in the country are reporting higher profit margins than before the pandemic. That doesn’t sound like they’re just passing on costs Q: Does those increase profit margins, and higher market concentration in industry after industry, suggest that some corporations are passing on increased costs, and also charging more to fatten their profits margins? Powell replies that this could be right, or it could be “because demand is incredibly strong and they’re raising prices because they can”. That’s the point, Warren shoots back. Market concentration has allowed giant corporations to hide behind claims of increased costs to fatten their profit margins - so the consumer pays more both because of higher costs, and because the corporation. Warren insists: We can’t overlook the role that concentrated corporate power has played in creating the conditions for price-gouging. The Federal Reserve’s discussion paper on central bank digital currencies should be published in the coming weeks. Jerome Powell tells the Senate Banking Committee that the report - into whether the Fed should implement its own digital currency -- was delayed last autumn as policymakers focused on adjusting monetary policy, but it should be published in the coming weeks. He says: “The report really is ready to go. “It’s more going to be an exercise in asking questions and seeking input from the public rather than taking a lot of positions.” Flexible working is here to stay.... Powel tells the committee that Omicron will only have a “shortlived” impact on employment and economic growth . He explains that the fast-spreading Covid-19 variant may lead to a pause in hiring and growth in the near term, but the outlook could be very positive once infections have subsided. Interestingly, Jerome Powell tells Senators that inflation poses a threat to the Fed’s goal of maximum employment. Achieving full employment requires price stability, he explains -- a sign that the Fed could claim that interest rate hikes would protect the jobs market? The Fed will, in all likelihood, start to normalise policy by raising US interest rates this year, Jerome Powell tells the Senate committee -- with officials predicting three hikes in 2022, on average. He explains that the US economy doesn’t need, or want, highly accommodative monetary policy. So, the Fed could also possibly start to shrink its balance sheet later this year -- reversing some of the bond-buying stimulus it has conducted since the pandemic began, which is due to end in March. Bankrate’s Sarah Foster has the details: Inflationary pressures are likely last well into this year, says Jerome Powell -- after creating brief confusion by referring to next year (it’s 2022, sir!). Jerome Powell is being grilled about the Fed’s performance controlling inflation Q: Why did you say inflation would be transitory, and why does the US have higher inflation than other countries? Powell explains that the pandemic has created a unique set of circumstances. The Fed, like other central banks, expected inflation to drop back faster than it has done, and didn’t expect goods prices to be so strong. He points out that we’re not seeing a lot of progress resolving supply chain problems - one cause of higher inflation. Jerome Powell has been challenged to restore trust in the Federal Reserve, after it emerged that some senior officials had traded assets early in the pandemic. Last night the Fed announced that vice-chair Richard Clarida was stepping down a couple of weeks early, after it emerged he had been more active in financial markets in 2020 than he first divulged. Two other senior officials, Eric Rosengren and Robert Kaplan, who ran the Boston and Dallas Fed’s respectively, stepped down last autumn after revelations about their financial trading in 2020, when the Fed was intervening to stabilise the financial system and protect the economy. Jerome Powell also risks a joke, telling the Senate committee that his five siblings are all watching ‘or will later claim to have watched’ his testimony (an ad-lib that wasn’t in the prepared testimony). Federal Reserve chair Jerome Powell is appearing before the Senate Banking Committee for a confirmation hearing today, after being nominated for a second term by President Biden. In his prepared testimony, Powell explains that the Covid-19 virus caused the fastest and deepest downturn in the US economy on record, risking a full-scale depression. But, Congress’s stimulus packages, the Fed’s own actions, vaccines and “American resilience” cushioned the pandemic’s economic blows and sparked a historically strong recovery. Powell says: Today the economy is expanding at its fastest pace in many years, and the labor market is strong. But with that recovery comes the highest inflation rate since the early 1980s, hitting households as the cost of energy, food, goods and services rises. And Powell says the Fed will act to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched, while also supporting jobs (the Fed’s dual mandate is to deliver low unemployment and price stability). He says: We know that high inflation exacts a toll, particularly for those less able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are strongly committed to achieving our statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. We will use our tools to support the economy and a strong labor market and to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched. We can begin to see that the post-pandemic economy is likely to be different in some respects. The pursuit of our goals will need to take these differences into account. To that end, monetary policy must take a broad and forward-looking view, keeping pace with an ever-evolving economy. Fed officials have predicted that US interest rates will rise three times this year - some Wall Street banks predict they could be four hikes. Back in England, bus services in England used by hundreds of thousands of passengers are poised to be slashed when emergency Covid funding expires at the end of March, transport authorities have warned. Passenger numbers on buses have dropped sharply from 80% of pre-pandemic levels to less than 60% since the rise of the Omicron coronavirus variant and the introduction of work-from-home advice in December, leaving firms reliant on recovery grants to run services. Bus firms, which have to give six weeks’ notice to withdraw a route, are compiling lists of services to be scrapped after 31 March. Many services depend on local council subsidy in places where bus operators cannot make a profit. But authorities now do not expect to find money to maintain such routes, typically serving isolated communities or hospitals and running outside peak hours. Buses in regions whose budgets have to cover fixed-cost transit systems, such as Tyne and Wear which has the Metro, are expected to be hardest hit. The funding crisis comes amid a driver shortage, affecting buses as well as the HGV and logistics sector. About 6,700 bus drivers are needed, with roughly 10% of positions vacant, according to the bus industry group, the Confederation of Passenger Transport (CPT). Here’s the full story: Wall Street has opened slightly lower, as investors fret that US inflation will rise to a new 38-year high when December’s CPI report is released tomorrow. The S&amp;P 500 index of US stocks has dipped by 15 points, or 0.33%, while the Nasdaq composite index is down 0.2% -- a day after shares tumbled then rebounded. Energy stocks are higher, following the rise in the crude oil price today, while the weakest sectors are real estate, consumer staples, tech, industrials and materials. The jump in OECD inflation highlights the pressure on central banks to raise interest rates or dial back their economic stimulus. Walid Koudmani, market analyst at financial brokerage XTB, explains: “Figures for consumer prices in the 38 countries comprising the OECD surged to 5.8% per year in November, the highest since May 1996 with Energy prices being the main factor, rising by 27.7%. This continues to reinforce the narrative that central banks are under increasing pressure to take action in order to alleviate this extreme rate of inflation. While significant changes may take some time, investors seem to be taking these figures and the language used by central banks more seriously which has led to an increase in volatility across markets as they try to anticipate their future decisions.” Nickel prices have jumped today, highlighting the inflationary pressures in the economy. Benchmark nickel prices on the London Metal Exchange touched their highest in over seven years, with a temporary power outage at the LME also hampering trading in industrial metals. Benchmark three-month nickel was up 3.3% at $21,490 a tonne just after 1pm, its loftiest since May 2014, Reuters reports, adding: Prices for stainless steel, where most nickel supply is used, jumped as producers cut production to carry out maintenance. Output is also expected to be curbed by Spring Festival holidays and the Beijing Winter Olympics because industries have been asked to lower output during the Games. Inflation across the OECD area has hit its highest level in 25 years, as consumers across the world are hit by the cost of living squeeze. Consumer prices in the 38 richer countries which make up the OECD surged to 5.8% per year in November, the highest since May 1996. Energy prices were the primary factor, soaring by 27.7% in the OECD area in the year to November. That was a sharp jump on October’s 24.3% rate. Food price inflation in the OECD area jumped to 5.5% per year in November, up from 4.6% in October. The OECD says: Excluding food and energy, OECD year-on-year inflation rose more moderately, to 3.8%, compared with 3.5% in October, though it contributed significantly to headline inflation in a number of large economies. Inflation rose particularly sharply in the US, where the CPI index hit 6.8% in November, the highest in almost 40 years, putting pressure on the US Federal Reserve to raise interest rates several times this year. Inflation in Germany rose to 5.2%, a 29-year high -- which may have spurred new Bundesbank president Joachim Nagel to call for vigilance about eurozone inflation this morning. In the UK, CPIH (Consumer Prices Index including owner occupiers’ housing) jumped to 4.6%, which is the measure the OECD uses. The CPI index, which is targeted by the Bank of England hit 5.1%, prompting the UK’s central bank to raise interest rates last month. The OECD’s 38 members are: Austria, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States. Professional staff in the UK are set to see substantial pay rises this year, as companies bouncing back after the Omicron-slowdown fight to recruit employees or hold onto staff. The Robert Walters 2022 UK Salary Guide shows today that professional services firms are planning to increase their budget for pay raises by 10-15% this year. That’s the largest increase seen since 2008, and well ahead of UK inflation which is expected to rise over 5% in coming months. The biggest pay rises will be reserved for new starters, as firms try to recruit employees. At least 5% of the increase in payroll budgets will be reserved for existing employees in 2022, according to the recruitment firm (which reported strong results this morning). These pay raises are expected to be for workers across all seniority levels - from entry-level workers and temporary staff right through to management level and executives. Here’s are the key points from the Salary Guide: Payroll budgets to increase by +10-15% this year, the largest increase seen since 2008 New starters salaries increased by 6-15% in 2021, whilst pay for existing employees remained flat 43% of companies planning pay rise for existing employees to match wages of new starters Over a third of businesses (39%) plan to increase pay to keep up with rising inflation Excellent compensation &amp; benefits (65%), desirable bonus scheme (53%), and job security (40%) ranked most important by professionals looking for work this year Half of professionals claim they don’t ask about flexi-working in an interview as they assume “it is a given.” Chris Poole, managing director at Robert Walters UK, explains: “Wage increases above market value for in-demand hires was a recurring theme of the past year. As a result, we saw new starter salaries outstrip those of existing employees. “The consequences of this will result in ‘wage compression’ – where existing employees feel their additional experience at the company (over new starters) is no longer valued or has not grown in value over the past two years. “Looking at the year ahead we will see more companies raise the pay of their existing employees to sit in line with new starter salaries.” The Wellcome Trust, Britain’s biggest charity, is ramping up spending on science research to £16bn over the next 10 years, with a focus on funding next-generation Covid-19 vaccines, after it reaped the highest investment returns in a quarter of a century. Wellcome said it was making its biggest funding commitment to science and health in its 85-year history. It was created by the will of the pharmaceuticals entrepreneur Sir Henry Wellcome in 1936. The £16bn promise comes after it spent more than £9bn on research grants and other charitable activities over the past decade, including £1.2bn last year alone. The trust made a 34.5% return in the year to 30 September on its investment portfolio, which is now worth £38.2bn, about £10bn more than a year ago. This is its best performance since it was created in its present form as an independent charitable foundation in 1995, when Wellcome plc was sold off to the drugmaker Glaxo, which later became GlaxoSmithKline. One of Wellcome’s top investment picks was DoorDash, a US-based food delivery business, which doubled in price since its stock market flotation in December. Germany’s new central bank chief has warned that eurozone inflation could remain elevated for longer than expected. Joachim Nagel struck a hawkish tone as he was sworn in as the new Bundesbank president in Frankfurt this morning, saying the current high inflation rates are not entirely due to special, temporary effects. Nagel, who succeeds Jens Weidmann, urged his colleagues at the European Central Bank to be vigilant. Bloomberg has more details: While Nagel acknowledged that temporary factors are partly to blame for current pressures, he also called the medium-term outlook “exceptionally uncertain.” “It’s true that prices could rise less than estimated in projections,” he said. “However, I currently see a greater risk that inflation rates could remain elevated for longer than currently expected. In any case, monetary policy must be on guard.” Eurozone inflation is estimated to have hit 5% last month, the highest since the euro was introduced, driven by the surge in energy costs, and also pricier food and goods. The ECB has forecast that inflation will fall slightly below its 2% target by the end of 2022 and stand at 1.8% in 2023 and 2024. It will end its pandemic stimulus programme in March, but is pressing on with another bond purchase programme and shows no sign of lifting interest rates from their current record low of 0% soon. WEF’s Global Risks report also identifies cyberattacks as a serious threat, points out Associated Press: “We’re at the point now where cyberthreats are growing faster than our ability to effectively prevent and manage them,” said Carolina Klint, a risk management leader at Marsh, whose parent company Marsh McLennan co-authored the report with Zurich Insurance Group. Cyberattacks are becoming more aggressive and widespread, as criminals use tougher tactics to go after more vulnerable targets, the report said. Malware and ransomware attacks have boomed, while the rise of cryptocurrencies makes it easy for online criminals to hide payments they have collected. While those responding to the survey cited cybersecurity threats as a short- and medium-term risk, Klint said the report’s authors were concerned that the issue wasn’t ranked higher, suggesting it’s a “blind spot” for companies and governments. Update: WEF are right to warn about the risks of complacency from cyber risks, says Jocelyn Paulley, partner at the law firm Gowling WLG: This warning has implications for the extent to which groups containing multiple brands, business types and customer groups take a centralised and in-depth approach to preventative cyber-security measures and training. The reputational and financial fallout of not addressing this before an incident hits is evident here and the WEF’s warning embodies the fact that reacting after the event may not be enough to claw back a hard-won customer following.” Here are more details of the Global Risks report, from WEF: The burst of interest in space from countries and companies risks exacerbating global tensions, as the dangers of militarization of space rise. So warns the World Economic Forum in today’s Global Risks report, which points out that space is getting busier, with a record number of launches last year. Businesses, start-ups and research entities are driving down launch costs particularly in the Low Earth Orbit (LEO) orbits, it explains. Companies are looking to provide direct-to-consumer broadband access via space, and also examining opportunities such as “hyperspectral remote sensing” to analyse the earth, energy generation, manufacturing, mining and tourism. While early space activity was conducted or funded by the public sector, the last decade has seen growing private investment, the report points out, adding: New commercial entrants are disrupting traditional incumbents’ control in delivering satellite services, especially in internet-related communications or launch services. Some governments are encouraging private space activity to further national “territorial” claims or to foster the development of high-value jobs, especially in the zone of Low Earth Orbit (LEO) or Medium Earth Orbit (MEO), as well as enhancing their military or defence-oriented presence. This increase of space carries the risk of congestion and an increase in space junk, and a danger of collisions in a realm where dated space governance frameworks are coming under considerable pressure. The report says: A greater number and diversity of actors operating in space could generate new or exacerbate old frictions if not responsibly managed. Carolina Klint, Marsh’s Risk Management Leader for Continental Europe, says the “diversification of actors” is an exciting development, but warns that dated space governance frameworks are coming under considerable pressure: In a blogpost on today’s report, Klint explains: Growing security concerns, increased competition among global communications providers and leisure flight operators, weapons tests, the threat of harmful space debris, and nation-state pride may disrupt commercial and scientific endeavours, increase geopolitical tensions, and threaten future cooperative efforts around governance. Klint also warns the junkyard of space debris poses a threat to global communication networks and space travel. Last month, Elon Musk denied that his Starlink satellites were taking up too much room in space, after the head of the European Space Agency claimed the US billionaire was “making the rules” himself. And in late December, China accused the US of ignoring international treaty obligations and engaging in irresponsible and unsafe conduct in outer space after two near misses between the Chinese space station and Starlink satellites operated by Musk’s SpaceX company. WEF’s report also flags that national space ambitions also bring a growing risk of the militarization of space, as the current gaps in space governance make arms races even more likely. The US military created a Space Force as a separate branch of its armed services in 2019, while Japan’s Space Operations Squadron and the United Kingdom’s Space Command were both created in the last two years. Other leading armed forces also now typically include a space component—for instance, in 2021, the French Air Force became the Air and Space Force (Armée de l’Air &amp; de l’Espace). In November of 2021, an anti-satellite weapons test conducted by Russia created significant debris and threatened astronauts on the ISS. Other countries have conducted similar testing, raising the spectre of repeat occurrences from other nations, which would add considerably to the problem of space debris. A hypersonic weapons arms race also risks contributing to the militarization of space—China, Russia and the United States are all developing such weapons and each tested them in the second half of 2021. The top threats to the global outlook over the next decade are all environmental concerns, WEF’s global risk report shows. Failure to act on climate change was the biggest global risk, followed by extreme weather and biodiversity loss. Natural resource crises and human environmental damage also featured in the top 10 risks over the next 10 years, along with social cohesion erosion, livelihood crises, infectious diseases, debt crise” and geo-economic confrontations. The report explains: For the next five years, respondents again signal societal and environmental risks as the most concerning. However, over a 10-year horizon, the health of the planet dominates concerns: environmental risks are perceived to be the five most critical long-term threats to the world as well as the most potentially damaging to people and planet, with “climate action failure”, “extreme weather”, and “biodiversity loss” ranking as the top three most severe risks Scars left by the Covid-19 pandemic have deepened the global divide between rich and poor countries and will make it harder to find common cause in the fight against global heating, according to the World Economic Forum. A WEF report puts climate or environment-related threats in the top five slots in its list of the 10 long-term risks but warned a “vaccine divide” was making collaboration to limit temperature increases more difficult. In its annual global risks survey, just released, the WEF – which has postponed its annual meeting in Davos until the summer because of the rapid spread of the Omicron variant – said the mood among its members was downbeat. Only 16% of those who responded to the survey said they were optimistic about the outlook for the world, and just 11% believe the global recovery will accelerate. Most respondents envisaged the next three years to be marked by either volatility and shocks or by a widening of the gap between winners and losers. Saadia Zahidi, the WEF managing director, said: “Health and economic disruptions are compounding social cleavages. This is creating tensions at a time when collaboration within societies and among the international community will be fundamental to ensure a more even and rapid global recovery. “Global leaders must come together and adopt a coordinated multi-stakeholder approach to tackle unrelenting global challenges and build resilience ahead of the next crisis.” Heathrow airport has said at least 600,000 passengers cancelled their travel plans from the airport in December because of Omicron, warning aviation would take years to recover from the pandemic. Only 19.4 million passengers passed through the airport in 2021 – less than a quarter of 2019 levels and below even 2020, the year when the Covid-19 pandemic started in March. Heathrow said passengers cancelled their travel plans last month because of the Omicron variant and the uncertainty caused by swiftly imposed government travel restrictions. The UK’s busiest airport again urged the government to remove all testing requirements for fully vaccinated passengers and to adopt a playbook for any future variants of concern that is more predictable. Here’s the full story. Bloomberg points out that Heathrow’s long-distance passenger numbers were hit particularly hard in 2021, pulling down total passenger traffic by 12% year-on-year. The U.K. hub, the busiest in Europe in normal times, catered to 19.4 million passengers in 2021, it said Tuesday in a statement. Long-distance services were particularly hard-hit, with passenger counts falling 40% to the Asia-Pacific region, where Covid-zero policies have led to extended lockdowns. The emergence of the omicron variant and ensuing patchwork of border restrictions drove away at least 600,000 passengers in December, the airport said. While travel got a boost after the U.K. eased some curbs last week, passenger counts last year were less than one-quarter of 2019 levels and below 2020. The pound has hit its highest level against the US dollar in over two months. Sterling hit $1.3619 this morning, despite the impact of omicron on economic sectors such as travel. That’s the pound strongest level against the dollar since 4th November -- the day when the Bank of England surprised the City by not raising interest rates that day. The pound also hit its highest level since February 2020 against the euro yesterday, at almost €1.20. Rising inflation expectations have pushed the pound up recently, as traders anticipate the Bank of England could hike interest rates as soon as next month, having already lifted rates to 0.25% in December. ING’s developed markets economist James Smith says it’s a close call, as omicron will hit growth this winter. “Will the Bank of England hike rates again at the start of February? Markets think the answer is yes. We narrowly reckon the committee will wait until May, though February’s meeting is looking much more 50:50 than it did just a few weeks ago. “Partly, that’s because it looks like Omicron’s economic damage will be neither huge nor long-lasting. “True, staff shortages are a pressing issue for most firms, while the latest card spending data shows social spending fell off a cliff in late December. There’s a decent case for waiting for more data, as the committee did last November, and that’s why we’re still leaning towards a rate hike in May. A negative December and January GDP reading look likely. European stock markets have opened higher after a turbulent Monday. The UK’s FTSE 100 has gained 0.45% to 7,477 points, towards last week’s 22-month highs. The pan-European Stoxx 600 is 0.75% higher, recovering around half yesterday’s fall, with investors relieved that the New York stock market staged a late recovery last night. Oil is also stronger, with Brent crude up 1% at $81.73 per barrel Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, says: “As well as equities, oil is catching a bid on the back of firmer risk appetite after a challenging start to the year. WTI and Brent crude are both up by around 1% with the benchmarks trading around $80 a barrel. A softer US dollar is also buoying energy prices as the markets await a slew of Fed speakers this week. Amid a backdrop of improving demand fundamentals and contained supply from OPEC, the near-term outlook continues to look optimistic. However the threat of further variants or more hawkish than expected tones from the Federal Reserve may limit potential upside.” Shares in cybersecurity specialist Darktrace have surged by around a fifth this morning after it lifted its revenue and profit forecasts. Darktrace, which uses artificial intelligence algorithms to spot and neutralise cyber-attacks on companies, says it’s seen significant growth in the first half of its financial year, with stronger than expected sales. Customer numbers grew almost 40% year-on-year, to 6,531 -- typically private sector firms keen to avoid losing precious data or facing extortion threats. Cathy Graham, CFO of Darktrace, said: In December, we delivered the first module of our new Prevent product line to early adopters. This is the next logical step in fulfilling our vision of creating a Continuous AI Loop, a virtuous circle that equips customers with a suite of technologies that strengthen and reinforce each other. The power of our innovative underlying technology, Self-Learning AI, enables us to expand our ability to protect organisations from the cyber threats of today and tomorrow.” Shares have popped 18% to 465p. Darktrace’s floated on the stock market at the end of April at 250p per share, immediately surged 40%, and hit £10 in September. But it then fell back to 400p, as a lock-up on insiders selling shares ended, and analysts at Peel Hunt questioned its products’ usefulness. Recruitment firm Robert Walters has reported that business picked up at the end of last year, as firms looked to hire more staff. Net fee income jumped by 33% year-on-year in the final quarter of 2021, including a “record December performance” (suggesting Omicron didn’t have an immediate impact on hiring). Fee income in the UK rose by 7% with a shortage of candidates leading to “heightened competition for talent” in both London and the regions. Legal, commerce finance and technology sectors were particularly active, it says. Fee income surged 48% in Asia-Pacific markets, with Indonesia, Hong Kong, Singapore, mainland China, Japan and Australia all seeing strong net fee income growth. Robert Walters, the company’s chief executive, says: We are seeing candidate shortages across all locations and disciplines, a fierce competition for talent and wage inflation kicking in which together create huge opportunities across the recruitment market. Following a strong quarter including a record December, trading is now comfortably ahead of current profit expectations, Walters adds. Today’s Heathrow travel stats show that hopes of a 2021 recovery have been dashed, says Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown. Mass vaccination programmes failed to have the desired effect in 2021, in bringing the rebound in travel there had been such high hopes for this time last year. The web of rules and regulations which was spun across different countries and regions and swept away, and then spun again as new variants emerged, clearly led to a drop in confidence in the travelling public. The threat of expensive hotel quarantines following a rapid rule change and the risk of being left stranded overseas if testing positive were hardly a relaxing prospect for holidaymakers wanting to get away from it all. It’s “little surprise” Heathrow Airport wants all tests for fully vaccinated passengers to be scrapped, in favour of a predictable playbook to go by, in the event of fresh variants of concern, Streeter adds. Despite hopes for pent up demand to translate into a bounce back in bookings this year, the industry looks set to face a long haul recovery ahead. Many consumers are faced with an income squeeze which is likely put to expensive holidays out of reach. Others might have splashed their piles of savings on other luxury treats instead. Among some older travellers who may still have the cash to spare, there is still a lingering fear of the new variants and they are likely to keep putting off booking that once coveted overseas trip. So summer 2022 may not be as strong as the travel sector hopes.... The spring summer season is set to get warmer for Heathrow in terms of business, but it’s unlikely to be the scorcher the travel industry, and the retail and hospitality businesses which rely on transport hubs, sorely need.’’ Britain’s retailers have said the soaring cost of living risks dragging down high street sales in 2022 after a bumper Christmas trading period and year of recovery in consumer spending. Sounding the alarm over the risks for the UK economy as whole, the British Retail Consortium said there were significant headwinds for the industry in 2022 from high inflation, rising energy bills and planned tax increases. In a joint report with the accountancy firm KPMG, the BRS said soaring living costs would erode households’ spending power and had the potential to weigh on retail sales after a strong festive season and a year of recovering ground that was lost during the first stage of the Covid-19 pandemic. According to the latest snapshot, total retail sales rose by 2.1% during the key month of December, compared with a year earlier, and were up by 4.6% compared with 2019, before the pandemic struck. Reflecting a stronger performance for the full year, as Britain’s economy recovered from repeated lockdowns, total sales grew by 9.9% compared with 2020, and by 6.6% compared with 2019. However, retail bosses said the emergence of Omicron and increasing pressure on household budgets could hit sales at the start of 2022. Helen Dickinson, chief executive of the BRC, said: “Retail faces significant headwinds in 2022, as consumer spending is held back by rising inflation, increasing energy bills, and April’s national insurance hike. “It will take continued agility and resilience if they are to battle the storm ahead, while also tackling issues from labour shortages to rising transport and logistics costs.” Omicron hit Heathrow just a few weeks after the US lifted its travel ban, which was marked by a simultaneous double take-off by British Airways and Virgin Atlantic. Despite the latest variant, Heathrow saw nearly 800,000 North America passengers in December - a 540% increase from 2020. But that’s barely half as many as in December 2019, when Heathrow handled over 1.5m North America passengers, just before Covid-19. David Edwards of Scattered Clouds, a tourism market intelligence service, tweets: Heathrow CEO John Holland-Kaye argues that the sector will only “fully recover” once the risk of Covid-19 restrictions has lifted for good. Holland-Kaye says: “There are currently travel restrictions, such as testing, on all Heathrow routes - the aviation industry will only fully recover when these are all lifted and there is no risk that they will be reimposed at short notice, a situation which is likely to be years away. While this creates enormous uncertainty for the CAA in setting a new 5-year regulatory settlement, it means the regulator must focus on an outcome that improves service, incentivises growth and maintains affordable private financing.” The Civil Aviation Authority proposed last October that Heathrow could increase charges by up to 56% by 2023 as it seeks to recoup losses from the pandemic. That’s less than Heathrow hoped, but much more than airlines argue is fair as they try to recover from Covid-19. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Heathrow Airport has warned that the aviation sector faces a “long-haul recovery”, after the omicron variant sparked a rush of cancelled flights last month. The UK’s largest airport has revealed that at least 600,000 Heathrow passengers cancelled travel plans in December, after the discovery of the Omicron variant led to travel restrictions to be imposed. For 2021 as a whole, Heathrow says it only saw 19.4 million passengers - less than one quarter of 2019, before the pandemic, when it handled 80.9m. That’s also around 12% less than in 2020 (when it handled 22.1m passengers). And the outlook looks uncertain, Heathrow warns, as it urges ministers to drop Covid-19 testing for fully vaccinated passengers to encourage travel. It says: There is significant doubt over the speed at which demand will recover. IATA forecasts suggest passenger numbers will not reach pre-pandemic levels until 2025, provided travel restrictions are removed at both ends of a route and passengers have confidence they will not return rapidly We are urging the UK government to remove all testing now for fully vaccinated passengers and to adopt a playbook for any future Variants of Concern that is more predictable, limits additional measures only to passengers from high-risk destinations and allows quarantine at home instead of in a hotel Also coming up today European markets are set to open higher, after worries about possible US interest rate rises hit stocks on Monday. Wall Street managed a late recovery last night, after the Nasdaq Composite index dipped into correction territory (10% off its record high), ahead of Wednesday’s US inflation report. Asia-Pacific stocks have dropped today though, with Australia’s S&amp;P/ASX down 0.8%. Kyle Rodda of IG explains: Stocks have remained on the backfoot today, with sentiment across the ASX200 particularly weak. Global pressures stemming from heightened volatility on Wall Street and fears about tighter global monetary policy are probably behind some of that, as is a market discounting marginally weaker profits from what’s shaping as a fairly material hit to the Australian economy from the current COVID-19 outbreak. Investors will be keen to hear from Federal Reserve chair Jerome Powell today, when he appears before the Senate banking committee for a confirmation hearing. Powell, who has been nominated for a second term, will be questioned about the Fed’s plan to control rising prices, and its recent hawkish twist. In testimony released overnight, Powell says the central bank is prepared to take action to ensure elevated inflation does not become entrenched, while also pointing out that the post-pandemic economy may look different than before. The agenda 9.30am GMT: World Economic Forum publishes Global Risks Report 2022. 9.30am GMT: UK labour productivity statistics for Q3 2021 11am GMT: NFIB index of US business optimism 3pm GMT: US Federal Reserve chair Jerome Powell’s confirmation hearing at the Senate banking committeeThe government’s climate agenda is under threat as Boris Johnson’s popularity slumps, according to green campaigners who work closely with the Conservative party. As the prime minister faces further lockdown party allegations, and angry Conservative MPs seek answers over energy price rises and the cost of living crisis, analysts fear the government’s commitment to net zero is facing its most severe test yet. Tom Burke, a co-founder of the E3G green thinktank and a veteran government adviser, said: “Johnson has been the standard bearer for net zero, and lots of people were happy about that. There is now a sustained assault from the right on net zero. They see the prime minister’s political weakness, and they see net zero as a flank on which to attack him.” Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, is meeting backbench Tory MPs this week to calm fears that the squeeze on incomes caused by rising inflation and soaring gas prices will turn away voters, particularly in “red wall” seats in the north of England. He is under pressure from vocal quarters to abandon green measures such as carbon levies, which play a small role in energy bills. Although experts have criticised the government’s net zero plans as falling woefully short on ambition and funding, Johnson is still seen as more engaged with the climate crisis than any of his Tory rivals and has made net zero a personal crusade, with a 10-point plan to “build back greener”, published after the first Covid lockdown. He is influenced by close advisers and allies including his wife, Carrie Johnson, who works for a conservation charity, and his father, Stanley, a prominent “green Tory”, as well as friends such as Zac Goldsmith, the former owner of the Ecologist magazine, whom Johnson appointed as a minister in the Lords. Chris Venables, the head of politics at the Green Alliance thinktank, said: “There is definite jeopardy in Boris Johnson’s weakness, as he has been the champion. But the forces of good are now rallying behind the green agenda. It does help that the facts are on our side.” Johnson’s main rivals in the cabinet – Sunak and the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who are both seen as leadership contenders – have been particularly notable in distancing themselves from net zero efforts. Megan Randles, a political campaigner at Greenpeace, said: “This year there have been more missed opportunities than bold measures by Sunak and Truss. Sunak didn’t mention the climate once in his party conference speech; his spending review failed to kickstart a green recovery, and he is reported to have curbed Johnson’s climate ambitions and hindered Cop26. Truss actively undermined climate action in the Australia trade deal.” On the Tory backbenches, a small but vocal group – the “net zero scrutiny group” – of about 20 MPs has been courting media attention by blaming gas prices on green measures that they say should be scrapped. Analysts and experts have pointed out that the UK’s overreliance on fossil fuels carries most of the blame, and that insulating homes and investing in green energy at home would alleviate the problem. Bob Ward, the policy director at the Grantham Institute for Climate Change at the London School of Economics, warned of attempts to undermine public support for climate action. “The growing crisis around energy prices threatens to delay implementation of the policies necessary to make the net zero target credible,” he said. “There is a small but noisy group of Conservative MPs, whose voices are being amplified by the usual suspects in parts of the media, who are attempting to mislead the public about the roots of the current crisis, blaming green energy policies rather than the true cause: wholesale prices of natural gas.” Alok Sharma, the cabinet minister who oversaw Cop26, also aimed a coded warning at his party in an interview with the Guardian late last year. He said delivering on the UK’s net zero target must be a “focus across the whole of the UK government” or the achievements of the Cop26 climate summit would be “just a bunch of meaningless promises”. Chris Skidmore, a former energy minister, is also rallying Tory backbenchers to support net zero under the banner of the “net zero support group”. Shaun Spiers, the executive director of Green Alliance, noted: “Fortunately, a few eccentrics aside, the Conservative party is committed to climate action. Business-friendly Tories are pushing for more ambition, while MPs across the country are demanding and celebrating green investment in their constituencies. Net zero and nature are increasingly at the heart of the party, and Boris Johnson can take some credit for that.” Any change of direction to reduce emphasis on tackling the climate crisis could also play badly with voters, who back climate action, argue campaigners. Dave Timms, the head of political affairs at Friends of the Earth, said: “Deep concern about the climate crisis now reaches every part of British society, so the public mandate for the radical action to slash UK emissions is there. The words on every minister’s lips should be delivery, delivery, delivery.”Two army instructors have been cleared of calling a trainee soldier “Paki Rambo” and suggesting his father was a suicide bomber. Cpl Robert Mehers and Sgt Christopher Tolley were accused of racially abusing Rifleman Kasem Salem, who is a Muslim and originally from Egypt, while he undertook basic training at the infantry training centre in Catterick, North Yorkshire. Mehers was said to have called Salem “Paki Rambo” – a nickname used in the satirical film Four Lions, about a group of inept jihadists – and “carpet rider”, a court martial was told. The court also heard that Tolley allegedly learned the Arabic for: “Your mother’s a whore” so he could insult Salem in his first language. Tolley was alleged to have told Salem his father was not allowed to attend a parade because he might be a suicide bomber and “his car might have a bomb in it”. Salem, 20, told the court in Bulford, Wiltshire, he moved to the UK keen to follow his father into the military but felt “marginalised” by the alleged comments. He started his training in April 2019 with 5 Rifles. Salem said: “I decided to join the army because my father and his father served, so it’s a tradition. I was very open about my religion, faith and family … we talked about my beliefs and my culture.” He said the instructors were initially very understanding, making sure he had set times to pray and all his dietary requirements were fulfilled. But he claimed the racial abuse began and he felt singled out because of his religion and upbringing. But Tolley’s barrister, Ed Wylde, told the hearing Salem referred to himself as “Paki Rambo” after he and fellow recruits watched the Chris Morris satire Four Lions, in which one of the characters uses the phrase. Wylde said he even ran around the accommodation block “pretending to be a terrorist” and used “Allahu Akbar” – “God is greatest” – as his “rallying cry” when attacking training dummies during a bayonet exercise. Tolley and Mehers were both charged with ill treatment of a subordinate but Tolley was found not guilty after Salem’s evidence and Wylde’s submissions. Mehers, who also denied the charge, told the court he had not used any of the words or phrases Salem had alleged but said the recruit had himself used the phrase “Paki Rambo” and “took it as a point of pride”. He was also cleared. Another recruit, Rifleman Jake Chattell, said Salem had never been racially abused by any of the instructors. Chattell said: “He used to call himself two nicknames. One of them was “sand dancer” that he had written on his door in camp … he also used to call himself “Paki Rambo”. “He used to find it hilarious … he used to say it all the time, he said it was funny and part of the banter.” Chattell claimed Salem had contacted him last year to say he was withdrawing a complaint against ITC Catterick because he had felt “pressured” to make the allegations by other people.One of the world’s leading makers of pressure washers and steam cleaners has formally asked French politicians not to use its name to score political points. Kärcher, a German family-owned company, issued a statement on Tuesday objecting to rightwing presidential candidate Valérie Pécresse taking its brand in vain. It is the latest of several similar complaints it has issued in recent years. Last week, Pécresse, the candidate for the mainstream opposition conservative party Les Républicains (LR), said it was time to “get the Kärcher out of the cellar again” to sweep drug dealers and criminals out from the country’s city suburbs. She repeated the comment to French radio, television and newspapers. Pécresse was echoing her predecessor Nicolas Sarkozy who caused a stir in 2005 when, as the Interior Minister, he said he planned to use the company’s pressure cleaner to wash the louts out of the Paris banlieues. Sarkozy had visited La Courneuve after the death of an 11-year-old boy who was killed in front of an apartment block when he was caught in the crossfire of a battle between two gangs. Le Monde reported he said he would “nettoyer au Kärcher” (clean with a Kärcher) the district of 4,000 in a private meeting with the victim’s family. This was not captured on film, but 10 days later he justified what he had said. “The term ‘to clean with a Kärcher’ is the right term because we have to clean up,” he told local youngsters. Contrary to the received wisdom that there is no such thing as bad publicity, Kärcher’s French division said Pécresse’s comments were “misplaced”, “inappropriate” and damaging to the brand. “Kärcher asks political figures and the media to immediately cease all use of its name in the political sphere. This is damaging to the brand and to the values of the company,” it said in a statement. “The Kärcher brand is not the ‘banner’ of any political party … the Kärcher group has been fighting for years to ensure that its brand is not exploited in the French political scene, where it has no place, and is opposed to it being associated with any political party or ideology.” It added that contrary to being good publicity, it was “harmful because it associates Kärcher products with violence and insecurity”. The company said it is “dedicated to cleaning” and noted it had just begun cleaning the Luxor Obelisk at Place de la Concorde – the oldest monument in Paris – in partnership with the ministry of culture. The Germany company has repeatedly asked French politicians to stop taking its name in vain. In 2016 it sent a recorded delivery letter to all 19 presidential candidates asking them not to do so and sent a reminder last August. Pécresse is under pressure after it was reported that the ultra-right candidate Éric Zemmour is having difficulty collecting the 500 signatures from mayors and other elected officials needed to support his presidential candidature. Polls suggest Pécresse stands more change of getting into the run-off of the two-part election in April if the far-right vote is split between Zemmour and the Rassemblement Nationale’s Marine Le Pen. Another blow for the LR candidate was the defection of the party’s former number two, Guillaume Peltier, to Zemmour’s team. Peltier said he had “no confidence” in Pécresse. The latest opinion poll suggests support for Macron, who has yet to declare his candidature, remains stable at about 25%, with Le Pen behind at 17%, followed by Pécresse at 16% and Zemmour at 12%. The Socialist Party candidate Anne Hidalgo is trailing with 4%.It used to be “follow the money”, but nowadays it’s follow the emails (Leaked email about drinks event at No 10 explodes Johnson’s defences, 10 January). For Partygate, like Watergate, the cynical deceit of the cover-up matches the arrogant stupidity of the initial offence. A hundred people got invitations to the “bring your own booze” party, but until now none thought to make this public. They stayed silent even when, responding to the press conference mockery, Boris Johnson did his Captain Renault impersonation, pretending to be “shocked” that any of his staff made light of lockdown restrictions. Presumably it will have to be a limousine rather than a Nixonian helicopter, but one lives in hope of a similar outcome. Dr Colin J Smith West Kirby, Wirral • Is it my imagination that during the pandemic Boris Johnson has attended more unlawful gatherings than he has Cobra meetings? Is he seeking to rebrand his party as the Conservative party party party? David Caleb Ealing, London • Cut the PM some slack. He probably went to so many parties that he genuinely can’t remember whether he was at this one or not. Dave Hanson Hull • I see that the Daily Express’s front-page headline on Tuesday was “Enough Boris!”. Normally I would complain pedantically about the missing comma, but this time I have to say they’ve got it dead right. Mark Miller Kendal, Cumbria • Thanks to Muriel and Christopher Nankivell (Letters 10 January) for inspiring me to henceforth label homemade sliced bread for the freezer as “Johnson’s toast”. Dennis Clegg Maidstone, Kent • I’m intrigued that the Metropolitan police have previously said that they cannot act retrospectively on learning of various lockdown rule infringements perpetrated by Boris Johnson and his colleagues (20 May 2020: what was UK doing while No 10 aide organised a party?, 10 January). Arguably, 10 and 11 Downing Street are among the most heavily guarded spaces in the country; certainly uniformed police are always evident outside, with who knows how many other officers on duty inside. Surely those police on duty during the party on 20 May 2020 (and, indeed, at all other alleged parties too) had the power to insist revellers leave forthwith and levy a fine on the party organisers? I’d be interested in these officers’ recollections of said events and the actions they took, including who they reported the issues to, as well as any email evidence from their superiors that may explain exactly what led to them so conveniently failing to tackle a breach of the law happening right under their noses. Lynne Hammond Mundesley, Norfolk • Hard work justifies a party, according to the Tory MP Michael Fabricant. Does anyone in government understand the concept of hard work? NHS staff have apparently managed to get through the pandemic without illegal parties. They’re probably too exhausted. The numerous leaks about partying in No 10 during lockdowns suggests that it is endemic – if they can’t curtail it during lockdowns, what is going on the rest of the time? Sue Edwards Sidmouth, Devon • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Boris Johnson could one day regret the appointment of Sue Gray as head of a potentially explosive inquiry into suspected Downing Street parties during lockdown. The senior civil servant has a reputation for vigorous internal investigations – ones that her more career-minded peers decline to touch. Their conclusions have, on occasion, prompted the sackings of ministers and mandarins. The inquiry, which was launched last month by the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, was primarily asked to look into claims that staff at No 10 held a party on 18 December 2020, when London was subject to severe restrictions. It will now also include the “bring your own booze” event on 20 May that year and a gathering with wine and cheese in the same Downing Street garden five days earlier, pictured by the Guardian. Gray’s appointment came amid a panicky atmosphere in Downing Street, insiders claim. Case stood down in mid-December after allegations emerged of a drinks event taking place within his own office. On the same day, Gray agreed to replace him. She is understood to have studied Case’s work on the inquiry and decided to conduct her own interviews. She has contacted several former members of staff for evidence. Insiders point out that Johnson will still have to sign off the inquiry before it is released to the public and could request “clarifications”. This could delay its publication – it took six months to publish the damning report into bullying allegations against Priti Patel. One admirer of Gray’s work said she would not stand for delays or attempts to influence her inquiry. “The biggest mistake they have made if they want to cover anything up is to appoint Sue Gray because she will investigate the claims and point the blame at those responsible,” the informed source said. Gray began a career as a civil servant in the 1970s, according to reports. After marrying a country and western singer from Northern Ireland, Bill Conlon, she took a career break in the 1980s to run the Cove Bar outside Newry, County Down, close to the border with Ireland. “I loved it, loved it at the time, I’d never do it again,” she told the BBC in May. She was lured back to London to work in the Cabinet Office under Gordon Brown and Tony Blair. She was a “fixer”, according to one former Blair adviser, someone who worked in the shadows to vet potential peerages and smooth over problems. Brown wrote in his memoir: “Like Tony before me and two prime ministers since, I was able to draw on the support of Sue Gray, a senior official in the Cabinet Office, who was always there with wise advice when – as all too regularly happened – mini-crises and crises befell.” She was given a higher profile role in Whitehall under David Cameron. According to the then chancellor, George Osborne, she made an impression on the new government on its first day in office in 2010. “Thirty minutes after the Labour team had left, everyone was fawning at David Cameron,” the former chancellor wrote in a tweet. “Then someone spoke out: ‘I’m sorry PM but you can’t do that.’ ‘Who’s that?’ I asked. Sue Gray.” Gray was appointed as the director general of the propriety and ethics team in 2012. Under Theresa May, she ran an investigation into the then prime minister’s close ally Damian Green. He was subsequently sacked after admitting he had lied about the presence of pornographic images on his House of Commons computer. She also oversaw the Plebgate inquiry into allegations that the then chief whip, Andrew Mitchell, had sworn at and insulted police officers on Downing Street. He stepped down from office over the affair. Gray returned to Northern Ireland to work as a senior civil servant in 2018 but was recruited back into Whitehall in the spring to work with Michael Gove on maintaining the union.Boris Johnson’s attempt to ignore questions about a No 10 party held during lockdown by urging people to wait for the outcome of the ongoing inquiry into “partygate” has failed to quell growing uproar about his conduct in his party, and in the country at large. While relatively few Tory MPs have criticised him in public, in private their mood is reportedly more unforgiving and Douglas Ross, the Scottish Conservative leader, has said that if Johnson did attend the lockdown-busting event (as witnesses say he did), while ministers were telling the public that gatherings of this kind were banned, that would be “utterly despicable”. (See 4.38pm.) Ross said Johnson must resign if he has broken the rules. Two polls suggest more than half of voters have already decided Johnson should quit. (See 3.57pm.) Michael Ellis, a junior Cabinet Office minister, spent almost 90 minutes in the Commons ducking questions about whether Johnson had attended the party, and having to listen to heartrending accounts of the anger felt by constituents who missed key moments with loved ones while No 10 staff were partying. (See 2.22pm.) There will now be intense focus on tomorrow’s PMQs, where Johnson’s performance may determine whether his MPs decide to push for his removal. The Metropolitan police have been accused of “deferring to the powerful” by not investigating Downing Street parties held in apparent breach of lockdown rules. Government MPs have voted down a Labour motion calling for VAT on household energy bills to be cut. In the past government MPs have often abstained on Labour motions they do not support, because normally opposition day motions are non-binding, but they felt obliged to vote down this one because the wording would have set aside time for the Commons to pass a bill cutting VAT. Only one Tory, Anne Marie Morris, voted with Labour. Labour has posted this on Twitter. Restrictions on large outdoor events in Scotland will be lifted from next Monday, Nicola Sturgeon has confirmed, as she told Holyrood that the latest Covid infection data indicated “we may be starting to turn a corner”. That’s all from me for today. But our coronavirus coverage continues on our global live blog. It’s here. The Conservative former minister Johnny Mercer has joined the list of Tory MPs speaking out about the No 10 party. (See 5.42pm.) He says it is “humiliating” for his party. John Caudwell, a major Tory donor, has told the BBC that Boris Johnson should “sort it out ... or step aside and let someone else sort it out so that the Tories aren’t wiped out at the next election”. And here the BBC’s Carolyn Quinn quoting a Tory MP critical of Boris Johnson who does not want to go on the record. George Grylls from the Times has got a Twitter thread starting here naming seven Tory MPs who have publicly expressed concern about the No 10 party. They are: Philip Davies, Robbie Moore, Laura Farris, Philip Dunne, Douglas Ross, Christopher Chope and Bob Blackman. Douglas Ross, the Scottish Tory leader, has said backbench Tory MPs will discuss tabling a no confidence vote in Boris Johnson with the party’s 1922 committee if he is found to have broken the law by attending the No 10 party. Speaking to STV, Ross said he was “furious” that while other Britons were unable to meet dying or hospitalised relatives “people in 10 Downing Street were enjoying the sunshine out the back of No 10 and quaffing the booze”. Ross, the Tory MP for Moray as well as an MSP, said he could no longer support the prime minister if he was found to have attended the event and then failed to resign voluntarily. Asked whether he would himself send a letter to the 1922 Committee to trigger a leadership election, Ross did not confirm he had done so but said: It doesn’t trigger an election, it triggers a vote in whether you have confidence or not. These are discussions I know that colleagues will be having in Westminster. I would not in any way support the prime minister if he broke the law and attended that party. Mass vaccination and past waves of infection mean the UK may be closer than other countries to emerging from the coronavirus pandemic and Covid becoming a more manageable disease, a leading public health expert has said. Prof David Heymann, a distinguished fellow in global public health at Chatham House and former chair of the UK Health Protection Agency, said immunity in the UK seemed to have reached a sufficient level to prevent widespread severe illness from Covid, though he stressed it was impossible to rule out more virulent variants in the future. “Probably in the UK, it’s the closest to any country of being out of the pandemic, if it isn’t already out of the pandemic, and having the disease as endemic as the other four coronaviruses,” Heymann told a Chatham House webinar today. The other coronaviruses he referred to have been around for centuries and are among the many viruses that cause common colds. He went on: Countries are now seeing population immunity build up. That means immunity against serious illness and death after one is vaccinated, or after reinfection if one has had the illness before, and that population immunity seems to be keeping the virus and its variants at bay. The Office for National Statistics estimates that about 95% of the UK population have antibodies to Covid from vaccination, infection or both. Antibodies bind to the virus and disable it before it infects cells. Another arm of the immune system deploys T cells which destroy infected cells and limit the spread of infection. Immunity is “keeping the virus at bay, and it’s now functioning more like an endemic coronavirus than one that is pandemic,” Heymann said. In fact, the people who are getting seriously ill are those who have not had previous infection or vaccination. And if you look in the intensive care units, you’ll see that unfortunately, the majority of those people are not vaccinated. But Heymann warned that we are not out of the woods. We should expect further resurgences of the virus, he said, adding that it is impossible to predict where or when new variants will emerge and how virulent and transmissible they will be. “We don’t know what’s in store for us,” he said. “It could certainly be a bumpy road.” The UK has recorded 120,821 new Covid cases, today’s government dashboard update says. That means the total number of new cases over the past week is now down, by 13.1%, on the total for the previous week. Until now the week-on-week total has been rising. But deaths are up 80.8% week on week, with another 379 recorded today. Douglas Ross, the Scottish Conservative leader, has said that Boris Johnson will have to resign if it has found that he broke lockdown regulations by attending the party in Downing Street on 20 May last year. In what is probably the most significant Tory criticism of Johnson so far, Ross – who still sits as an MP, despite also being a member of the Scottish parliament – told Sky News that Johnson should say now whether or not he attended the event, instead of dodging the question and saying it is a matter for the Sue Gray inquiry (as he has been doing). Ross said: It is not pre-judging Sue Gray’s inquiry for the prime minister to come forward and say if he was at the party or not. That’s a crucial question. It won’t in any way undermine Sue Gray’s investigation. It will let the public know, right now, if he was there or not. It’s a crucial question that shouldn’t have to wait until prime minister’s questions tomorrow. We should hear the answer right now. Ross said that, if Johnson and his staff did break the lockdown rules being followed by everyone else, such hypocrisy would be despicable. He said: I can’t understand why [the PM would not answer the question now]. If there’s nothing to hide here, if there’s no issue, then just answer the question. And if there is, then that is an acceptance that he himself breached the guidance that his government were putting in place. This is the guidance that stopped people going to family members’ funerals. It stopped people grieving together. It meant that doctors and nurses were working flat out to get this virus under control and people across the country were following some of the strictest guidance we’ve ever seen. And if the prime minister and others within No 10 breached that guidance, while earlier that afternoon a cabinet minister had told people what they were expected to do, yet out the back in No 10 people were enjoying the sunshine in the garden - I think that is utterly despicable. Asked if Johnson could stay on as prime minister if he were found to have broken the law, Ross said: No, absolutely not. This is a law that he and his government put in place. This is a law ... that constituents up and down the country have suffered as a result of. They have been fined, they have been punished, for breaking the rules that the UK government put in place. And if the UK government and the prime minister have broken those rules, then they must be punished to. Johnson is significantly more unpopular in Scotland than he is in England and in one respect distancing yourself from him is an essential survival mechanism for a Scottish Conservative leader. Ross resigned from government in May last year because he was unwilling to defend Dominic Cummings over the Barnard Castle trip, and this was a factor that bolstered his credibility when there was vacancy for the Scottish Conservative leadership. But it is not just Scottish voters who are angry about No 10 partying, and Ross’s willingness to speak out might encourage some of his parliamentary colleagues to break cover too. YouGov has also released some snap polling suggesting a majority of people (56%) think Boris Johnson should resign. YouGov’s Patrick English has just told Sky News that this is the first time in YouGov polling that more than half of people have said he should quit. That makes two polls this afternoon suggesting more than half of voters think Johnson should resign. (See 3.40pm.) YouGov also found that more than half of people say they are following partygate stories either very or fairly closely. Nicola Sturgeon says that the latest revelations about Downing Street’s “serial” rule-breaking are “deeply angering and upsetting” to people who had made significant personal sacrifices to follow government guidance. Asked at her weekly Covid statement about the impact of the latest reports on Scotland’s public health messages, Sturgeon said: People across the country are aghast at the revelations about Downing Street’s conduct. It appears not just one isolated breach but serial breaches of guidance that people were following through painful sacrifices through this pandemic, and a prime minister who apparently is not being truthful about his knowledge of these matters. I don’t think it will surprise anybody to hear my view that the office of prime minister would be greatly enhanced by Boris Johnson’s departure from it. But more importantly, I think at this moment in time, the interests of the United Kingdom would be enhanced by that as well. Savanta ComRes has released the results of a snap poll suggesting that, by a margin of almost three to one, voters do not see Boris Johnson as an asset for his party. Even among people who voted Conservative in 2019 opinion is evenly divided as to whether or not he is an asset. And two-thirds of voters (66%) think he should resign over the latest revelations, the poll suggests. This is a 12-point increase on the percentage of people saying Johnson should resign when Savanta ComRes asked the same question last month, in the light of the original partygate revelations. The poll also suggests that 77% of people think the Metropolitan police should investigate the latest revelations and and that 36% of people say they would be less likely to follow government Covid rules as a result of this story. The government has published figures that show take-up of its flagship national tutoring programme is falling woefully short of targets, putting catch-up plans for the nation’s children in doubt. Schools appear to be rejecting the government’s tuition scheme run by the Dutch multi-national Randstad in favour of their own in-house tuition provision. Just 10% of this year’s target for the Randstad-led scheme has been reached so far, while tuition provided by academic mentors - a separate strand of the NTP also run by Randstad - is at 8% of target. Last term, an estimated 230,000 school-led tutoring packages got under way to help children with the greatest learning loss. Just 52,000 were provided by the Randstad scheme, which has a target of 524,000 this academic year, plus 20,000 through the academic mentoring scheme, which has a target of 252,000. One source described the results as “scandalously poor”. Nick Brook, deputy general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, said schools had found accessing tuition support through the NTP confusing and difficult. He explained: Unfortunately, the story behind these numbers is that there are still many children that would benefit from tutoring support who are not getting it. The government’s tutoring revolution risks stalling unless more is done to ensure that high quality easy-to-access tutoring support is available to every school, for all pupils that need it, in every single part of the country. Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, added: The government’s theory behind aiming to reduce the workload on schools may have been good but its decision to use an expensive commercial partner has backfired. Schools minister Robin Walker said: “We know there is still work to do, but its hugely encouraging to see so many students from all backgrounds have been directly reached through the government’s tutoring programme and I encourage all schools to take advantage of it.” One in 12 NHS staff in Wales are off sick with Covid-19 or are self-isolating, the Welsh health minister, Eluned Morgan, has said. She said 8% were off – around 10,000 people - the highest number since April 2020 and there are more than 1,000 Covid patients in hospitals in Wales. Morgan said Wales remained in a grip of a “huge coronavirus wave” that had not yet reached its peak, despite statistics seeming to show a levelling off in the last few days. The minister also conceded a shortage of social care workers meant that 1,000 people were in hospital waiting to be discharged but could not because of a lack of support. Asked if restrictions on the number of people able to attend a sporting match may be lifted in time for the rugby Six Nations, Morgan said that “we are keen to dismantle any restrictions as soon as we possibly can” and the matter was already being discussed in cabinet. The Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, is resisting pressure for large crowds to be allowed back into football and rugby grounds. Drakeford’s Labour government has been criticised for its restrictions, which include a limit of 50 people meeting at an outdoor event. At first minister’s questions, the Tory leader, Andrew RT Davies, said Wales had become an “outlier” by maintaining such restrictions and called for a clear roadmap out. Drakeford said that Wales remained “in the teeth of the Omicron storm”, adding: We have the latest modelling - it shows that the peak of the on wave is yet to be reached in Wales, we may be 10 days away form the peak. Every week we take advice from the chief medical officer and others. When they tell us it is safe to lift restrictions, we are eager to do that. We are not in that situation yet. Restrictions on large outdoor events in Scotland will be lifted from next Monday, Nicola Sturgeon has told the Holyrood parliament, as she said that “cautious optimism” around the impact of the Omicron wave would mean a phased lifting of the limits on events and hospitality settings introduced before Christmas. My colleague Libby Brooks has the full story here. At the time of the Downing Street party, the Welsh first minster, Mark Drakeford, was living in a hut in the bottom of his garden to protect shielding relatives, Welsh Labour has pointed out The shadow Welsh secretary, Jo Stevens, said: The continuing series of revelations about parties at Downing Street have made a mockery of all those across Wales who have diligently followed the rules - often at great personal cost. Whilst Boris Johnson was attending BYOB house parties in Downing Street, Wales’ first minister, Mark Drakeford, moved out of his home to protect his shielding wife and mother-in-law. The contrast in leadership could not be clearer. Truth and integrity matters. No one is above the law. It damages trust and confidence in government if the person leading it and the people around him break the law, lie to us and laugh about it. Wales deserves so much better than Boris Johnson. The Welsh health minister, Eluned Morgan, has claimed the controversy over parties at No 10 made it impossible for Boris Johnson to bring in restrictions to counter the Omicron wave. Speaking in Cardiff, Morgan said Johnson’s authority had been so severely undermined that he could not take the advice of experts and impose the sort of stricter rules that are in force in Wales. “Clearly people are likely to be less willing to follow the example set by a prime minister who is not following his own rules,” Morgan said. She described May 2020 as “an acute time” in the crisis. She went on: I think about the sacrifices that so many people in Wales made at that time, sacrifices of not being able to say goodbye to loved ones in hospital, the sacrifices people made in not being able to leave their homes, not being able to see loved ones, not being able to reach out for the support so man people wanted at that time. To have that juxtaposed with a situation within Downing Street where a party was going on really defies belief. I do hope the prime minister will do his duty and report to the House of Commons. It is his responsibility to lead from the front and lead by example. He has failed to give very clear answers on very simple questions and I think the public deserves to know what was going on. Nearly 5% of state school teachers in England were absent because of Covid infections on the very first days of term, according to the latest official attendance figures that also reveal more children stayed off school last week because of Covid than at the end of last term. Paul Whiteman, the general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, said the official data matched the union’s reports from its members of significant levels of staff absence. “Schools are doing a brilliant job to keep things going in the face of very challenging circumstances but it is very far from business as usual. And the concern is that the situation could worsen over the coming weeks,” Whiteman said. The Department for Education figures show that on 6 January some 315,000 students and pupils were absent for Covid-related reasons - 3.9% of all pupils nationally and 14,000 more than on 16 December. The January total includes 159,000 pupils absent with confirmed cases of Covid and 102,000 with suspected cases - but it does not include those isolating after a positive PCR test result, who are defined as ill. More worryingly, the figures also show rising numbers of staff absences. Among teachers and school leaders, 4% were off on 6 January with a confirmed Covid infection, nearly double the 2.2% absent for the same reason on 16 December. Among teaching assistants and other school staff, 5% were off with a confirmed Covid infection, compared with just 1.5% on 16 December. Overall attendance in primary schools was 91%, while in secondary schools it was 85.9%. The latest figures are likely to be distorted by the beginning of term, with many secondary schools staggering their start dates in order to conduct on-site testing. However the government’s statisticians warned that a “large number of secondary schools misinterpreted” the data collection forms, and mistakenly indicated that their school was “closed due to coronavirus reasons” at the start of term. Any school that said it was closed for that reason has been excluded from the data. The Spectator dishes out numerous awards for parliamentarians every year, but they don’t have one for best defence of the indefensible. If they did, Michael Ellis would be a shoo-in. For almost 90 minutes, he batted away perfectly reasonable questions about whether Boris Johnson did attend the No 10 party on 20 May last year, where he was seen by witnesses, and almost everything else. He sounded less oleaginous and more compassionate than when he last went round this course, and from No 10’s point of view it was a job well done. From what Ellis said, we learnt almost nothing – although his disclosure near the start that, if there is a police investigation the Gray inquiry may be paused, could turn out to be significant. He said: As with all internal investigations, if evidence emerges of what was a potentially criminal offence the matter would be referred to the Metropolitan police and the Cabinet Office’s work may be paused. That could turn out to be useful delaying tactic for No 10 – albeit one that would probably involve Martin Reynolds, the PM’s principal private secretary, getting his collar felt by the Met. But often in parliament you learn more from the questions than from the answers. Three things stood out. First, whatever they feel in private, Conservative MPs are not prepared to attack Johnson over this in public. No one from the Tory benches had a go at him in the chamber, and even on Twitter the few Conservatives speaking out have mostly been longstanding critics of Johnson from the House of Lords. But, second, there was almost no attempt to defend him either. Only about two backbenchers (Maria Miller and Suzanne Webb) wholeheartedly went out to support him, and even then only on the appropriateness of debating this now. No 10 may find that silence ominous. And, third, anger about what happened is deep, visceral and unlikely to go away. Commons proceedings are normally dull, and outrage is often confected, but these exchanges – dominated by MPs relaying accounts of the betrayal felt by constituents who made terrible sacrifices because they were obeying the rules last May – were remarkably moving and compelling. Parliament is there to channel the views of the nation, and this afternoon it felt as if it were doing its job brilliantly. If Johnson thinks he can just sit this one out and hope the anger will go away, he is deluded. Stephen Flynn (SNP) says we have all seen the footage of Johnson smirking when asked about these allegations. He says Johnson has been lying about them. Ellis says that characterisation is unworthy and unfair. Rachael Maskell (Lab) says normally when someone is under investigation they are suspended. Why has the PM not been suspended? Ellis says gatherings are being investigated, not individuals. Richard Thomson (SNP) says the authority of the PM is draining away. He says he must have known about a party in his garden. Ellis says No 10 is not a normal domestic building. Jonathan Edwards (Ind) asks about constituents who could not have a proper funeral when their mother died last year. What would be an appropriate sanction if the rules have been broken. Ellis says it is not for him to say. Munira Wilson (Lib Dem) asks what Ellis would say to a constituent who could not visit her dying mother last year. Ellis says he apologises unreservedly for the upset these allegations have caused. Kerry McCarthy (Lab) says her constituents do not want to hear from Ellis. They want to hear from the PM. Ellis says Johnson will be hear for PMQs tomorrow. Alison Thewliss (SNP) asks about a constituent unable to visit a brother with learning disabilities during lockdown, while they were partying in No 10. Her brother thought his family had died. What would Ellis say to them? Ellis expresses his sympathy, and says he regrets what people have gone through. Asked for a list of the PM’s engagments on 20 May, Ellis says those are a matter of public record. Kim Johnson (Lab) asks if Ellis agrees the PM should resign. Ellis says he does not agree. He says the PM has been serving the people of this country, and has led the way through the pandemic. Martin Docherty-Hughes (SNP) says if the PM sanctioned this party in any form, that will be a fatal blow to the PM’s premiership. Chi Onwurah (Lab) says the government is a laughing stock if it won’t say where the PM was on 20 May last year. She says NHS staff in PPE were able to obey the rules. Ellis says the PM has thanked NHS staff from the bottom of his heart, including those who saved his life. Helen Hayes (Lab) asks about a constituent who died on the day the PM had cheese and wine in his garden with others, and only five days before the No 10 party. Only 10 people were allowed at the funeral, and her friends had to attend via Zoom. What can Ellis says to them? Ellis says there is nothing he can say that will ameliorate their loss. Geraint Davies (Lab) says at the time of the No 10 party people in Wales could be fined up to £1,920 for attending similar events. That shows how seriously they took matters, he says. Catherine West (Lab) asks about a constituent unable to attend her grandmother’s funeral, while No 10 staff were partying. “It’s an absolute disgrace.” Ellis offers his condolences. Diana Johnson (Lab) asks why the PM is hiding behind Sue Gray’s investigation. Ellis says the PM is not hiding behind anything. Johnson respects the Nolan principles of public life, Ellis claims. He says Johnson is a person of integrity. Barbara Keeley (Lab) quotes a constituent left alone, unable to have visitors, after having a baby last year. How does Ellis feel about this? Ellis says he feels considerable regret and sorrow. But his feelings are irrelevant. Joanna Cherry (SNP) says she was pleased to hear Ellis says earlier the PM has recently visited a police station. She hopes he is visiting another one soon, with his solicitor. She calls for a review of all fixed-penalty notices issued during the pandemic, and for pardons for all of those held to a higher standard than those who govern us. Ellis says the rules apply equally to everyone in this country, and will continue to do so. Andy McDonald (Lab) asks Ellis if he has been told whether or not the PM attended the party on 20 May. If so, what was the answer? Ellis says he will not discuss private conversations with government ministers. He accuses McDonald of wanting to prejudge the matter. He says it is not a matter for him; it is a matter for Sue Gray. Alison McGovern (Lab) says it is “the height of disrespect” for Ellis to come here with no answers. Can he say when the investigation will be over? Ellis says the investigation must be allowed to continue. Sam Tarry (Lab) says his constituents, unable to go to church or the mosque, were furious. When will the PM apologise? Ellis says people unable to celebrate holy days suffered a loss. One can only express sorrow for them, he says. Ellis claims Johnson acknowledges the importance of the Nolan principles of public life and follows them. Julie Elliott (Lab) says she felt sick when she heard what was happening in No 10 when she and everyone else were making sacrifices. When will the PM take responsibility? Ellis says he will be in the Commons for PMQs tomorrow. Christine Jardine (Lib Dem) says one of the things that kept us going last year was the sense we were all making sacrifices together. She says people feel they have been betrayed, and treated with contempt. Ellis says Johnson is in a better position than most to know the impact of Covid, because of all the visits he makes. “He’s on the side of the people of this country,” says Ellis. Ellis claims there is “no indication” that the PM has misled parliament. Jim Shannon (DUP) asks about his mother-in-law who died alone last year. He breaks down with grief asking the question, and is unable to finish. Ellis says he is sorry for Shannon’s loss. Ellie Reeves (Lab) asks about a constituent not allowed visitors in hospital last year after giving birth. Will the minister apologise to mothers of lockdown babies who did the right thing while No 10 partied? Ellis says he cannot prejudge the investigation. But of course it is a matter of regret that people were affected by the restrictions. Of course he expresses regret about that, unreservedly. Naz Shah (Lab) mentions another family that lost a member last year, with only limited numbers allowed at the funeral. Will Ellis tell the PM to apologise? Ellis says he is not trying to minimise what happened. But the restrictions were there for a good reason. Vicky Foxcroft (Lab) ask what Ellis would say to constituents who lost a father last year, with only limited numbers allowed at the funeral. Ellis offers his condolences. But the inquiry should be allowed to conclude, he says. Kirsten Oswald (SNP) asks Ellis if he has asked the PM about this party. Ellis says he will not say. He is answering questions today, the investigation will take its course, and Oswald will get answers then, he says. Ruth Jones (Lab) criticises Boris Johnson for not being present and asks why anyone should ever believe the PM again. Ellis says Johnson will be here tomorrow for PMQs. Richard Burgon (Lab) says the public believe the PM is a liar. Isn’t the only way to restore public confidence for him to resign? Ellis says he does not think the public believe that. But Burgon shouts out that two-thirds of them do. Burgon is right. Tony Lloyd (Lab), who had Covid last year, says his life was saved by medical staff who came forward to help him. Don’t they deserve better than what they are getting from No 10. Ellis says we should not prejudge what happened. There are claims based on unknown sources. He says we should wait for the results of the inquiry. Maria Eagle (Lab) says no self-respecting minister would come to answer this UQ without knowing the facts. Does he know if the PM attended the party? Ellis says that is a matter for Sue Gray and her investigation. It is not a matter for him, he claims. Charlotte Nichols (Lab) says a constituent was fined for breaking lockdown rules. She asks when he and all other people fined will get their money back, given that No 10 broke the rules too. Ellis says Nichols should await the results of the inquiry. Afzal Khan (Lab) says his mother died in hospital in March last year. He had to be outside in a car. When asked about the parties on Sky News, Johnson “smirked and laughed”. Will the PM apologise for the pain caused by the parties, and for lying about it. Ellis says Johnson understands the pain caused by this. He urges Khan to wait until Sue Gray reports. Wendy Chamberlain (Lib Dem) says police officers were assaulted while enforcing Covid regulations. She says the PM should apologise to those officers. Ellis says Boris Johnson has always been a strong supporter of the police. They know that. Ian Lavery (Lab) asks what advice he would give to a hypothetical PM who has lied to this country, who has lied to MPs, and who has laughed when people have died. Ellis says the advice he would offer would be to be fair to all sides, and to listen to the evidence. That is what we expect in this country. Ben Bradshaw (Lab) asks if the PM will resign if he is shown to have broken the law. Ellis says that is a hypothetical question. The PM is going nowhere, he says. He says he “retains the confidence of the people of this country”. Pete Wishart (SNP) says the PM should resign. “For goodness sake, man, go.” Ellis says an inquiry is under way. Wishart should wait for its conclusions, he says. Catherine McKinnell (Lab) says support groups for alcoholics were not allowed to meet during lockdown. If No 10 was holding a party at the same time, that would be obscene, she says. Sir Christopher Chope (Con) says the civil service must have known about the party on 20 May. Why did they not refer it to the inquiry earlier? Ellis says the fact that a number of dates are being looked at will delay the investigation. Ellis says Boris Johnson will be in Commons for PMQs as usual tomorrow. Suzanne Webb (Con) says the time of the Commons would be better spent talking how the government will level up. Ellis says Webb is right to say levelling up is important, but this matter is of concern too. It should be investigated. Angela Eagle (Lab) says it might be quicker for Sue Gray to investigate a day when there were no parties at No 10. She says 268 people died in hospital on the day the No 10 party was held. What is there to wait for? The PM should come here and “fess up”, she says. Ellis says Eagle has a reputation for fairness, so she should see the case for allowing the investigation to conclude. Peter Bone (Con) says he has “great confidence” in the PM. He says he was worried by Ellis’s comment that the inquiry might be paused if there is a Met inquiry. Ellis says the PM wants the Gray inquiry to conclude quickly. But it is a matter for her. Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader, asks what should happen if an MP is found to have broken lockdown rules. Ellis says it is not for him to say. Maria Miller (Con) says MPs should debate these matters once the evidence has been collected. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, intervenes. He says he hopes Miller is not saying he was wrong to grant this UQ. But Ellis says Miller’s point is a good one. Ian Blackford, the SNP leader at Westminster, says Johnson should resign. If he won’t, Tory MPs should force him from office. Ellis says the rules apply to everyone. That is why there is an investigation. The result of the Gray inquiry will be in the public inquiry in due course, he says. Sir Desmond Swayne (Con) says this affair should show ministers the perils telling everyone else how to order their lives. Swayne is one of the Tories most critical of lockdown measures. All this should be a powerful corrective to the urge to order the rest of our lives, shouldn’t it? Ellis is responding to Rayner. There is a need for an investigation, he says. He says Sue Gray is a “paragon of independence and integrity”. Johnson himself was affected by Covid, he says. He says Johnson “takes this matter very seriously”. And, responding to Rayner’s question about whether he still views Johnson as a man of integrity and honour, he says he does. Rayner is responding to Ellis. She says Boris Johnson’s absence speaks volumes. She says people have seen Johnson’s smirks on TV, and drawn their own conclusions. She quotes an email from a person whose partner died in May last year - after she had been unable to get a GP appointment. She says there is no need for an investigation. Johnson could answer the question today about whether he attended the party. And she asks if Rishi Sunak knew about the party, pointing out he lives in Downing Street too. Michael Ellis, paymaster general and a minister in the Cabinet Office, is now responding to the Labour urgent question about the Downing Street party revelations. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, asks the question. She says she wants the prime minister to make a statement on events in the Downing Street garden. Ellis says the PM and he both spoke to MPs in December about the Sue Gray investigation. He “apologises again unreservedly” for the upset these allegations have caused. (If they are only allegations, why is there is a need for an apology?) Ellis says the government has set out the terms of reference of the inquiry. The allegations relating to 20 May will be included. If wrongdoing is found to have taken place, disciplinary action will be taken, he says. And he says if there is evidence of criminal behaviour, it will be referred to the police. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, has criticised Boris Johnson for not responding in person to the UQ on the No 10 party that is about to start. She said: Despite having no official engagements listed today, the prime minister has again failed to turn up to parliament and face the music. His absence speaks volumes. Boris Johnson holds the British public in contempt. At the No 10 lobby briefing the PM’s spokesman said it was “not uncommon” for another minister to be asked to reply to a question like this. The Downing Street lobby briefing has just finished and, on partygate at least, it was a masterclass in stonewalling. The PM’s spokesman took numerous questions about the party revelations, whether the PM stood by his many previous claims about no rules having been broken, about whether he has lied, and about the future of Martin Reynolds, Boris Johnson’s principal private secretary (PPS) who sent out the email party invitation. We did learn that Reynolds has not already been sacked. He is still at work, the spokesman said, and Johnson still has confidence in him. But otherwise the spokesman would not engage with these questions at all. He just insisted that these were matters for the inquiry by Sue Gray, the senior civil servant investigating the various partygate allegations. Sir Peter Fahy, a former chief constable of Greater Manchester police, has told Times Radio that the Metropolitan police should give a public explanation for their decision not to investigate, at least until now, parties at No 10 that may have broken lockdown rules. He said that, while the Met’s reluctance to investigate historic breaches of lockdown rules was understandable, this had now become a competence issue, affecting public confidence in the police. He said: Normally, if an organisation is thought to have breached the law, you don’t leave it for that organisation to go away and investigate it themselves and wait for the result. And some people have said there’s quite a lot of police officers on duty around No 10, why did they not realise that there was something going on and report it, or at least give advice that this shouldn’t be going on? So unfortunately it’s becoming, as well as an issue of political confidence, one of competence in the police and almost the investigation system. Fahy said a statement from the Met was necessary “so the public do understand the reasoning as to why they’re going to investigate or not investigate”. Ruth Davidson, the former Scottish Conservative leader, has said that some people affected by Covid will never forgive the government after what they have learnt about partygate. She told the BBC: If No 10 doesn’t understand the anger that is out there, then they’re going to find out that anger pretty soon in the next couple of days because everybody has some form of sacrifice, or somebody important in their life that gave a huge sacrifice, that will never forgive whatever went on, because it just makes a mockery of this idea that we were doing a national endeavour to try and keep each other safe. The UK’s main statistical body has reported more than 175,000 deaths involving Covid since the start of the pandemic, my colleagues Niamh McIntyre and Pamela Duncan report. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, has said he does not expect junior Downing Street staff to be named in Sue Gray’s report into the partygate affair. Speaking on his Moggcast podcast, Rees-Mogg said “you wouldn’t expect the name of extremely junior people to be put into public highlights”. He went on: I don’t know what’s happened, I have no idea what will be concluded. But if there is somebody on work experience, who happened to be there for a week, it would seem unfair that that person should be named publicly. If, on the other hand, the Pope had popped in briefly, somebody of that seniority, you would expect that His Holiness would be named. The Conservative MP Michael Fabricant has been defending Boris Johnson in an interview with BBC News. Fabricant expanded on the argument he posted on Twitter earlier, saying that this was a work gathering for people who had been working exceptionally hard. (See 10.04am.) He said that if Johnson had a fault, it was his loyalty to staff. He explained: You know what, I‘d rather have a prime minister who felt for his staff and all those hard-working people than some cold fish who really couldn’t care a toss about them. Michael Ellis, the paymaster general, will be reponding to the Labour UQ, the Sun’s Harry Cole reports. The last time Ellis answered a UQ on partygate stories he repeatedly told MPs that Boris Johnson was a man “of honour and integrity”. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, has challenged Boris Johnson to turn up in person to respond to the UQ she has tabled. (See 11.12am.) This is from the Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice campaign group. And Lobby Akinnola, a campaigner from the organisation who lost his father, Femi, in April 2020, said that if Boris Johnson did attend the party on 20 May last year, his position was untenable. He said: It’s blindingly obvious that Martin Reynolds has to go. If the prime minister was at this party then his position would be untenable. He’d have lost all moral authority to lead the country, after breaking his own rules that the rest of us followed, often at great sacrifice. It’s beyond belief that the government seems to be suggesting a report is needed to determine whether Boris Johnson was at the event at all. He knows. The dozens of people there know. Why does the prime minister need someone to tell him whether or not he was at a party? When this party took place, people couldn’t see their loved ones in their final moments. People couldn’t see friends and family. Last year Boris Johnson met with bereaved families in the Rose Garden, in the very site this booze-up took place, and looked us in the eyes and told us he had “done all he could” to save our loved ones. Now he needs to come clean to the country in a way that he didn’t with us. Gavin Barwell, who was chief of staff to Theresa May when she was prime minister, is another Tory peer (see 9.59am) who thinks the government cannot just carry on delaying any substantive response to the No 10 party story until the Sue Gray report comes out. Omicron is starting to take a greater toll in England’s care homes, with deaths from Covid almost doubling in the first week of the new year to 122 from 65 in the last week of 2021. It represents the highest Covid death toll among care home residents since March 2021, according to weekly statistics on the deaths in care homes notified to the Care Quality Commission regulator. Meanwhile care homes are continuing to struggle with staff shortages. Live figures this morning from internal health system capacity data seen by the Guardian showed 122 operators have declared a red alert on staffing, with 13,500 care workers off with Covid in England. The impact of Omicron on staffing levels has seen hundreds of care homes shut their doors to hospital admissions, which is a big concern for NHS managers trying to free up beds. It also compounds an existing shortage of staff for the typically low-paid social care roles with around 60,000 fewer people in the workforce in October compared to May, according to analysis by the Health Foundation. There will be an urgent question in the Commons today on the latest No 10 party revelations, Labour has said. We don’t yet know who will be responding. Just because the question is tabled for the PM that does not mean Boris Johnson will reply, and almost certainly he won’t. Rayner shadows Dominic Raab in his capacity as deputy PM, and so she would be entitled to expect him to turn up. But more often the government gets Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, to respond on topics like this. No 10 could even put up a more junior minister, like the paymaster general, Michael Ellis, who has form for wholeheartedy defending Johnson’s integrity in the chamber on days like this in circumstances that would defeat his less-loyalist colleagues. The Commons public administration and constitutional affairs committee has this morning published a letter (pdf) it received from Christopher Geidt, the PM’s independent adviser on ministerial standards, responding to questions from the committee about the Downing Street flat refurbishment inquiry. In the letter, Lord Geidt repeats the point he made in letters published last week about how concerned he was by the PM’s failure to disclose WhatsApp messages undermined. Geidt says: The episode shook my confidence precisely because potential and real failures of process occurred in more than one part of the apparatus of government. These failures were not, in my view, due to a lack of investigatory powers, but rather they showed insufficient care for the role of independent adviser. Geidt also restates his belief that, because the PM has agreed to review his powers, he will emerge from this affair with his status enhanced. He says: I would expect by the time of my next annual report in April to be able to describe the role of independent adviser in terms of considerably greater authority, independence and effect, consistent with the ambitions for the office that the prime minister has set out. Downing Street has not yet published details of how Geidt’s role may be beefed up. The Conservative mayor for the West Midlands, Andy Street, whose mother died of Covid last year, has said news of a party at Downing Street during the first lockdown is “pretty incredible” and that he is “very hungry” to find out what happened. Speaking to BBC Radio West Midlands, Street said he was shocked when he read the news. He said: When I saw this I thought, I can’t really believe this, if I’m honest. It was May 2020, a time when we were all restricted. My idea of going out was to walk along the canal with one friend, frankly, and I’m sure there’s lots of people in the West Midlands who have their own recollections of what they were doing in May 2020. So yes, it is very difficult to believe. He said he hoped an inquiry into Downing Street parties would determine who attended. What we don’t know is whether the prime minister was there. I obviously can’t possibly comment on that, but that’s why the inquiry has got to come. And I’m sure that when the inquiry finds out the facts, then the conclusions and the consequences will be acted upon. One of the many reasons why the partygate story is so damaging is that that there are countless examples of ministers saying that gatherings like the 20 May one in Downing Street last year should not have been taking place. Here are some examples. From the FT’s Jim Pickard From the Mirror’s Rachel Wearmouth From the i’s Paul Waugh Chris Curtis from Opinium posted a useful thread on Twitter last night looking at the polling on the partygate controversy, and how the scandal has affected support for the government and for Boris Johnson. It starts here. My colleague Martin Farrer has had a look at how the papers have been covering last night’s latest partygate allegations. Even normally-supportive papers are critical. Nicola Sturgeon has signalled Scotland’s stricter Covid regulations could be relaxed soon as she acknowledged a possible shift in strategy towards learning to live with the virus longer-term. The first minister, who is due to update MSPs later today on Scotland’s Covid policies, said it was possible face masks could become normalised as society adapted to milder forms of Covid-19 becoming endemic. That echoes similar signals recently from some health experts and UK government ministers, including Michael Gove, the levelling up minister, on Monday. In an interview with STV, Sturgeon said for her, that still involved some longer-term adjustments to normal life. She said: Sometimes when you hear people talk about learning to live with Covid, what seems to be suggested is that one morning we’ll wake up and not have to worry about it anymore, and not have to do anything to try to contain and control it. That’s not what I mean when I say ‘learning to live with it’. Instead, what we will have to ask ourselves is what adaptations to pre-pandemic life – face coverings, for example – might be required in the longer-term to enable us to live with it with far fewer protective measures. Sturgeon said the virus remained deadly for some; NHS services may need to be re-configured with more patients treated outside hospital. “One of the things that we’ve been looking at recently is different patient pathways for people with Covid, to enable people to be treated at home,” she said. Sturgeon is expected to propose changing the strict crowd limits at public events from 17 January, as Scottish football returns from its Christmas break and the Six Nations rugby tournament due to involve Scotland facing England at Murrayfield in early February. With evidence growing the Omicron wave has been less severe than first feared, and may peak in Scotland this week, Sturgeon acknowledged the pre-Christmas anxieties about the severity of this surge had not been borne out. She said that was partly due to the strict controls her government introduced. Some of our projections pre-Christmas have not quite come to pass because we’ve managed to mitigate to some extent what the Omicron wave would otherwise have presented for us. Lord Evans, the former MI5 boss who is now chairman of the committee on standards in public life, has just started giving evidence to the Commons public administration and constitutional affairs committee. The hearing is meant to be focusing mainly on the Greensill affair, and changes to governance rules but William Wragg (Con), the chair, asked Evans in the opening minutes about “more topical matters” and what impact they might have had on confidence in standards. In reply, Evans said that a serious of issues recently, like the Owen Paterson affair, the controversy over the Downing Street flat refurbishment, had showed “at least a carelessness amongst people in government over standards issues, and possibly more than that”. He said polling suggests people are concerned about this. He said people want politicians to live up to the standards they profess to maintain. Wragg said he thought Evans’ point was “quite correct”. UPDATE: Evans said: I think we have seen a whole series of issues over the last few months: the Owen Paterson affair, the attempt to change the rules over standards investigations in the middle of the investigation into Mr Paterson’s actions. The questions around the redecoration of Downing Street, in particular the very bad processes that were clearly in place for keeping Lord Geidt properly informed. The Greensill affair and now partygate. All of those, I think, have demonstrated that there is - at least - a carelessness amongst people in government over standards issues, and possibly more than that. Perhaps No 10 should have asked the Conservative backbencher Michael Fabricant to make the case for the government on the airwaves this morning. Fabricant seems to think that there was nothing wrong with the party in the no 10 garden in May last year (unlike Edward Argar, who was clearly uncomfortable having to put the government’s case). Fabricant has posted these on Twitter. Ruth Davidson, the former Scottish Conservative leader, and now a member of the House of Lords, is not impressed by the government line that it has to wait until the Sue Gray report is out until it responds to the latest revelations about a No 10 lockdown-busting party. Good morning. Partygate has now got a lot, lot worse for Boris Johnson. It would be surprising if the number of Conservative MPs coming to the conclusion that they will have a better chance of reelection at the next election under a different leader has not increased overnight, or if those Tories already inclined to that view are not feeling a bit more certain this morning. It was not as if partygate was not highly damaging, and even potentially career-threatening, in the first place. But the latest revelations – starting with Dominic Cummings publishing a blog on Friday saying that there had been a lockdown-busting party in Downing Street on 20 May last year (“I and at least one other Spad [in writing so Sue Gray can dig up the original email and the warning] said that this seemed to be against the rules and should not happen”), followed by the Sunday Times suggesting that Boris Johnson was there, and culminating in ITV’s Paul Brand publishing the email invitation sent by Johnson’s principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds – have taken this to a new level. Here is our overnight story summarising the situation. Why is this so much worse? There are at least three reasons. 1) No 10 has been able to half-defend previous partygate allegations by claiming that they were essentially work meetings involving some drink late in the day. For some events, like the 18 December Christmas party, this defence was highly improbable. But it does not function at all in the light of the email invitation from Reynolds sent to staff ahead of the 20 May do. Reynolds wrote: Hi all, After what has been an incredibly busy period we thought it would be nice to make the most of the lovely weather and have some socially distanced drinks in the No 10 garden this evening. Please join us from 6pm and bring your own booze! Even Lord Geidt would have to conclude that this was an invitation to a party, not a work invitation. 2) Boris Johnson was almost certainly there himself. Witnesses have told journalists he attended, and he and No 10 have declined multiple invitations to deny this. That means that another key defence deployed until now in response to partygate – that Johnson did not know what staff might have been up to in what is a relatively large office complex – is no longer tenable. 3) The Metropolitan police, who have done their best to avoid being dragged into previous allegations, seem more likely to investigate this one. Edward Argar, the health minister, has been doing the morning interview round on behalf of No 10. He refused to explain what happened, sticking to the No 10 line from Monday that these were all matters for the partygate investigation being conducted by Sue Gray, a senior civil servant. But he said that “appropriate disciplinary action” should be taken if Gray found the rules had been broken, and that he could understand why people were “upset and angry” about the reports. But Labour said that Johnson had to explain himself now instead of just waiting for the Gray investigation to conclude. Angela Rayner, the party’s deputy leader, said: Boris Johnson’s deflections and distractions are no longer tenable. Sue Gray is a highly respected civil servant who will be carrying out an investigation to the highest standard. But the truth is out now. Not only did Boris Johnson know about the parties, he attended them and he lied. It’s time for the prime minister to stop hiding behind Whitehall inquiries and finally come clean. Rayner is referring to the many times Johnson told MPs in the Commons that no rules were broken (although generally Johnson was talking in response to questions about Christmas parties, rather than partying at any time). Ed Miliband, the shadow climate change minister, made a similar argument on the Today programme. He said: It’s all very well that we are having Sue Gray’s inquiry, but the prime minister cannot run and he cannot hide. He’s got to answer. If I went to a party, I know I went to the party. He’s got to explain - was he at the party? How can he possibly justify all of the things he said in the House of Commons - that no rules were broken, that he did nothing wrong? He is going to have to answer. It speaks to a rotten culture at the heart of this government and the rotten culture begins with the person in charge. And this is from Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary. Here is the agenda for the day. 9.30am: Boris Johnson chairs cabinet. 10am: Lord Evans, chair of the committee on standards in public life, gives evidence to the Commons public administration and constitutional affairs committee on governance standards in the light of the Greensill affair. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. 12pm: The Department for Education publishes pupil attendance figures. 12pm: Eluned Morgan, the Welsh government’s health minister, holds a Covid briefing. After 12.45pm: MPs begin debating a Labour motion calling for VAT on fuel to be cut, and setting aside parliamentary time for a bill implementing this to be debated. 2.20pm: Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, gives a statement to the Scottish parliament on Covid. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comA Chinese broadcaster has been ordered to pay the Premier League at least $213m (£156m) by the high court in London over the collapse of one of the competition’s most lucrative international rights agreements. The league terminated the deal last year after PPTV failed to pay two instalments of the rights fees owed, citing a change to the schedule caused by the 100-day pandemic-enforced pause in fixtures in 2020 and the lack of fans in stadiums when games resumed in June. Given the season concluded eventually, the judge rejected the arguments made by the streaming service, which is owned by Suning, the Chinese retail giant that also controls the Italian champions Internazionale. “In many commercial contracts events may transpire other than as anticipated by one, or even both, contracting parties,” Judge Peter Fraser said in a ruling published on Tuesday. “That does not mean that the court will rewrite the parties’ bargain and impose different terms upon them to suit those later events. That is not the function of the law of contract.” The judge said the league payments of $210.3m and $2.673m should be made by the broadcaster‘s parent company, PPLive Sports International, along with interests and legal costs. The judge said in his ruling that the broadcaster had even “failed to pay a substantial amount of outstanding legal fees” owed to its lawyers last year. The Premier League said it welcomed the judgment. “The Premier League will robustly enforce its contractual rights when it has no other option available,” a statement said. “The league notes the judge’s view that PPLive had ‘no real prospect of success’ defending the claim. The bar is high for a summary judgment application and this decision highlights the strength of the league’s case. “The league will now begin the process of recovering the fees and costs owed by PPLive.”The former KPMG partner in charge of auditing Carillion’s accounts before its collapse has blamed his more junior colleagues for misleading regulators, as former team members turned on each other during a tribunal hearing allegations against the firm and six individual auditors. KPMG, one of the “Big Four” accountants that dominate the sector worldwide, on Monday admitted misconduct and apologised. However, a tribunal run by the accounting regulator, the Financial Reporting Council (FRC), must also decide if any of the six individuals are guilty of misconduct. Five have denied all misconduct. Carillion collapsed in January 2018, resulting in 3,000 job losses and causing chaos across hundreds of its projects – including building and maintaining primary schools, roads, and even Liverpool Football Club’s stadium, Anfield. The FRC alleges that KPMG misled its inspectors by forging documents in relation to the audit of Carillion and a software company, Regenersis. The 2016 Carillion audit was led by Peter Meehan, a partner at KPMG from 1998 until he was suspended in 2019 following an internal investigation. Meehan’s counsel, Ian Croxford QC, argued that there was no evidence that he was involved in a conspiracy to mislead the regulators, and that it was former colleagues who were responsible. “Mr Meehan placed his trust and confidence in those who were members of his audit team,” Croxford told the video tribunal on Tuesday. “He feels let down.” “He was the patsy, and he bitterly regrets that that is the case,” Croxford added, using the term for a person who is easily duped. Alistair Wright, a KPMG group senior manager working under Meehan, has already admitted “serious misconduct”. His counsel, David Turner QC, told the tribunal that Wright expressed “deep contrition” over misleading documents given to regulators and undermining public confidence in audits. However, Turner questioned the portrayal of Meehan as metaphorically “unseeing and anosmic” – meaning unable to smell – with regards to problems with the Carillion audit. None of the parties have disputed that the documents under question, including meeting minutes and a spreadsheet, were created and given to FRC inspectors. The FRC alleges the documents were designed to give a flattering picture of the work carried out by KPMG. The FRC alleged that Richard Kitchen, who was an audit manager of Carillion, edited a key formula in the spreadsheet to increase a threshold for scrutiny of contracts from £300,000 to £1.5m. The change ruled out a large number of contracts that would have been flagged, and avoided uncomfortable questions on why more contracts had not been scrutinised, the FRC alleged. “The final version of the [spreadsheet] would have selected a far greater number of contracts for testing during the course of the audit,” said the FRC’s counsel, Nick Medcroft QC. “And so the increase of the threshold was a very useful mechanism to cut out a lot of these contracts.” Kitchen strongly denies all wrongdoing. His counsel, Fionn Pilbrow QC, argued that Kitchen was following Meehan’s directions, and that he did not knowingly make false representations to the regulators. The FRC made similar allegations relating to minutes that were missing from KPMG’s audit file, saying auditors had a motive to disguise the fact that documents had not been created during the audit. Missing documents would have been “great cause for concern about the quality of KPMG audit work”, the FRC alleged. KPMG, which is facing a £1bn claim in damages for alleged audit failures, argued that the tribunal can make no judgments on the quality of the Carillion audit, and that the problems highlighted were limited to the individual auditors. “There was no systemic problem, and none is alleged,” said Simon Brocklebank QC, KPMG’s counsel. The hearing is expected to continue over weeks of evidence. Two more former KPMG auditors deny misconduct. Stuart Smith, who was the partner in charge of the Regenersis audit, has reached a confidential settlement with the FRC. The FRC’s counsel has previously said he denied misconduct.On 20 May 2020 the UK was two months into its first lockdown, with many isolated and barred from seeing friends and family even in the most difficult circumstances. The news that a “bring your own booze” party was allegedly held in Downing Street on that day has been met by many with anger, but also a lack of surprise: it’s the latest in a series of similar revelations. Five readers share memories of where they were on the day and how they felt when they heard the news. ‘We had to grieve in solitude’ The day of the No 10’s “socially distanced drinks” has a particularly heavy significance for Laura Backhouse: it was the day of her husband’s funeral. He had died alone in hospital 10 days earlier, from leukaemia, at the age of 44. “Ten of us stood by his graveside, socially distanced, while the vicar said a simple prayer,” says Backhouse, a 41-year-old HR manager in York. Her children, eight and 10 at the time and attending their first funeral, were not allowed to “hug their grieving grandparents, who had lost their only child”. As wakes were not permitted at the time, the family “returned alone to [their] house to continue to grieve in solitude”. Backhouse says that at the time she found solace in the idea that everyone was in the same boat. “It was personally a very awful time, but the fact everyone was doing same thing was some comfort. We couldn’t have a proper funeral, but no one I know was breaking any rules,” she says. “Nothing surprises me any more, but it’s shocking that they thought [holding a party] was acceptable and no one spoke out at the time.” ‘My family couldn’t come and help with our newborn’ 20 May 2020 was 35-year-old Claire Mawson’s first day back home after being rushed into hospital for emergency spinal surgery. Mawson, a learning and development manager in Essex, was a new mother at the time, having had her baby less than a month before. “[My husband and I] weren’t allowed any members of family to come and help. I was unable to walk unaided and needed help using the bathroom all while caring for a three-week-old,” Mawson says. Had the UK not been in lockdown, “my mum, his mum, all of our friends and family would have taken it in turns to come look after us,” Mawson says. “That first day [home] was just so sad. I couldn’t hold my baby, I was just in bed not able to move. My husband was doing all the baby duties.” Recent revelations about government rule-breaking have hit Mawson hard. “It’s actually heartbreaking, to be honest,” she says. “A few weeks ago, I actually just sat down and cried to my husband, because I was just like, how can they do that? There’s people that have died, there’s families that haven’t been able to see their loved ones.” ‘Our daughter’s mental health has not recovered’ Mike, a chiropractor in Nottinghamshire, wasn’t surprised by the news. “It’s what, the seventh or eighth party that’s been declared?” the 52-year-old says. “But why are we only finding out about this now?” Mike was home schooling his children on 20 May 2020, during a lockdown that has had a sustained impact on his daughter’s mental wellbeing. “Her mental health crashed,” he says. “She needed social interaction with friends … it was against the law for us to take her to see a friend.” His daughter, 11 at the time, was stuck at home until schools partially reopened in June, but was “terrified” about moving to secondary school as “no visits were allowed to ease the process”. Mike adds: “Her mental health has not recovered.” ‘I was in intensive care, looking after Covid patients’ On 20 May 2020, Pete, a 42-year-old theatre nurse in Swansea, was looking after Covid patients in intensive care. “We’d been trained to work in ITU to help with the workload, and we were in the ‘red zone’, face to face with Covid patients on ventilators,” he says, recalling the day of the No 10 party. Like many, Pete feels “furious” despite his lack of surprise at the news. “I’ve seen people say prayers over iPads, taken so many tearful phone calls from people,” he says. He’s mainly worried that attention will quickly move on: “In a few days, eyes will be turned elsewhere and this will be another ‘gaffe’ to add to the list. We’re all just shouting in the wind.” ‘We were stuck in front of our computers’ In Hertfordshire, Geraint Cooksley, 47, who leads a mapping and surveying team, remembers working into the night to a tight deadline on 20 May 2020. “It was a very long, hot, stuffy day. I did think at the time it was a shame we were all stuck in front of our computers, but didn’t mind too much as I had in mind that everyone else was in the same boat. “I thought, at least we’re all at work. I’d rather be doing this than being out of work, so let’s get through it. It was a day our team pulled together to get things done.” The leaked email “seems crazy”, says Cooksley. “We’ve all had to make sacrifices. So it feels like a real kick in the teeth that while people were keeping the country going, others were faffing around and doing what they liked, against the rules.”Coronavirus loses 90% of its ability to infect us within 20 minutes of becoming airborne – with most of the loss occurring within the first five minutes, the world’s first simulations of how the virus survives in exhaled air suggest. The findings re-emphasise the importance of short-range Covid transmission, with physical distancing and mask-wearing likely to be the most effective means of preventing infection. Ventilation, though still worthwhile, is likely to have a lesser impact. “People have been focused on poorly ventilated spaces and thinking about airborne transmission over metres or across a room. I’m not saying that doesn’t happen, but I think still the greatest risk of exposure is when you’re close to someone,” said Prof Jonathan Reid, director of the University of Bristol’s Aerosol Research Centre and the study’s lead author. “When you move further away, not only is the aerosol diluted down, there’s also less infectious virus because the virus has lost infectivity [as a result of time].” Until now, our assumptions about how long the virus survives in tiny airborne droplets have been based on studies that involved spraying virus into sealed vessels called Goldberg drums, which rotate to keep the droplets airborne. Using this method, US researchers found that infectious virus could still be detected after three hours. Yet such experiments do not accurately replicate what happens when we cough or breathe. Instead, researchers from the University of Bristol developed apparatus that allowed them to generate any number of tiny, virus-containing particles and gently levitate them between two electric rings for anywhere between five seconds to 20 minutes, while tightly controlling the temperature, humidity and UV light intensity of their surroundings. “This is the first time anyone has been able to actually simulate what happens to the aerosol during the exhalation process,” Reid said. The study, which has not yet been peer-reviewed, suggested that as the viral particles leave the relatively moist and carbon dioxide-rich conditions of the lungs, they rapidly lose water and dry out, while the transition to lower levels of carbon dioxide is associated with a rapid increase in pH. Both of these factors disrupt the virus’s ability to infect human cells, but the speed at which the particles dry out varies according to the relative humidity of the surrounding air. When this was lower than 50% – similar to the relatively dry air found in many offices – the virus had lost around half of its infectivity within five seconds, after which the decline was slower and more steady, with a further 19% loss over the next five minutes. At 90% humidity – roughly equivalent to a steam or shower room – the decline in infectivity was more gradual, with 52% of particles remaining infectious after five minutes, dropping to about 10% after 20 minutes, after which these was no difference between the two conditions. However, the temperature of the air made no difference to viral infectivity, contradicting the widely held belief that viral transmission is lower at high temperatures. “It means that if I’m meeting friends for lunch in a pub today, the primary [risk] is likely to be me transmitting it to my friends, or my friends transmitting it to me, rather than it being transmitted from someone on the other side of the room,” said Reid. This highlights the importance of wearing a mask in situations where people cannot physically distance, he added. The findings support what epidemiologists have been observing on the ground, said Dr Julian Tang, a clinical virologist at the University of Leicester, adding that “masks are very effective … as well as social distancing. Improved ventilation will also help – particularly if this is close to the source.” Dr Stephen Griffin, associate professor of virology at the University of Leeds, emphasised the importance of ventilation, saying: “Aerosols will fill up indoor spaces rapidly in the absence of proper ventilation, so assuming the infected individual remains within the room, the levels of virus will be replenished.” The same effects were seen across all three Sars-CoV-2 variants the team has tested so far, including Alpha. They hope to start experiments with the Omicron variant in the coming weeks. • This article was amended on 11 and 12 January 2022. In an earlier version, we said Covid loses 90% of ability to infect within five minutes. It is actually within the first 20 minutes – with most of the loss occurring within the first 5 minutes. The article and headline have been corrected for clarity.High-end delivery services are entering the Covid test market as demand for testing continues to soar in the US, with some pivoting to offer Covid tests alongside “wellness” products such as face creams or Botox injections. FastAF – a delivery startup serving San Francisco, Los Angeles, and New York – is one such startup, with a business model offering “premium essentials” like CBD sparkling water, high-end skincare and AirPods delivered to your door within two hours or less. The company, recently valued $200m, began selling at-home Covid tests about two weeks ago, according to the company. Under a “Covid-19 Home Tests &amp; Essentials” page, the app lists an assortment of products: three different types of rapid tests, cold-pressed juice shots, masks, and several types of premium hand sanitizers (some costing up to $35.99 a bottle). Two brands of Covid tests sold on FastAF, including Abbott’s BinaxNOW, have a sticker price of $39.99 – 67% higher than the typical retail price of $24. Still, in San Francisco, they sold out last week. Luxury wellness delivery services have also entered the Covid testing market. Drip Hydration – a company that delivers $299 IV treatments for issues like hangovers and food poisoning directly to your home in over 50 cities – is now offering at-home Covid testing. The company’s at-home Covid tests – which are nurse-administered – cost between $249 and $449. The company also offers Covid treatments such as a round of monoclonal antibody IV therapy ($999-$1,999) and IV bags of Super Immune Boost ($399), a blend of vitamin C, antioxidants and zinc. “Well worth the cost to determine if I could end precautionary self-isolation and rejoin my family as soon as possible, especially given long wait periods for standard PCR tests in the Bay Area (it would have taken 5+ days to test and get results elsewhere),” wrote one Yelp reviewer from San Francisco. “Thank you Drip Hydration!” Velour Medical – which provides in-home Botox, fillers and chemical peels – uses a similar model. The New York City-based company bills itself as providing “luxury cosmetic services and medical treatments”, and trained professionals administer either cosmetic facial fillers or nasal swabs to clients. One review on the site applauds the range of services: “I have used velour medical for concierge covid testing MANY times as well as for some (a lot) of Botox.” Amid a nationwide shortage of Covid-19 tests, the US government has tried to take various steps to keep rapid tests accessible. In a deal that expired last week, the Biden administration had two grocery giants commit to selling test kits “at cost” for $14. On Monday, the administration announced that, starting on Saturday, private insurers must cover the cost of eight at-home tests a month through in-network providers. And Americans are awaiting the distribution of 500m free at-home tests, though that process may take months to conclude. Meanwhile, US lawmakers from New York to California have warned against price-gouging for at-home tests. While premium test delivery services may not violate price gouging laws, they have raised questions about who can access testing at a time when US daily Covid cases are hitting record highs. “When there’s a profit to be made, you can count on American companies to step in,” Dr Bob Wachter, chief of medicine and an expert on Covid at the University of California, San Francisco, said in an email. Wachter anticipates that testing will become more accessible later this month as cases peak. “This seems like a brief potential windfall – I ordered tests on Amazon ($18/set) and they came in three days,” he added. “It seems like the federal intervention is likely to kick in soon as well. So I suspect this is a short-lived profiteering phenomenon, which will probably go away in a few weeks.” A spokesperson for Fast AF said the company marks up some of its products, which can be standard for middleman companies, but not all of them. “The value that FastAF shoppers receive comes from access to their preferred products and the convenience of rapid delivery, always in two hours or less,” said a FastAF spokesperson. “We try to price our service at a level which takes into account the cost of the supplies, the nursing, the dispatch, the clinical oversight, and at a level which allows us to retain good talent and pay our staff appropriately,” said Dr Abe Malkin, founder and CEO of Drip Hydration. Velour Medical did not respond to a request for comment prior to publication.Protesters gathered in Fayetteville, North Carolina, for a second night in a row on Monday after a man was killed by an off-duty sheriff’s deputy. The Fayetteville police department identified the man killed on Saturday as Jason Walker, a 37-year-old Black man who the deputy told authorities jumped on to his vehicle. The Cumberland county sheriff’s office identified the deputy as Jeffrey Hash. In a statement, Fayetteville police said a preliminary investigation revealed that Walker “ran into traffic and jumped on [the] moving vehicle”. “The driver of the vehicle shot [Walker] and notified 911,” it said. Hash, who has been with the Cumberland county sheriff since 2005, was taken into custody but not arrested. On Monday, he was put on administrative leave, pending an internal investigation. By Tuesday, no charges had been filed. The Fayetteville police chief, Gina Hawkins, said data obtained from the “black box” of Hash’s truck revealed that “that vehicle did not impact anything or anyone” but a windshield wiper was torn off and used to break the windshield. Hawkins said the weapon used by Hash was not his service weapon. She did not disclose how many shots were fired or where Walker was hit. Hawkins asked the North Carolina bureau of investigation to “take the lead in the investigation”. Demonstrators challenged the police version of events, gathering outside the Fayetteville transit authority and chanting: “What do we want? Justice. When do we want it? Now.” Elizabeth Ricks, a trauma nurse, told WRAL News she was on the scene and tried to save Walker’s life. “I did not see anyone in distress. The man was just walking home,” she said. “It breaks my heart he didn’t survive and I’m trying to cope with that as well. I don’t want to take away from Jason or the injustice and I’m not going to be silent.” A cousin of Walker told WRAL News the police chief’s description of events did not sound like something Walker would do. “We’re hearing one side of the story that sounds like a person that Jason is not, and then on the other side, we’re hearing a story that makes complete sense,” said the cousin, who was not identified by name. “We have to take it one day at a time. Hopefully the system does what’s right and gets to the bottom of this. We really just want justice for Jason.” According to Walker’s family, he was a single father and left behind a young son. On Tuesday, the prominent civil rights attorney Ben Crump said he would represent Walker’s family. Crump, who represented the family of George Floyd after he was killed by former Minneapolis officer Derek Chauvin in May 2020, disputed the police account of Walker’s death. “At the crux of the matter, was Mr Walker shot in the back as he tried to return home? His parents lived across the street, less than 100 yards away,” Crump said on Twitter. “We stand committed, with the family and the young son that Jason Walker left behind, to find answers as to what happened to him when he was senselessly shot and killed by off-duty deputy Jeffrey Hash.”The billionaire Tory donor Alan Howard collected £56m last year from the hedge fund he co-founded as the profits shared between its financiers soared, accounts filed at Companies House suggest. Brevan Howard Asset Management LLP is based in Jersey and controlled by Howard, who is one of Britain’s richest men, via a Cayman Islands bank. Its accounts show that the partnership earned fees of £169m for its in-demand services as an asset manager. It recorded a £130m profit after expenses, with a further £43m deducted to reflect the cost of the services and staff provided to the LLP by a related business. That left an £87m pot to be shared among the 17 members who own and operate the business, including Howard. The company distributed £79.8m of this in what it described as “contractual and discretionary profit allocations […] in consideration for services provided”. The highest-paid member received almost £55.8m, up from £29.9m the previous year. Howard stepped down as chief executive in 2019 but still acts as an investment manager for the company and is likely to be its highest-paid member. Brevan Howard, which serves wealthy clients from offices in London, New York, Geneva, Jersey, Hong Kong, Edinburgh and Singapore, declined to comment on the identity of the highest-paid member. Howard is the 107th richest man in the UK, according to the 2021 Sunday Times rich list, with assets worth £1.5bn. Electoral Commission records show that he has used his vast wealth to donate £352,854 to the Conservative party since 2019 alone, including a £250,000 gift made in December 2020. Howard has also been a frequent donor to charitable causes, including homelessness and Holocaust education. He has said that he prefers to keep a “low profile”. The former bond trader, 58, founded Brevan Howard in 2002 and the firm grew to become the world’s fourth-largest hedge fund within seven years, with £20bn under management. In autumn last year, it became the latest major global financial institution to announce a major push into cryptocurrency. The company said it would “significantly expand” BH Digital, a division devoted to cryptocurrency and digital assets, according to the Financial Times. At the time, Aron Landy, the fund’s chief executive, spoke of the “huge diversity of opportunities within the digital asset space and the significance of this to long-term macro investors”. Asked about its accounts and pay arrangements, Brevan Howard declined to comment.Italian police have raided the homes of 15 young men and three boys who are suspected of involvement in a series of sexual assaults during New Year’s Eve celebrations in Milan. Nine women have so far reported that they were assaulted during celebrations in front of Milan’s Cathedral on Piazza del Duomo. The case has prompted comparisons with the mass sexual attacks and muggings that took place in the German city of Cologne on New Year’s Eve in 2015-16. Police said the 18 suspects are aged between 15 and 21 and are foreign or Italian of north African origin. Raids were carried out early on Tuesday morning at homes in Milan and Turin. Several women, including two Germans who had been visiting Milan, came forward with their reports in the days after New Year’s Eve, with the number rising to nine as of Tuesday. Police believe more women were assaulted. Police identified the suspects based on CCTV images, the accounts of the victims and witnesses, as well as via the analysis of social media posts. The women shared similar stories of being dragged into the crowd, shoved and groped during the fireworks display. A 19-year-old woman alleged that she was set upon by a gang of youths at about 1.30am and attacked for about a minute before help arrived. Her friend managed to get away. The two German women said they were pushed up against barriers and sexually assaulted. They filed their reports after returning to Germany. One claimed the police didn’t respond to cries for help. In a video, the women can be seen trying to escape. “I realised they were touching me and we wanted to escape but there were too many of them,” one of the German women told the Italian news agency Ansa. “I hope they find them and that justice is done for us and all of the other girls that were molested that night.” One young woman suffered scrapes when her jumper was torn and trousers pulled down. She was taken to hospital by police for examination. Another was attacked on a street close to the square. The Italian interior minister, Luciana Lamorgese, last week said that no effort should be spared in ensuring that such “deplorable behaviours” never happen again. However, the incidents have sparked a political debate, with rightwing parties calling for the city’s councillor for security, Marco Granelli, to be dismissed over the management of the New Year’s Eve celebrations. “The leftwing goodness, even in the face of the evidence, is really disgusting,” said Alessandro De Chirico, a councillor at Milan’s town hall from the Forza Italia party. The city’s leftwing mayor, Giuseppe Sala, condemned the “very serious attacks” that have besmirched the city. The case has drawn comparisons with the Cologne incident, when up to 1,000 young men, many of north African origin, carried out a series of sexual assaults, rapes and muggings close to the city’s cathedral. Cologne’s police were also accused of failing to respond to the attacks while a fierce debate erupted amid accusations of a police and media cover-up over fears of whipping up anti-foreigner sentiment in the wake of the migrant crisis in 2015. More than 1,200 women were attacked, 24 of whom said they were raped. The attacks were condemned by the then chancellor, Angela Merkel, as “abominable”.It is the United Nations’ biggest ever appeal for a single country. But the $5bn (£3.7bn) sought to stave off catastrophe in Afghanistan is dwarfed both by the trillions that were poured into the war, and by the level of current need. The Disasters Emergency Committee says that 95% of Afghans do not have enough to eat, and one million children are at risk of dying from malnutrition this winter. Women and other vulnerable people are especially hard-hit. The money is merely a stopgap, as the UN itself points out. Even if the appeal is fully funded – as it must be – the desperation will grow. Conditions will only worsen as winter intensifies, remaining possessions are sold and flimsy social safety nets break: even the relatively lucky are struggling, leaving them less able to help family and friends. The Taliban’s seizure of power last August brought economic collapse, and drought has exacerbated the crisis. One UN expert believes that no modern economy has experienced such an abrupt shock, with the overnight loss of foreign aid amounting to 43% of GDP. Work and salaries disappeared. The price of essential imports such as wheat surged. Asset freezes and sanctions have deepened the crisis. The Taliban’s repression has left women jobless: “While we are living under the poverty line, the statements of [the]Islamic Emirate are about women’s hair and faces,” complained protesters in Parwan province last week. No one wanted the Taliban to take power, and no one wishes to reward a group who are immiserating and punishing their compatriots and dismantling democratic institutions, even as they demand foreign assistance. But while western governments ask themselves if they can deal with the Taliban, Afghans have no such choice. Humanitarian relief is essential but wholly inadequate. In late December, the US extended and clarified its waivers for aid, including development funding. This must be given too, but carefully. Though international donors have very limited leverage, strict monitoring and conditionality – such as ensuring that only services accessible to women are funded – is necessary. This will not be about grand deals, but the grind of daily negotiations. European nations have gone further than the US in a “humanitarian plus” approach, but Afghanistan cannot get off its knees without a functioning financial system. Unfreezing the assets of the central bank remains a highly controversial option, for obvious reasons, and it is unclear that the Taliban are capable of handling it anyway. Among the alternatives mooted are the creation of a private central bank or credit swaps, perhaps the quickest fix. Without a serious effort to shore up the economy, others will feel the consequences too: there is a significant risk that Islamic State could gain ground and that the production of narcotics will increase sharply. More people will be forced to flee into grim conditions. Above all, the appalling human toll in Afghanistan will rise steeply. Judging the best path ahead is extremely difficult. What is striking is how little serious effort is being put into it. A greater sense of responsibility by the US, and of urgency across the international community, is desperately needed.This year’s Oscars ceremony will have a host after a three-year absence. During the winter Television Critics Association virtual press tour, the ABC entertainment president, Craig Erwich, announced that March’s ceremony would see a return to the tradition without revealing who might be hosting. “You heard it here first,” he said before quipping that it could be him. The Academy awards last had a host in 2018 in the shape of Jimmy Kimmel before the following year was plagued by controversy after resurfaced homophobic jokes and tweets caused Kevin Hart to stand down. The 2019 telecast saw a rise in viewers, up from 26.6 million to 29.5 million but subsequent years have seen a consistent fall with 2021’s ceremony plummeting to an all-time low of 10.4 million. After last year’s Covid-affected ceremony was held at Union Station, this year will see the Oscars return to the Dolby Theatre. The Girls Trip and Ride Along producer Will Packer has been named executive producer for the night. “Will really has his pulse on popular culture and entertainment,” Erwich said. “I know he has a lot in store and we’ll have more details to share soon.” Fresh off the record-breaking success of Spider-Man: No Way Home, star Tom Holland recently expressed interest in hosting. “If they ask me to, I would, and it would be very fun,” he said to the Hollywood Reporter. “I would really enjoy it.” The Hollywood Reporter revealed that the Academy did then reach out to Holland. Last weekend saw The Power of the Dog and West Side Story come out on top at a subdued, star-free Golden Globes which wasn’t televised after the Hollywood Foreign Press Association was boycotted by publicity firms, celebrities and studios. Oscar nominations will be revealed on 8 February with the ceremony taking place on 27 March.“Is this for real?” responded one Downing Street staff member to a party invitation from Boris Johnson’s private secretary at the height of the first lockdown. Sadly, shamefully, it was. The undisputed facts bear repetition. At the daily coronavirus news briefing on 20 May 2020, Oliver Dowden, then culture secretary, reiterated that Covid restrictions permitted individuals to meet just one person from outside their household. Barely an hour later, one of the prime minister’s most senior aides invited about 100 colleagues to a party in the Downing Street garden. Leaving no room for doubt as to the nature of the occasion, staff were told to “bring your own booze”. It seems that 30 to 40 people attended and the star guests, according to eyewitness accounts, were the prime minister and his now wife, Carrie. After a month of denials and disingenuous evasion over “partygate”, this latest evidence of an outrageous breach of public trust takes Mr Johnson into new, exposed territory. In December, when a leaked video revealed Downing Street aides joking about how to explain away a Christmas party, the prime minister exuded faux-indignation and launched an inquiry. When this newspaper subsequently published a now notorious photograph of a garden gathering enjoyed by No 10 staff on 15 May 2020 – with the prime minister and his wife both present – the occasion was defended as an extended work meeting. But Martin Reynolds’ email invitation, sent five days later, allows little wriggle room for alibis or obfuscation and places the prime minister’s future on the line. This was clearly a party, and it therefore broke the law; Mr Johnson has failed to deny that he went to it, and it seems wholly implausible that it could have been organised without his consent, tacit or otherwise. As unprecedented sacrifices were being required of those unable to see dying relatives or attend friends’ funerals, Downing Street was treating the lockdown rules that Mr Johnson had set with contempt. Sent out to defend the indefensible in the House of Commons on Tuesday, the paymaster general, Michael Ellis, chided MPs for rushing to “prejudge” the ongoing inquiry into Downing Street “gatherings”, which is being conducted by the senior civil servant Sue Gray. She was drafted in to replace the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, when it emerged that a Christmas event had been held for members of Mr Case’s own private office. Ms Gray is now charged with ascertaining the facts regarding a party that Mr Johnson himself is alleged to have attended, and on which he has refused to comment publicly, before reporting them to him. This black farce brings politics into disrepute at a time when trust between the governed and the governing remains vital in the management of the pandemic. The millions of Britons who obeyed Covid rules, in often heartbreaking circumstances, can only rely on the respected Ms Gray to do her job rigorously. But the Metropolitan police should prepare to launch their own inquiry into a saga which has scandalised the nation and which now directly implicates the prime minister in wrongdoing. On the day that Mr Reynolds encouraged colleagues to congregate and enjoy the hottest day of the year, the Met tweeted a warning that, whatever the weather, the public was obliged to stick to the rules. Fines were issued to those who did not. No healthy democracy can allow the perception to take root that certain powerful people are above the law, least of all during a public health crisis of the first order. Yet this is what Mr Johnson has allowed to happen. The prime minister will hope to bluster his way through, as he has done so often before. But if he is found to have egregiously flouted the rules, and misled parliament, he should pay the price.How much must Boris Johnson hate Michael Ellis? There again, how much must Michael Ellis hate Michael Ellis? It takes a special kind of person to volunteer to be the prime minister’s fall guy. Someone with even a trace of self-respect might have looked wistfully at the lateral flow test, inked on a second red line and made himself unavailable. Not the delusional Ellis. He was at his master’s beck and call: ready at all times to defend the totally indefensible in an act of imagined nobility. All he asked for in return was a knighthood for this and previous acts of slavish devotion to Johnson. It should, of course, have been Johnson who came to the Commons to answer the urgent question. After all, it was his party, in his garden, that he couldn’t remember attending. Short-term memory loss is beginning to look like the only excuse he has got. Feasible or not. But Boris has never been one to clean up his own shit. The MO of the Pikachu-lookalike with the toddler haircut has always been to generate chaos and let others take the rap. So brave. But with Johnson holed up in the Downing Street flat and refusing to come out, it was Ellis, the junior minister with the non-job of paymaster general, who was forced to show his face. Again. Only last December, he had been made to answer a previous UQ on other Downing Street parties and that hadn’t gone well, with his oily disposition and evasive answers attracting widespread derision from the opposition benches. Tuesday’s performance was pretty much a re-run of the first. Only with even less credibility as no one in the chamber seemed in any doubt about Johnson’s guilt. Ellis began by saying how sorry he was that the “allegations had arisen”. Not that the party had taken place, while the rest of the country were obeying the rules and some were being denied a last goodbye to their loved ones. Just sorry that someone had seen fit to blow the whistle on the gathering. It was already getting downgraded from a party. But that was all he could say because it would be wrong to prejudge Sue Gray’s investigation. After all, it was possible that during the course of her inquiry she would find Boris had been doing something completely different from what everyone thought he had been doing and so accidentally exonerated him. So there was no point anyone bothering to ascertain the truth because there was a half chance that Gray might fall for whatever lies the prime minister eventually came up with. A few Labour MPs clapped ironically. None of which went down with Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader. Her voice was laced with equal parts anger and scorn as she demanded some proper answers. Had the prime minister been at the party or not? That was surely a binary question which it should be easy to answer without a formal investigation. “He can run but he can’t hide,” she said. Which was not strictly true. He can barely even walk these days. Rayner ended by asking if Ellis still believed the prime minister to be a man of honour. Astonishingly, Ellis did. Though no one else did. Not even the handful of Tories who had bothered to show their faces for the government’s total humiliation. Desmond Swayne wondered if the Downing Street parties showed that everyone would have been better off being allowed to do what they wanted all along. Christopher Chope wished that all the dirty linen had been washed in one go rather than drip fed. Duh! There’s way too much of it for that. Maria Miller rather timidly suggested that maybe the debate should have been delayed until Gray had been given a chance to have a memory lapse and exonerate Johnson, but that was about as good as it got for Ellis. “I have the full support of the government,” said the ever-so-oily Ellis, apparently unaware that the frontbench was entirely empty apart from a lone whip, who had been sent to keep him company and was doing his best to pretend he wasn’t there. From time to time, he looked pleadingly up at the speaker, desperate to be put out of his misery. Most UQs only run for 45 minutes, but for this one Lindsay Hoyle was prepared to make an exception and go into 30 minutes overtime. If Johnson wouldn’t turn up then he’d make his understudy suffer. It was a punishment beating, with opposition MPs quoting the fury of their constituents and asking questions to which Ellis could only recite the same useless non-answer. “It would be wrong to prejudge the inquiry,” he said time and again. And time and again, he would be told that all the house wanted was confirmation that Boris had been at the party. Surely Ellis had asked him that before he had agreed to cover up for him? “I couldn’t possibly disclose private conversations,” he said, grandly. At which point his last remaining shred of self-worth shrivelled up and died. He was now a mere carapace, masquerading as sentient life. Ellis was not the only one having a bad day defending Johnson. The junior health minister, Edward Argar, had drawn the short straw of the morning media round and had been unable to explain anything to anyone. Not even why Boris needed an inquiry to tell him what he had been doing. Mostly Argar was left talking nonsense before deciding enough was enough and it was time to cover his own back. He definitely had been to no parties. He had spent all the last two years on Zoom. He definitely knew nothing. The more he spoke, the less convincing he sounded. But the prize for real stupidity went to Tory backbencher Michael Fabricant. No one had asked him to help, obviously, because he’s a perennial liability. But he volunteered anyway. The party wasn’t a party, it was just a group of workmates having a party. Thud. The sound of one wig clapping. Boris was just bewildered to find so many people in his garden. Thud. They deserved a party because they had been working so hard. Thud. With friends like these ... Still, at least we got one answer. For years, people have wondered what the point of Micky F was. Now we knew. To make third-raters like Ellis look smart.The Kremlin has said it sees “no significant reason for optimism” about diplomatic solutions for the Ukraine crisis, ahead of a meeting in Brussels between Russia and Nato’s 30 member states. As Moscow was playing down the chances for success at the negotiating table after initial US-Russian talks in Switzerland on Monday, Russian forces deployed near Ukraine conducted a live-fire military exercise involving 3,000 troops and tanks, in a clear rejection of US demands for a de-escalation in the region. A Russian delegation will hold talks with Nato’s 30 member states on Wednesday, in the first Nato-Russia Council meeting to be held since 2019. The idea behind the talks is to broaden the bilateral discussion begun by the US deputy secretary of state, Wendy Sherman, and her Russian counterpart, Sergei Ryabkov, in Geneva. Sherman and Ryabkov pointed to the “useful” and “professional” nature of the Geneva talks, in which the US proposed reciprocal confidence-building measures limiting missile deployment and military exercises in Europe. But Ryabkov said the negotiations had made no progress towards fulfilling Vladimir Putin’s central demand: a guarantee that Ukraine will never become a Nato member and that US troops and equipment would be withdrawn from former Soviet bloc countries in eastern Europe that are now in Nato. “So far, let’s say we see no significant reason for optimism,” the Kremlin spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, told reporters, adding that Russia was looking for quick results and would make an assessment of progress at the end of the week, following the Nato talks and a meeting on Thursday of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, is due to hold a press conference on Friday. “There are no clear deadlines here, no one is setting them. There is just the Russian position that we will not be satisfied with the endless dragging out of this process,” Peskov said. The US has firmly rejected the key Russian demands on Nato enlargement and troop withdrawals from eastern European countries that joined the treaty after 1997 as “non-starters”. Julianne Smith, the US ambassador to Nato, said Russia would get the same response from all members of the alliance on Wednesday. “In our prior consultations and meetings with allies … it has become crystal clear that not a single ally inside the Nato alliance is willing to budge or negotiate anything as it relates to Nato’s open-door policy,” Smith told reporters. “I cannot imagine any scenario where that is up for discussion.” As for Nato returning to its old posture before it began its eastern enlargement in 1997, the ambassador said: “I think we’re operating in today’s world with Nato as it stands today, and I don’t think anyone inside the Nato alliance is interested in going back in time to revisit an era where Nato looked a lot different than it does today.” Kadri Liik, a senior policy fellow at the European Council on Foreign Relations, said the approaches followed by the US and Russia were fundamentally incompatible, with the US seeking to reduce the talks to technical arms control issues while Russia wanted to use them to redefine Europe’s whole security order. “In Moscow’s view, the arms control agreements should follow the logic of the newly agreed order, not substitute for it,” Liik said. Whatever the outcome of this week’s diplomacy, she predicted it would “likely shape Europe’s strategic landscape for many years to come”.Unilever is frustrating its shareholders. Last year’s stock market “rally in everything” bypassed the consumer goods giant entirely. The shares fell by a tenth and, at £39.42, stand roughly at their level of five years ago, soon after the group adopted a supposedly energising cost-cutting and deal-making overhaul in response to its close encounter with Kraft Heinz’s financial engineers. There have been developments since then, such as the offloading of the low-growth PG Tips tea business a couple of months ago, but none has stirred excitement. Here’s fund manager Terry Smith, explaining to investors in his £29bn Fundsmith fund via his annual letter on Tuesday why the stock was a bottom-five performer in the portfolio: “Unilever seems to be labouring under the weight of a management which is obsessed with publicly displaying sustainability credentials at the expense of focusing on the fundamentals of the business.” Smith cited the row over Unilever brand Ben &amp; Jerry’s refusal to sell ice-cream in the occupied Palestinian territories, but offered other examples: “A company which feels it has to define the purpose of Hellmann’s mayonnaise has in our view clearly lost the plot. The Hellmann’s brand has existed since 1913 so we would guess that by now consumers have figured out its purpose (spoiler alert – salads and sandwiches).” Make up your own mind about the Ben &amp; Jerry’s affair (note that its founders enjoy semi-autonomy under the Unilever umbrella), but Smith’s criticisms play into a general sense that Unilever has drifted back into comfortable mode. In reality, the corporate emphasis on “purpose” may not be the problem since it has always been part of Unilever’s makeup. Rather, it’s the failure to convert those “value” credentials, which are supposed to be a commercial advantage these days, into serious acceleration in the profits line. At the nine-month point last year, Unilever still showed underlying sales growth of 4.4%, so in the upper half of its totemic 3% to 5% range, but the share price underperformance versus its peers is striking. It can’t simply be explained by the fact that Nestlé has shifted mountains of pet food during the pandemic and Unilever isn’t in that game. It’s more a case of chief executive Alan Jope’s expansionary ambitions in areas such as nutritional supplements, plant-based food and e-commerce beauty products looking lacklustre and very long term. Unilever, by reputation, is a formidable marketing machine, but the pace of transformation feels pedestrian versus expectations set after Kraft Heinz was defeated. The lesson of that episode was that the best defence against interlopers who don’t share your values is a high share price. With a stock market value of £101bn, Unilever is surely out of range for would-be bidders these days but rumbling among shareholders carries its own dangers. Jope must know it goes wider than one fund manager. Others ask why Unilever’s rivals are better at sticking to their profit margin guidance, to which there is no simple answer. A couple of strong quarters might banish the doubters and restore faith in Unilever’s brand and distribution clout, which are the qualities that persuade Smith to stick with the investment. But it needs to happen. A pandemic and inflation in the price of raw materials do not make Jope’s life easy, but he is now in his third year in the job. It is the point at which he is expected to deliver more than purposeful mayonnaise. Heathrow boss indulges in a flight of fancy Heathrow never passes up an opportunity to grumble about travel restrictions and its regulatory lot, and, sure enough, its chief executive, John Holland-Kaye, was at it again as passenger numbers for 2021 were revealed to be 19.4 million, lower than in 2020 and less than one-quarter of pre-pandemic 2019’s figure. On travel restrictions, Holland-Kaye may be winning the argument slowly, but he’s pushing his luck in warning about “a return to the Heathrow hassle days of the early 2000s” unless the Civil Aviation Authority, which sets landing charges, focuses on “an outcome that improves service, incentivises growth and protects affordable private financing”. Come on, the CAA, in its interim ruling last month, allowed Heathrow to raise its charges by 56% to £30.19 a passenger from the start of this year. The final outcome is awaited in the spring but, if 56% is an approximate guide, the airport’s wealthy owners should count their blessings. In pursuit of revival, shareholders in every airline have already been expected to dig deep.Newcastle are poised to make Chris Wood their second January signing, with the striker scheduled for a medical after the club agreed to meet the release clause of about £20m in his Burnley contract. A centre-forward has been a priority for Eddie Howe after Callum Wilson suffered a calf injury and Wood, whose Burnley contract runs to 2023, provides Premier League experience and is no stranger to a relegation fight. Wood has three goals in 18 league appearances this season, considerably down on his average of a goal broadly every three top-flight games. If all goes to plan the 30-year-old, who has agreed personal terms, will make his debut at home to Watford on Saturday in a match that could go some way to shaping Newcastle’s season. The first signing of the Saudi Arabian-led era at St James’ Park was the right-back Kieran Trippier and the club are pushing to make other purchases. Newcastle are keen on the Monaco centre-back Benoît Badiashile after failing to persuade Lille to sell Sven Botman. A second young French player, the striker Hugo Ekitike, is also in their sights, although their opening proposal is expected to be rejected by Reims and a deal could be difficult this month. Badiashile, a France Under-21 international, has played more than 100 times for Monaco since his debut in November 2018 and has been a Europa League regular this season. He suffered an injury against Nantes last weekend and tests on Tuesday indicated he should return in two to three weeks. An update on the 20-year-old’s fitness could be key to his future. Botman had been Newcastle’s first-choice central defender but the club had more than one bid rejected. West Ham are also interested in Badiashile and similarly are among the clubs targeting Ekitike, although Newcastle’s pursuit of the France Under-20 international is the most advanced. Reims value Ekitike at about €30m (£25m) and want a sell-on clause in any deal for the player, who has come through their ranks. Ekitike has scored eight goals and provided two assists in 17 Ligue 1 appearances this season in a team 14th in the table. He made his first-team debut in October 2020. Chelsea are continuing attempts to bring back Emerson Palmieri from his loan at Lyon by offering about €4m in compensation. Palmieri is their preferred option to replace the injured Ben Chilwell but Lyon have rejected two previous approaches from the Premier League club.A cross-party group of MPs has delivered a scathing attack on a “shambolic” and “appalling” appointments process in which a successful candidate to chair the charities watchdog resigned just days before he was due to take up the job, amid reports about his conduct in a previous role. In a lengthy hearing on Tuesday morning, the digital, culture, media and sport select committee grilled senior civil servants over the “debacle” in which Martin Thomas was approved as Charity Commission chair by MPs in December, then quit soon afterwards when press reports that he had faced allegations of misconduct surfaced. MPs said they were incredulous that the appointments system had not picked up an allegation that Thomas had been found to have acted inappropriately while previously the chair of a woman’s charity, despite the charity formally reporting the incident to the regulator. The committee chair, Julian Knight, compared the failure to successfully appoint a chair of the Charity Commission to delays and rows that have dogged the appointment of a new chair of the media regulator, Ofcom. Both roles have been unfilled for nearly a year. “By our viewpoint, what we have seen is a complete shambles in terms of appointments that are in the purview of this committee. They are huge appointments to the good of this country and they have been handled in a way that this committee is actually flabbergasted to the degree to which there have been such failings. “The British civil service used to be called a Rolls-Royce, didn’t it. When politicians were making mistakes the civil servant would pick up the pieces and glide the country through thick and thin. Is it more of a Reliant Robin now, rather than a Rolls-Royce?” The government is continuing to seek a new head of Ofcom after the former Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre unexpectedly pulled out of the running in November after concerns were raised about the transparency of the recruitment process. The Ofcom role was advertised last February. Senior Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport civil servants, who oversaw the Charity Commission appointment, admitted to the committee that as a matter of departmental policy they had not taken up references for Thomas, and nor had they checked Thomas’s track record as chair of 14 charities with the commission. The committee also tore into the commissioner for public appointments, William Shawcross, after he at first refused to comment to the committee on the Charity Commission chair appointment because he was carrying out an inquiry into it, and then said he “did not think the DCMS was to blame” for the failure to appoint. John Nicolson MP told a visibly discomforted Shawcross he had effectively told the entire committee his decision before he had even started his inquiry. “Can you imagine the judge in a court saying before the trial begins: ‘Of course the defendant is clearly innocent, but I’m not pre-judging in any way, let’s proceed’?” Sarah Healey, the permanent secretary at the DCMS, denied the Charity Commission appointments process had been a failure, saying it had been carried out in line with official guidance. She defended not taking references from previous employers and said Thomas himself should have highlighted the incident to his interviewers. Thomas has said he left the charity in question, Women for Women International, in the summer and was unaware when he subsequently applied for the £62,000 a year Charity Commission role that a formal complaint made against him, relating to comments made on a zoom call, had been upheld by the charity. Three other formal complaints made against him had not been upheld, including a 2018 incident in which he mistakenly sent a photo of himself in a lingerie store to a female employee instead of the charity chief executive, whom he was trying to warn against taking a donation from the same lingerie store brand. Healey said ministers had not yet decided whether to re-run the appointments process for the Charity Commission chair post or to appoint from the list of seven candidates previously interviewed for the role and who were assessed as suitable for ministers to choose from. Knight said: “I’m absolutely astounded that your employer has not spoken to previous employers. You seem to do less checks for a £70bn sector of the UK economy [with] 180,000 charities than, frankly, if you were employing someone to do a paper round.” Healey said Whitehall departments each had different policies on whether to take up references, which could be a time-consuming process and often did not add much value other than to confirm the dates of a person’s previous employment. • This article was amended on 12 January 2022. In a previous version, Ofcom was incorrectly referred to as “Ofsted” in one instance.The fight over voting rights in the US has arrived at a hugely consequential juncture. After watching Republicans ram through state bills that impose new voting restrictions, Joe Biden and Democrats in the Senate are set to make their most aggressive effort yet to push back. Later this week, the Senate will vote on legislation that would amount to the most significant expansion of voting rights protections since the civil rights era. Here’s a look at how the fight over voting rights has unfolded over the last year: Why are voting rights under threat? All of the data from the 2020 election points to it being one one of the most successful in American history. About two-thirds of eligible voters – 158 million people – cast a ballot, a record turnout. About a week after the election, a coalition of experts, including a top official in Donald Trump’s Department of Homeland Security, described the election as “the most secure in American history”. Nonetheless, Republican state lawmakers fueled an unprecedented surge of legislation to impose new restrictions on voting. In total, more than 440 bills that included measures to restrict voting access were introduced in 49 states in 2021, according to the Brennan Center for Justice. Thirty-four of those bills became law in 19 states. Many of the measures impose restrictions on mail-in voting, which was used in unprecedented numbers in 2020 amid the Covid pandemic. Republicans in Florida and Georgia, for example, limited or prohibited the use of mail-in ballot drop boxes, widely used in 2020 to ensure ballots made it back to election offices in time. Some states also imposed new identification requirements for voters both when they request and return a ballot, despite no evidence of widespread fraud. Lawmakers in Georgia passed measures that prohibit providing food or water to people standing in line to vote. Republicans have also taken up measures to exert control over who runs elections and counts. Election administration in the US has long been seen as a non-partisan job run by under-the-radar officials. But experts are concerned this new trend, which some call election subversion, could lead to partisan meddling. How do Republicans justify what they’re doing? Even though voter fraud is virtually non-existent, Republicans say their measures are needed to shore up confidence in elections. Polling shows significant numbers of Americans do not trust the results of the 2020 election. A recent UMass Amherst poll, for example, found that 33% do not believe the election was legitimate. That thinking belies reality. Much of the shaken confidence is because Trump continues to claim without evidence that the election was rigged. The Republican party has embraced his claims, ostracizing dissenters. Republicans also point to polling showing that voter ID is broadly supported, and to record high turnout as evidence voter suppression isn’t really a problem. Voting rights groups point out that while turnout was up in 2020, there are still persistent gaps between white and non-white voters. About 70.9% of white voters cast a ballot in 2020, compared with 58.4% of non-white, according to the Brennan Center. In Georgia, lawmakers have defended the ban on providing food and water to people in line by saying it’s needed to prevent unlawful electioneering. Will these new laws actually help Republicans? It’s not clear that new restrictions will benefit the GOP. A study from March 2021 found that vote-by-mail neither boosted turnout nor helped Democrats. That said, there is still deep concern that Republicans appear to be pushing restrictions in response to an election where more Americans than ever, including a high numbers of non-white people, cast a ballot. Republicans could benefit significantly from efforts to take over election administration. Election officials often wield tremendous power to set rules. What are Democrats doing to push back? The Democratic response is built around two pieces of federal legislation. One measure is the Freedom to Vote Act, which would overhaul rules for federal elections and set an expansive baseline for voter access. States would be required to offer 15 days of early voting, same-day voter registration and ballot drop boxes, among other measures. It also would prevent the removal without cause of elections officials. The second bill, the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act, would restore a key provision of the 1965 Voting Rights Act, requiring places where there is repeated evidence of recent voting discrimination to get changes to elections approved by the federal government. The US supreme court gutted a similar requirement in 2013. What is the filibuster and how is it related to all of this? The filibuster is a longstanding rule in the Senate. It requires 60 votes to move legislation to a final vote. The Senate is currently split 50-50 between Republicans and Democrats but Democrats control it via Vice-President Kamala Harris’s casting vote. Because there are not 10 Republicans who support the voting rights bills, Democrats have been unable to move either. There has been growing criticism of the filibuster from Democrats, who say Republicans have weaponized it into a tool of obstruction. How can Democrats change the filibuster? Democrats can change the filibuster with a majority vote. The problem is that two Democrats, Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, staunchly support leaving the filibuster in place. They say it is an important way to forge bipartisanship. And they argue that getting rid of the rule would allow Republicans, when back in control, to exert unlimited power. There have been aggressive negotiations to get both senators to support tweaking but not eliminating the filibuster. Ideas for such changes include requiring senators to actually talk on the floor of the Senate to hold up legislation, or to require 41 senators to actively show up to block a vote, instead of requiring 60 votes to advance. Chuck Schumer, the Senate majority leader, has pledged a vote on changes to the filibuster this week. It’s unclear what changes, if any, Manchin and Sinema support.Two of the world’s largest private equity firms are teaming up to bid for Boots, which is expected to be sold by its US owner this year for an estimated £10bn. The US group Bain Capital, which recently bought the bakery chain Gail’s and made a doomed bid for the British insurer LV= last year, is understood to have teamed up with UK-based CVC Capital. A one-time owner of the failed department store chain Debenhams, CVC now owns the Moto service station group, the RAC and the luxury watchmaker Breitling. Walgreens Boots Alliance (WBA), the US health group that has owned a stake in the UK’s dominant pharmacy chain since 2012, is considering a potential sale this year. Estimates on the price range from £5bn to £12bn. Any bid involving CVC and Bain is likely to mean a key role for Dominic Murphy, the CVC managing partner who currently sits on the WBA board. Murphy is likely to have to recuse himself from board discussions about the sale. His association with Boots dates back to 2007, when he teamed up with the Italian billionaire Stefano Pessina to take the chemist private. Then working for the private equity group KKR, Murphy helped negotiate an £11bn takeover of Alliance Boots, which had been formed by the merger of Pessina’s Alliance Unichem and Boots only the year before. The pair then brought about the even bigger merger with WBA, where Pessina is currently chairman. KKR retained a stake in Boots until 2016, and in 2019 the firm approached Walgreens about a buyout of the whole group, but a deal could not be agreed. Bain is thought to be interested in developing Boots’s online beauty and healthcare services, according to Sky News, which first reported CVC’s potential tie-up with the US private equity group. Other large private equity firms expected to consider a tilt at Boots include Apollo Global Management and Majestic Wine’s majority owner, Fortress Investment Group, which both missed out on the buyout of the British supermarket Morrisons last year. Apollo also attempted to buy Asda in 2020. British retail assets are seen as ripe for private equity investment as lack of certainty about winners and losers in a fast-changing consumer environment is prompting owners to sell up or seek new funds. A WBA statement said: “We can confirm that Walgreens Boots Alliance … has announced a strategic review, primarily focused on our successful Boots business. “This strategic review is at an exploratory stage and further announcements will be made in due course.” Any auction process is not expected to kick off until summer. However, the company previously said in a statement that Walgreens had “a renewed set of priorities and strategic direction for the group” that included “a more pointed focus on North America and on healthcare”. A stock market listing for the Nottingham-based retailer and pharmacist, which has more than 2,000 outlets and employs about 55,000 people, may also be on the cards as an alternative to a private sale. Boots has had a tough time in recent years as it has struggled to deal with a huge ageing store portfolio and difficulties in taking its brands worldwide even before the pandemic. In 2017, WBA sold off the Boots manufacturing business to the France-based specialist Fareva, including the Nottingham factory that it opened in the 1930s. In 2019, Boots said it would close up to 200 stores over two years. While the group, as an essential retailer, was able to trade during the recent high street lockdowns, its stores suffered from low visitor numbers while neighbouring businesses remained closed. Trading bounced back last year, with sales at established pharmacy counters up almost 9% in the three months to 30 November, while sales across the rest of its product ranges rose more than 16%. Online sales have almost doubled on pre-pandemic levels to account for 15% of the total. Boots, which was founded by the Quaker John Boot in 1849, has been in private hands since 2007, the year after it teamed up with Alliance Unichem, handing control to Pessina.Chopping onions is a recurring kitchen nightmare that often reduces home cooks to tears, but red eyes could be a thing of the past as “tearless” onions go on sale in the UK for the first time. Next week Waitrose will start selling Sunions in its stores, a “brown, tearless and sweet” onion variety that is being billed as a “gamechanger” for red-eyed chefs. The onions, which are being marketed using the strapline “not a single tear”, have taken more than 30 years to perfect. The irritation caused by the vapours released when chopping into an onion means that every day, Britons go to great lengths to take away the sob factor at meal times. The hacks used include sticking onions in the freezer first, soaking them in water, or even wearing swimming goggles. Indeed, Waitrose’s sister chain, John Lewis, sells special “onion goggles” with anti-fog lenses for £23 to get the job done. However, onion goggles could soon be obsolete thanks to Sunions, which Waitrose says are “perfect for those with sensitive eyes as well as cooking in the kitchen with children”. With the vegetable a staple of many dishes, Paul Bidwell, the supermarket’s onion buyer, said Sunions would be a versatile ingredient. The “sweetness of this type of onion lends itself perfectly to a variety of dishes, from salads to hot meals”, he said. However, at a time when food bills are going up anyway, Sunions may yet make your eyes water, as they are a lot more expensive than regular onions. A three-pack of Sunions costs £1.50 – or 50p an onion. That is three times as much as Waitrose’s cheapest own-brand onions, which are 14p each. The race to develop a tearless onion has been a long one, with scientists around the world working on prototypes for decades. Sunions were launched in the US four years ago. They reached mainland Europe last year when the brand was picked up by a number of Spanish retailers. The onion was originally developed by the agricultural giant Bayer, but is now owned by the chemicals firm BASF, which acquired part of its seeds and crop business. It says Sunions are not genetically modified but the product of decades of cross-breeding of less pungent strains of onion. On the brand’s website it says that, unlike all other onions, they “become sweeter every day”. “Volatile compounds in onions are responsible for tearing and pungent flavour and the amounts of those compounds in other onions remain the same or increase over time. In Sunions, these compounds do the exact opposite and decrease to create a tearless, sweet and mild onion.”The BBC opposes so-called “cancel culture” and will actively provide a platform for individuals with contrary viewpoints, according to the man who enforces its editorial standards. David Jordan, the BBC’s director of editorial policy, said the broadcaster should “represent all points of view” and wanted to see a belief in impartiality triumph over identity. “We are very committed to ensuring that viewpoints are heard from all different sorts of perspectives and we don’t subscribe to the ‘cancel culture’ that some groups would put forward,” he said. Jordan said everyone should expect their views to be appropriately represented by the national broadcaster – even if they believe the Earth is flat. “It’s critical to the BBC that we represent all points of view and give them due weight,” he said. “Flat-earthers are not going to get as much space as people who believe the Earth is round, but very occasionally it might be appropriate to interview a flat-earther. And if a lot of people believed in flat Earth we’d need to address it more.” Asked about issues such as transgender rights, Jordan told the House of Lords communications committee that impartiality should triumph over personal identity. He criticised the New York Times for some of its editorial choices in this area and said individual BBC staff should not be able to veto coverage. “Whether or not some members of our staff like it is not the point. They leave their prejudices at the door … they need to be prepared to hear viewpoints they might personally disagree with. It’s our job to get those viewpoints proportionately viewed on the BBC,” Jordan said. Tim Davie, the director general, is attempting to put impartiality at the centre of his pitch for the future of the corporation’s news division and has already cracked down on social media use and announced ongoing impartiality reviews. However, the corporation is currently dealing with internal staff battles over its approach to covering topics such as politics, race and gender self-identification with wider questions about who gets to define impartiality. Davie said he was aware of staff concerns that the focus on impartiality could leave BBC journalists reluctant to take risks and make bold editorial decisions. He also accepted that the BBC’s understanding of where it needs to change its editorial approach is often shaped by external forces. “We are beasts of the wider world. If we’re sensing there is genuine concern about an area or we’re getting more complaints in an area, that will help inform our decisions about where we want to focus our internal reviews,” Davie said.Good morning. The world is waiting for news from Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, who has yet to decide the fate of Novak Djokovic. Covid is sweeping across Europe as health officials in Australia call for stronger public health messaging about ventilation. Djokovic has been training with his coach in Melbourneas he awaits a verdict from Hawke. Australian Border Force is investigating whether he incorrectly declared he had not travelled for two weeks before his flight to Australia, despite social media posts showing him in Belgrade before flying out of Spain. The fiasco reveals a much larger problem with Australia’s borders, writes Ben Doherty. “In its incompetent handling of Djokovic’s case, the Australian government has exposed not just one bizarre case, but systemic, structural flaws in the way Australia treats those who arrive on its shores.” Other tennis stars are now speaking out about the situation, with Andy Murray suggesting Djokovic has questions to answer, and Marton Fucsovics saying: “I don’t think Novak has the right to be here.” Australia needs to improve its public health focus on air quality, rather than hand hygiene, to combat the spread of Covid, experts say. Health officials are calling for the government to implement an air safety campaign and set standards for safe indoor air as awareness of viral airborne transmission lags behind previous messaging. But physical distancing and mask-wearing may still be the most effective prevention methods after a new study suggests the virus loses 90% of its ability to infect us within five minutes of becoming airborne. So is it time to consider switching your reusuable mask for a respirator? Australia’s promised supplies of 51m doses of the Novavax vaccine may be approved within months after the company finally completed its approval applications with the health department. The WHO is warning Omicron could infect half of Europe’s population within the next two months if immediate action isn’t taken. The region recorded more than 7 million new cases in the first week of 2022. Hans Kluge, the WHO’s Europe director, said while vaccines provided “good protection” against severe disease and death, rising hospital admissions were “challenging health systems” and it was too soon to start treating the coronavirus as an endemic illness. Australia Covid-related staff shortages in the disability sector are leaving some people without access to vital services and anger is brewing among providers who say they’ve been left to compete for rapid antigen tests with other businesses and the general public. A Labor government will commit up to $200m a year from the $4.7bn emergency response fund to disaster prevention and resilience, including measures such as flood levees, sea walls and cyclone shelters. Labor accused the Morrison government of sitting on the emergency respond fund, which had “done nothing to help” prepare the country for natural disasters. Farmers have committed to work with traditional owners after land in the Liverpool Plains of NSW has been bought back by local farming families. Gomeroi traditional custodians were still seeking assurances that their sacred places were safe and accessible to Indigenous people. Santos has been accused of failing Indigenous groups and treating one of the country’s biggest landholders with a “cavalier attitude” as it faces court action over a proposed expansion of its fracking operations in the Beetaloo Basin. Queensland police officers have been cleared of wrongdoing in the death of an Indigenous man in custody but a Queensland coroner wants the state’s police force review the use of a controversial neck hold which was used to restrain the man before he died of a heart attack. The world Protesters have gathered in Fayetteville, North Carolina, for a second night in a row after a Black man was killed by an off-duty sheriff’s deputy. The deputy told authorities Jason Walker, 37, had jumped on to his vehicle. The UK’s Metropolitan police have been accused of “deferring to the powerful” by not investigating Downing Street parties held in apparent breach of lockdown rules. Germany’s climate minister has called for cuts to carbon emissions to be trebled, arguing the country faced a race against time and required a “massive national debate” to achieve his ministry’s goals. Recommended reads Almost two decades after The OC first hit the screen, the glossy teen show is well worth a rewatch, writes Nathan Jolly. “The OC was one of those lightning-in-a-bottle shows, intended by its creators to be a cross between The Karate Kid and 90210 … Best of all, The OC was ridiculous, and knew it. The show was filled with self-knowing winks, wry references to its own craziness, and never painted its faulted characters as entirely aspirational – despite how many pool-houses and ponies they possessed.” Michael Sun grew up in a household eating copious amounts of chilli at every mealtime: heapings of chopped bird’s eye on eggs, extremely liberal lashings of Tabasco in popcorn, huge dollops of hot sauce consumed straight from the spoon. Sun shares this 10-minute chilli oil recipe that suits everything from toasties to tofu and spoonfuls straight in your gob. “Does too much of this chilli oil make my stomach ache with an intense burning sensation as I lay awake at 3am? Yes. Will I continue making it and then overindulging anyway? Also yes,” Sun says. In our weekly interview about objects, Rhys Nicholson talks cooking, heirlooms and airport mishaps. “A few years ago, I was heading to the airport in Auckland at 6am and realised I didn’t have my passport with me,” the comedian says. “I was coming back to Australia and was going to land and go straight to shows. It was too late to cancel them and my agent was calling people in a panic. It was the most useless I’ve ever felt in my life.” Listen When released from prison, Darko Desic faces deportation to a country that no longer exists. Desic turned himself in to police in Sydney 30 years after escaping jail. In this episode of Full Story, Ben Doherty explores how Desic’s friends and family are pleading for the Australian government to show mercy and let him stay. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport US Open champion Emma Raducanu has been defeated 6-0, 6-1 by Elena Rybakina in Sydney after returning to the court for the first time since contracting Covid in December. Andy Murray won his first match of the season with a brisk 6-3, 6-1 triumph over Viktor Durasovic. Media roundup Non-Covid patients in South Australia will be moved to private hospitals to open up more hospital beds for Covid patients across Adelaide as the state prepares for an Omicron peak in two weeks, reports the Advertiser. Victorian schools are yet to receive government guidelines on minimising Covid infections just weeks from the start of term one, reports the Age. And if you’ve read this far … Residents of Hamilton in Ontario, Canada woke up to find their streets covered in soya bean husk instead of snow after the husks were released in to a filter malfunction at a nearby factory. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday from 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.The alleged parties hosted in Downing Street during lockdown have sparked a mix of horror, fury and cynical humour since the first reports emerged late last year. Every few days, a new piece of evidence has emerged, each more damning than the last and providing more fodder for outrage, dismay and humour on social media. The latest development, on the leak of an email inviting more than 100 Downing Street staff to a “bring your own booze” party during lockdown in May 2020, spawned tens of thousands of comments. On the trending #DowningStreetParties hashtag, one doctor whose tweet has gone viral recalled how she had to wear uncomfortable, sweaty PPE as she watched people die in May 2020, and had been left with post-traumatic stress disorder. Author Michael Rosen combined pathos and humour, ironically quipping “damn, I missed it” of the party – he was in a coma at the time due to coronavirus. Many commenters reflected on being unable to see relatives, including those who would later die of Covid, in May 2020. Some recalled saying goodbye to dying relatives over Zoom or FaceTime. One commenter shared an image of her dad followed by a picture of a coffin, and said she had been unable to see her father in the 37 days between the photos “because I followed the rules set out by our prime minister”. Some shared pictures of empty public spaces, such as parks where police had broken up gatherings of more than two people from different households, or empty play parks where children were banned. Several commenters referenced Jessica Allen and Eliza Moore, who were fined by police for taking two warm drinks on a socially distanced walk in Derbyshire during the third lockdown last January on the grounds it was an “illegal picnic”. Some noted how challenging the early lockdowns had been for those living in small spaces without a balcony or garden, given rules in the first lockdown had prevented people from sitting down outside in public places. Other commentators opted to seek comfort from the unhappy lockdown memories in gallows humour, likening festival scenes to the Downing Street party. One commenter speculated that perhaps the prime minister’s feeble clap for the NHS had been due to a hangover from the party, which he has not denied attending. There was much scepticism on social media over whether anyone would be held to account. One commentator referenced the allegations that the Metropolitan police have been accused of “deferring to the powerful” by not investigating the parties with an apt reference to Chief Wiggum, the bumbling and incompetent police chief in The Simpsons. And some recommended the public channel their anger at the Conservatives into their voting intentions. One pithily suggested that perhaps the real party to focus on and be appalled by is the one currently occupying No 10.The Australian Border Force is investigating whether Novak Djokovic incorrectly declared he had not travelled and would not do so for two weeks before his flight to Australia, in the latest twist in the tennis star’s visa cancellation saga. Questions have been raised about the declaration completed by an agent for Djokovic, with social media posts seemingly showing he was in Belgrade on Christmas Day before flying to Australia from Spain on 4 January. On Tuesday, the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, received a call from his Serbian counterpart, Ana Brnabić, in which he sought to manage the diplomatic fallout of the overturned visa cancellation by insisting Australia’s border policies were non-discriminatory. Despite a win in court restoring his visa on Monday, Djokovic’s fate will now be determined by Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, due to his personal power to again cancel the visa and deport the world’s No 1 male tennis player. Any decision to recancel the visa would likely be met by a fresh legal challenge from Djokovic, and a request for an injunction to stay out of immigration detention so that he could play in the Australian Open, where he is chasing a male record 21st grand slam singles title. In order to recancel the visa, Hawke would have to be satisfied of a ground for cancellation, such as a threat to public safety, and that cancellation was in the public interest. That could bring fresh scrutiny to Djokovic’s pre-travel declaration and his public appearances in the days after his positive Covid test result of 16 December. In his Australian traveller declaration, filed on 1 January, Djokovic declared “no” when asked: “Have you travelled or will you travel in the 14 days prior to your flight to Australia?” The declaration is accompanied with a warning that giving false or misleading information is a “serious offence”, also punishable by civil penalties. In documents filed to the federal circuit court, Djokovic said that on 1 January he authorised his agent to submit this declaration, before travelling to Melbourne from Spain via Dubai on 4 January. In his interview with border force officials on 6 January, Djokovic confirmed the declaration was completed by his agent, “based on” his Tennis Australia-approved medical exemption, but was not asked in the interview about travel in the fortnight before arrival. A Twitter post by a Portuguese tennis reporter, Jose Morgado, appears to show Djokovic was in Belgrade at Christmas, posing with the handball star Petar Djordjic. Djokovic was also pictured playing tennis in the streets of Belgrade in a video post on Instagram from 26 December, which now appears to have been taken down. Djokovic flew from Spain to Melbourne, where he arrived at 11.30pm on 5 January. Asked if the travel declaration could provide fresh grounds to cancel Djokovic’s visa, a spokesperson for Hawke said the minister was still considering whether to exercise his power to do so. “In line with due process, minister Hawke will thoroughly consider the matter. As the issue is ongoing, for legal reasons it is inappropriate to comment further.” The travel declaration comes on top of reported anomalies on the official website showing Djokovic’s positive Covid test, which was the basis for his claimed medical exemption from vaccination. Der Spiegel reported that the QR code linked to Djokovic’s Covid-19 test on 16 December, published in court documents on Monday, at times appeared to return a negative result. According to Der Spiegel, accessing Djokovic’s test result via QR code on Monday evening Australia time revealed a negative test result, before a subsequent attempt showed a positive result. Later on Tuesday Spiegel raised fresh questions about Djokovic’s test results. It alleged anomalies between the paper version of the PCR test result shown to be positive and the digital version of it as presented by the tennis player’s lawyers. The paper version reportedly indicates that the alleged positive test result is not from 16 December, but - according to the time stamped on it - from 26 December, 14.21 Serbian time. Djoković’s lawyers handed over a second coronavirus test result, this time negative. This is supposed to prove that Djokovic had recovered from his coronavirus illness. According to the documents, it was produced on the afternoon of 22 December and in this case, reportedly tallies with the digital time stamp as to when the test was carried out. According to findings by the IT research group Zerforschung, and shared with Spiegel, the positive test from 16 December had the Serb testing system number 7371999. The negative test result, carried out on 22 December reportedly had an identification number that was around 50,000 positions lower. The Zerforschung researchers have told Spiegel they have confirmation that the test ID numbers rise, rather than fall, raising questions that the test allegedly from 22 December was carried out prior to the test allegedly from 16 December. Spiegel has put the question to both Djokovic and to the Serbian health authorities, but by Tuesday evening had yet to get a response. Views within the Australian government are mixed on whether it should enforce a zero-tolerance approach on the requirement to be vaccinated and reject Djokovic’s exemption based on his recent Covid test result. A spokesperson for Morrison said he had a “constructive call with prime minister Brnabić this morning on Novak Djokovic”. “The PM explained our non-discriminatory border policy and its role in protecting Australia during the Covid-19 pandemic. “They both agreed to stay in contact on the issue, and to further strengthening the bilateral relationship.” Last week, Morrison vacillated on the question, at first deferring to the Victorian state government about whether Djokovic should be allowed in without quarantine, before backflipping to declare “rules are rules” and the vaccination requirement must be enforced. In a statement on Tuesday, the ATP tour said although it fully respected Australia’s “stringent immigration policies” it was “clear Novak Djokovic believed he had been granted a necessary medical exemption in order to comply with entry regulations”. “The series of events leading to Monday’s court hearing have been damaging on all fronts, including for Novak’s well-being and preparation for the Australian Open.” In a statement on Tuesday, Djokovic’s lawyers, Hall and Wilcox, confirmed he attended the court hearing at their Melbourne office – despite the firm’s policy requiring a Covid-19 vaccination – with “a medical exemption approved by our Covid officer and managing partner”. Djokovic’s agent and lawyers have been contacted for comment.Did Novak Djokovic actually test positive for Covid-19? The world No 1 was given permission to play in Melbourne by Tennis Australia and the state authorities in Victoria only after providing a document showing he had a positive test for Covid on 16 December. In the eyes of their medical panels – although not the Australian government’s – that made him eligible for a medical exemption, which meant Djokovic did not have to quarantine for 14 days after arriving in Australia. However on Monday, Der Spiegel claimed that when it scanned the QR code belonging to Djokovic’s PCR test at 1.19pm German time it said: “Test result Negative.” However an hour later, after another scan, it said: “Positive.” Several others – including the New York Times journalist Ben Rothenberg – reported the same findings, with Rothenberg also posting a photo of the two different results. When the Guardian tried on Tuesday it returned universally positive results. Meanwhile, on Tuesday, Der Spiegel said it had found an anomaly in the timestamp for the digital version of Djokovic’s positive test which, it claimed, indicated the result may actually be from 26 December and not the 16th. When asked about Djokovic’s PCR test on Monday, his brother Djordje insisted the entire process was public and “all documents are legal”. If Djokovic did test positive, why did he appear at several public events without a mask shortly afterwards? Djokovic took a PCR test at 1pm on 16 December and received his positive result seven hours later. At the time of his test, Serbia legally required those who had Covid to self-isolate for 14 days or risk a fine. Instead Djokovic attended a ceremony for the unveiling of a stamp in his honour in Belgrade, which he posted about on Twitter, and then also posed with 23 young players at his tennis academy. Meanwhile on 18 December, the French newspaper L’Équipe said he took part in its Champion of Champions awards photo shoot in Belgrade. Djokovic is yet to comment. However when his brother, Djordje, was asked about those public appearances at a media event on Monday he suddenly announced: “This press conference is adjourned at the moment.” Did Djokovic fill in his Australian Travel Declaration form incorrectly? When Djokovic’s declaration was filed on 1 January, the answer “no” was ticked to the question: “Have you travelled, or will you travel, in the 14 days prior to your flight to Australia?” However Djokovic flew to Melbourne from Spain on 4 January, having apparently spent the new year in Marbella. On 31 December a social media post also purported to show him participating in an activity with children from the SotoTennis Academy in Cádiz, where he filmed a message. A tweet on Christmas Day from the tennis journalist José Morgado suggests Djokovic was in Belgrade alongside the Serbian handball player Petar Djordjic, in an image taken from the latter’s Instagram on the same day. A video of him playing tennis from a different account was posted on the same day and deleted on Tuesday. In an affidavit Djokovic submitted to the court, he said he “authorised” his agent to submit the travel declaration form although among the documents he also suggested it was Tennis Australia. In his interview with border officials, he seemed to credit it at different times to the Australian government and his agent or manager. The form states that “giving false and misleading information is a serious offence. You may also be liable to a civil penalty for giving false or misleading information.” Border officials also may have questions to answer, however. Serbia is not in the EU, but Spain is in the Schengen zone so if Djokovic had travelled, there should have been a stamp in his passport showing the date of his arrival in Spain. Did the Australian Open and Victorian authorities ignore their own rules? Tennis Australia’s chief executive, Craig Tiley, said last week the potential reasons for medical exemptions from vaccination to play in the tournament included previous adverse response to vaccines, recent major surgery or myocarditis or certified evidence of a Covid infection in the previous six months. However the deadline for applying for a medical exemption from vaccination to compete at the Australian Open was 10 December — six days before Djokovic’s positive test result. Yet on 30 December it allowed the Serb to play. So why did the authorities appear to bend their own rules? If Djokovic had not tested positive, what was his plan for competing in Melbourne? On the face of it, Djokovic appeared likely to sit out a tournament he has won a record nine times until he caught Covid on 16 December – which suddenly satisfied Tennis Australia and the Victorian authorities that he deserved a medical exemption. But would the world No 1 really have spurned the chance to win a men’s record-breaking 21st grand slam in Melbourne if he had not gotten ill? What happens now? Djokovic practised again on Tuesday while he awaited the decision of Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, who could yet revoke his visa for a second time using powers granted to him by Australia’s Migration Act. That decision is now likely to be on Wednesday at the earliest.It was unusually warm on 20 May 2020, with the mercury hitting 26C. The windows of No 10 Downing Street were still displaying rainbows drawn by children in support of the NHS and Boris Johnson had enjoyed an early morning run in shorts and T-shirt. The sunny weather coincided with a retrospectively misplaced sense of optimism inside the building that the worst of Covid was now behind us despite strict national lockdown measures still in place. Five days earlier, staff in a celebratory mood had enjoyed impromptu drinks in the garden of No 10 and inside their offices, with Johnson telling one that they deserved their drink for “beating back the virus”. In public, cabinet ministers were sternly reminding people not to mix with more than one other person from outside their household. Schools and many businesses remained shut, people were dying alone, and many were suffering terrible loneliness after two months locked down. But according to those working in Downing Street at the time, there was a hopeful feeling at the top of government that the deadly wave of Covid was passing and the country would reopen before long. One insider said it verged on a “saviour complex”, whereby the hard work and sense of having triumphed over the virus divorced those inside the No 10 sanctuary from the reality of rules outside. It was against this backdrop that Martin Reynolds, Johnson’s principal private secretary, emailed more than 100 colleagues working in No 10 asking them to “join us” for a “bring your own booze” party later that day from 6pm. “After what has been an incredibly busy period we thought it would be nice to make the most of the lovely weather and have some socially distanced drinks in the No 10 garden this evening,” he said. About 40 staffers attended the event, with long tables laid out in the garden with crisps, crudités and sausage rolls. “It was picnic stuff in plastic boxes, I think, not much ceremony,” one said. But the alcohol was flowing freely and people were “boozing”, they added. The prime minister, recently recovered from a spell in hospital with Covid, went along with his soon-to-be wife, Carrie, who had recently given birth to their son, Wilfred. At the time, several of those working in the building knew it was an ill-judged move and chose not to go, with one calling the idea of the gathering “absolutely mental”. Another person who claims to have raised the alarm is Dominic Cummings, the prime minister’s senior adviser at the time, whose lockdown-busting travels were revealed by the Guardian and Daily Mirror two days later. A fortnight on, he appeared in the same No 10 garden to defend himself against accusations he broke the rules. Another No 10 source told the Guardian they also mentioned at the time that the 20 May party was not advisable. Former civil servants remarked on how unusual the Reynolds invite appeared to be, coming from a senior official. No 10 has declined to answer any questions about whether the gathering was sanctioned by Johnson. But staffers said it was not out of character for Reynolds. One former aide said the senior No 10 civil servant – who had previously worked alongside Johnson in the Foreign Office – was well liked by the prime minister. “He’s good at ‘not hearing things’ when the things being said are off-colour. He’s not uptight,” they claimed. Johnson has so far backed Reynolds to stay in post, while the inquiry into the party by veteran civil servant Sue Gray is ongoing. But there is a widespread feeling in Westminster that he will not survive in his job for long and rumours that Johnson is casting round for possible replacements. Reynolds, the former ambassador to Libya, is rumoured to be heading back to the diplomatic service, with one source saying he was keen to return to the Middle East. “Martin [Reynolds] literally sent an invitation to a large-scale party, bring your own booze, which totally breaks the rules; he can’t escape the rap,” one former staffer said. One Whitehall source who spent time in No 10 said they could understand the pressures junior staffers were under during the period. “They worked in the office the whole time when their colleagues were working from home. And you are working on something so important, it gets a bit ‘saviour complex’. You lose touch with how things are perceived.” Another source with knowledge of two No 10 parties later in 2020 said there had been an element of entitlement about the decision to ignore the rules, with a common theme that those working there felt they “deserved” the privilege after all they had been through. A former No 10 aide said this “bubble mentality” when it comes to sticking to the rules – evident from Cummings and his own trips during lockdown, Matt Hancock and his affair with an aide in breach of social distancing rules, and the multiple examples of Downing Street parties – goes a long way to “explain – but not excuse” the goings-on. “It is hard to see Sue Gray accepting this as any sort of mitigation,” they said.The US recorded a record number of hospitalisations due to Covid-19, the Biden administration said, as daily infections soared to more than 1.35m. Nonetheless, politics dominated a Senate hearing on the pandemic on Tuesday, as Republicans attempted to use the disease for political gain. Rand Paul of Kentucky clashed once again with Anthony Fauci, Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser. “In usual fashion, Senator, you are distorting everything about me,” Fauci said. “You keep coming back to personal attacks on me that have absolutely no relevance.” Paul, who has repeatedly used public health hearings for political grandstanding and launching personal attacks on Fauci, variously accused the immunologist of working to smear scientists and being responsible for school closures, while reiterating rightwing theories about the origin of Covid-19. Fauci has been subjected to death threats and said his family had been harassed “because people are lying about me”. He held up a printout of a page on Paul’s campaign website, which had the banner “Fire Dr Fauci” next to an invitation to donate to Paul’s re-election effort. “You are making a catastrophic epidemic for your political gain,” Fauci said. He also described the arrest in Iowa in December of a man who police said planned to kill Fauci and other powerful figures and was carrying an assault rifle. “What happens when [Paul] gets out and accuses me of things that are completely untrue,” Fauci said, “is that it kindles the crazies out there and I have threats upon my life, harassment of my family and my children with obscene phone calls because people are lying about me.” There were 145,982 people hospitalised with coronavirus in the US on Monday, according to data from the Department of Health and Human Services. Reuters reported that the previous high was 132,051, set in January 2021. According to Reuters there were 1.35m new Covid infections on Monday, also a record. Measures vary and observers point out that many home tests are not officially logged. But NBC News reported at least 1,343,167 new infections. The highly contagious Omicron variant has seen hospitalisations double in three weeks. The seven-day average for new cases has tripled in two weeks to more than 700,000 a day. Large numbers of Covid cases tend to be reported on Mondays due to many states not reporting over the weekend, but the 1.35m total reported this week comfortably outstripped the previous record of 1.03m, recorded on Monday 3 January. Delaware, Illinois, Maryland, Missouri, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, the US Virgin Islands, Vermont, Virginia, Washington DC and Wisconsin have reported record levels of cases recently. Only seven states have not set records for cases in 2022: Arizona, Idaho, Maine, Montana, North Dakota, Ohio and Wyoming, Reuters said. At the Senate hearing, Fauci was asked for an update on the effect of the virus on vaccinated people compared with unvaccinated people. He reiterated that getting vaccinated was the best way to avoid serious illness. Fauci said unvaccinated people were 10 times more likely to test positive for Covid-19, 17 times more likely to be hospitalised and 20 times more likely to die. As cases and hospitalisations soar, health authorities around the US are increasingly taking the once unthinkable step of allowing nurses and other workers infected with Covid to stay on the job if they have mild symptoms or none at all, the Associated Press reported. The move is a reaction to the severe hospital staffing shortages and crushing caseloads that Omicron is causing. California health authorities announced over the weekend that hospital staff members who test positive but are symptom-free can continue working. Some hospitals in Rhode Island and Arizona have given employees similar guidelines. In December, the CDC said healthcare workers who have no symptoms can return to work after seven days with a negative test but that the isolation time “can be cut further if there are staffing shortages”. In Tuesday’s hearing, Rochelle Walensky, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), clarified federal guidance. She said fully vaccinated people exposed to the virus do not need to stay at home unless they develop symptoms, but should wear a mask, get tested and avoid travel until after day 10. The threat of Omicron and number of new cases has led to an increased demand for tests, with long lines and shortages around the country. On Monday the White House said insurance companies will be required to cover eight over-the-counter at-home tests per person each month starting on 15 January. In December, Joe Biden said half a billion at home tests would be sent free to Americans, beginning in January.Barcelona signed two for one. First came Ferran Torres, the footballer they wanted, joining for €55m plus €10m more in add-ons. Then came Samuel Umtiti, the footballer they didn’t and still don’t but whom they needed so that Torres could actually play. Registered now and recovered from Covid, the former Manchester City forward’s first game is set to be a clásico, if not on the most classic stage. At the third attempt, the King Fahd Stadium in Riyadh gets to host the game they paid for. On Monday morning, less than two hours before Barcelona boarded the plane to Saudi Arabia for the Spanish Super Cup and a semi-final meeting with Real Madrid, the club announced that Umtiti had extended his contract, which will end in 2026 instead of 2023. The cliche talks about a player being tied to the club, which is rarely true anyway, and this is the other way round. There was no celebration and no pretence that this was anything other than another problem postponed, a long-term commitment that is a short-term fix. Barcelona had long been trying to get rid of Umtiti, who has problems with a knee, a salary they can’t afford (commensurate with his status as a World Cup winner) and no place in the team. No goodwill from the fans either, although perhaps that will change now. The 28-year-old defender has played once this season and almost certainly won’t play in Saudi Arabia, although he was on the plane. Few clubs wanted him and nor was he keen to depart, at least not yet. Forcing him out had been considered but ruled out. But no one anticipated that they would extend the contract of a player they don’t want. This was no change of heart, no re-evaluation of his usefulness and it certainly doesn’t change the fact that they would like him to go sooner rather than later. They hadn’t concluded that, if he wasn’t going to go, maybe he could be useful after all. Well, not on the pitch, anyway: off it, it had turned out he was not just useful, he was necessary, a means to an end. Barcelona didn’t even wait two minutes between announcing his deal and explaining why they had done it, which wasn’t about him. Quote tweeting the renewal, they said: “Through this contract extension FC Barcelona will be able to increase its ‘financial fair play’ quota and thus register Ferran Torres.” And there it was in a nutshell. In all probability there are promises made and details that escape us, agreements reached and not revealed which help explain why the terms were accepted. But the way Barcelona explained it, essentially Umtiti had done them a favour: he had agreed to a short-term 10% pay-cut and to spread the salary he was due to receive between now and 2023 across the next three years to 2026. An imaginative way to overcome an inherited problem which was constructed by Mateu Alemany, the director of football; one that may not resolve the underlying financial difficulties but does allow Barcelona to overcome an immediate obstacle. Torres’s signing was facilitated by a loan from Goldman Sachs. That was one thing; registering him was another. For any registration to go through, clubs must work within “salary limits”, essentially La Liga’s version of financial fair play. An automated system, if you don’t comply it simply will not allow the player to be registered. Barcelona’s limit this season is €97.7m. Their actual salary mass is closer to €430m. Which means they can only spend by what’s known as the 4:1 rule: they must make and demonstrate a four-euro saving for every euro they invest. (Or a two-euro saving if they are able to offload a player who alone accounts for 5% of the limit.) Alemany had already said that before anyone could arrive, players had to leave. Last week Barcelona’s president, Joan Laporta, declared: “We’re back!” – which was very like him. It was premature too, of course. Yet they are trying to get back and if the inheritance limits them, if more problems await, if significant gaps remain in the squad and players they don’t want remain too, there are some reasons to be cheerful. Not least an emerging young generation: Pedri and Ansu Fati are fit again and flew to Saudi Arabia. They have Gavi, Nico, Ronald Araújo, Eric García. Torres fits that mould too, a strategic signing that was also a statement. Plans run in parallel: short, medium and long term. Ultra short term, too. This latest, left-field announcement is the perfect example of that, an imperfect solution but a solution of sorts. “The reality is that when we signed Ferran we knew that we didn’t have any margin with the salary limit,” Alemany said. “We made an exception with Ferran because it was worth it. We accept that and we’re working on various avenues to register him.” Even the long, long-awaited departure of Philippe Coutinho was not enough – there was no sale and Villa are paying 65% of his salary. Ousmane Dembélé’s renewal, structured to create margin, remains on hold and may not happen. Sergi Roberto’s future has not been resolved. And so that avenue unexpectedly became Umtiti. On Monday, recently renewed, Umiti was on the plane bound for the Spanish Super Cup and a meeting with Real Madrid, but that wasn’t what mattered; what mattered was that Torres was on board with him.Quebec has announced plans to impose a “health tax” on residents who refuse to get the Covid-19 vaccination for non-medical reasons, as a new wave of the coronavirus pandemic overwhelms the province. Premier François Legault announced the new “contribution” for the unvaccinated on Tuesday, as the province reported 62 new deaths, bringing the total number of people killed by Covid-19 in the province to 12,028 – the most in Canada. “A health contribution will be charged to all adults that don’t want to get vaccinated. We are there now,” he said. “Those who refuse to get the shot bring a financial burden to hospital staff and Quebecers. The 10% of the population can’t burden the 90%.” The move follows the abrupt resignation of a senior health official in the province, amid mounting anger over new lockdown measures, hospitals at capacity and the slow rollout of vaccine boosters. Quebec made headlines last week when it announced that customers in cannabis shops and liquor stores would need proof of vaccination, leading to a surge in new bookings. But while other provinces have accelerated the rollout of booster shots to fight the contagious Omicron variant, Quebec has only recently opened access to residents 40 years of age and above. In Ontario, residents over 18 have been able to access the booster since mid-December. News of the tax, the first of its kind in the country, comes less than a day after the province’s public health director tendered his resignation. Dr Horacio Arruda served in the role for 12 years and was reappointed to another three-year term in June 2020, but has faced mounting criticism in recent weeks. “Recent comments about the credibility of our opinions and our scientific rigour are undoubtedly causing some erosion of public support,” wrote Arruda in his resignation. Arruda faced particular condemnation for allowing care home staff to move between sites during the first wave of the pandemic. That decision played a key role in helping the virus spread unchecked and contributed to more than 4,000 deaths – many of them among seniors. Most recently, Arruda was faulted for his dismissal of the benefits of N95 masks, saying they were not necessary for teachers or healthcare workers. Quebec’s worker safety board disagreed and recently ordered healthcare workers be provided with the more effective masks. As the Omicron variant sweeps across the province, prompting new lockdown measures and a government-ordered curfew – the only one in the country – Quebecers have been forced to reckon with the fact that their province appears to once again be the among the worst-hit regions of the country. “I’m not going to mince words: things are bad right now when it comes to hospitalizations,” said Dr Donald Vinh an infectious disease specialist at McGill University’s health centre. “Every time there’s a ceiling, in terms of hospital capacity, the hospitalization rate breaks through that ceiling.” The province’s health minister estimated last week that at least 20,000 healthcare workers due to Covid-19 infections 50,000 are on leave for burnout. Quebec’s timing during the pandemic has often been unlucky: the first wave hit as families travelled during a school break, bringing home the virus when they returned. But more than two years later, the province still struggles in executing its plan to fight the virus. It eschewed access to rapid tests and has since cut off access to PCR tests due to overwhelming demand. On Tuesday, 600,000 boxes of rapid tests are set to be distributed to Quebec amid growing frustration from residents that the tools needed to combat the pandemic are unavailable. The government has sent mixed messages by imposing a curfew – but also slowly rolling out booster vaccines, said Vinh. Hospital intakes keep rising and there is little indication the province has reached its peak. Despite early hopes Quebec might experience a similar rapid rise and drop to South Africa, Vinh calls those hopes “foolishly naive” and that a new approach is needed. “The virus is going to continue to propagate here until we get it under control,” he said. “And wishful thinking isn’t how we’re going to fight it.”